
      
         
            
               
                  
                  THE SECOND PART OF THE PROTESTANTS PLEA, AND PETITION FOR PREISTS AND Papiſts. Beeing an hiſtorie of the holy preiſthood, and ſacrifice of the true Church of Chriſt.
                  Inuincibly prouing them to be, the preſent ſacrificing preiſthood: prouing alſo the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, vſed in the Catholike Roman church: and that theſe were promiſed, and foretold by the Prophets, inſtituted by Chriſt, and exerciſed by all his Apoſtles.
                  
                     Moreouer that they haue euer from the first plantinge of Christianitie in this our Britanye, in the dayes of the Apostles, in euery age, and hundred of yeares, beene continued and preſerued here.
                  
                  All for the moſt part, warranted by the writinges, and teſtimonies of the beſt learned Proteſtant Doctors, and antiquaries of England, and others.
                  
                     The preiſthood beeing chaunged, there is made of neceſsitie a chaunge alſo of the lawe.
                     Hebr. cap. 7. ver. 12.
                  
                  
                     WITH LICENCE. Anno 1625.
               
               
                  
                  
                  AN ADMONITION OF THE Author, to all Readers of this his hiſtorie: comprehending the Argument and contents thereof.
                  
                     KNowinge well by longe and daiely purchaſed experience, the great and greeuous perſecutions, which formerly haue beene rayſed, and perſecuted in England against conſecrated Preiſts of the Romane Church, and profeſſors of that Religion; and for nothing more, then holy priesthood, and the ſacred ſunctions thereof. And yet often hearinge all ſorts of people, euen perſecutors themſelues, conteſtinge and cryinge out, they would willingly ſtand to the Iudgement of, and bee arbitrated by diuine Authoritie, and reuerend antiquitie: I an vnworthie member of that holy order, a longe ſtudent in diuinitie, to which theſe are either parts, or haue a ſubordination, for my diſcharge of dutie to God, and his holy Church, comfort and strengtheninge thoſe that bee in truth, and ſatisfying, or confounding ſuch, as bee in error, haue taken in hand to write a briefe history of this ſubiect, beginning at the first originall of Christianitie, eſpecially in this Kingdome of great Britaine, to which onely after my more generall Introduction,

and preface ended, to preuent 
                        〈…〉
                      both in writer, and Readers, I will confine my ſelfe.
                  And to winne the loue and likinge of all, and auoide the diſlike of any, I meane to follow that moſt frendly, and to all proteſtants, fauourable maner, and methode in writinge, inſinuated in the Title of this worke, alwaies, or moste commonly to carry with mee, the allowance, and warrant of the best learned Doctors, and Antiquaries of their Religion. And yet for Catholicks, I truſt none of them shall finde the least occaſion of feare, that though I shal walke vpon ſo vnl
                        •…
                     uell ground, I will betray their moſte iust, and holy cauſe: but rather adde a greater luster, and ſplendor of glory, then bringe any the leaſt diminution of honor vnto it. And make this matter ſo palpably manifeſt, by all Authorities, diuine, and humane, the ſcriptures both of the old and new teſtament, and all kinde of expoſitors of them, friends or ennemies, that they which shall not acknowledge the vndoubted, and onely truth of the doctrine of the holy Catholike Church in theſe misteries, must needes bee ſaid wilfully with malice to cloſe their eyes against it.
                  And though the lawe of Moiſes wherein the Prophets liued, and God ſpake by them, was but a figure of thinges to come, and gaue but a darke shadowe, or glimeringe of the gratious brightnes, and shininge, which our bleſſed Sauiour, the true light of the world, reuealed vnto it, in the lawe of the ghoſpell: yet I shall in the very beginning as a preface to this holy historie, ſo inuincibly proue, by the

ſcripture 
                        〈◊〉
                      old teſtament, by all original texts, hebrue or greeke, all Authors, the Rabines before Christ, the beſt learned Doctors of the primatiue Church of Christ, and proteſtants themſelues, that the Meſsias promiſed and foretold by the Prophets, was to ordeine a new ſacrificing prieſthood, and that bleſſed ſacrifice of his bodie, and blood which wee cōmonly name the ſacrifice of the Maſſe and this was one of the moſt apparant diſtinctiue ſignes to know him by; ſo that whoſoeuer denieth this, conſequently denieth Chriſt to bee the true Meſsias.
                  And the more plainely to demonſtrate this, when I come to the firſt plantinge of the faith of Christ, in this kingdome in the Apostles time, I will make manifest, by all testimonies, and antiquities, that Chriſt our bleſsed Sauiour and Meſsias accordingly to the propheſies of him did inſtitute this ſacrificing priesthood, and both celebrated, and ordeined the ſacrifice of Maſse for his Church for euer. That all his Apostles were ſacrificing maſsing preiſts, and offered that bleſſed ſacrifice And that in this kingdome of Britanie in particular, as in the whole Chriſtian world beſides, in euery age, and hundred of yeares, from the first preachinge, and receiuing of Chriſtian Religion here, in the Apostles time, in the first, ſecond, third, fourthe, fift, and ſix hundred yeares, of Chriſt, and ſo longe as the best learned protestants affirme, that holy primatiue Church remained vnſpotted, in the firſt receiued truthe, and integritie thereof.
                  The ſame holy ſacrificing priesthood, a continual

ſucceſsion of ſacrificinge maſsinge preiſts, and Biſhops, and ſacrifice of Maſſe euer continued here, in the ſame maner as they are now vſed and obſerued in the preſent Romane Church, without any the least eſſentiall change, or difference. By reaſon whereof many cheife Articles in Religion now queſtioned, as the ſupernaturall change or tranſubſtantiation of bread and wine into the bleſsed body, and blood of Christ, there offered a propitiatorie ſacrifice for ſinne; prayer to the bleſſed Virgin, S. Mary, & other Saints, and Angels, prayer for the faithfull departed, merit of ſacrifice, and good workes, with inſufficiencie of ſole faith, and other principall things which proteſtants commonly diſallow in Catholicke Religion, will bee thus proued, and deduced in euerie age, in this our Britanie, euen with the allowance of our best learned protestants, and ſuch antiquities, as they approue, and cannot diſallow. One most materiall point of the Popes power and ſpirituall prerogatiue in this nation, from the first embracinge of Christian Religion in all ages, which I promiſed in my firſt parte, I vnderstand to bee effectually performed already. Therefore I shall ſparinglie make mention thereof, in this hiſtory, except in ſome things, and places, where it shall bee needfull for the more perfect handlinge of the preſent ſubiect of this worke.
                  And hereby it will ſufficiently appeare, vnto all protestants, and perſecutors of the holy Catholike Romane Church, that ſeeing the controuerſie is, whether the Catholike, or protestant church is the

true church of Christ, that by no poſsibilitie the protestant congregation can bee this true and holie church. For by their owne Articles of their Religion, to which all proteſtant Bishops and miniſters haue sworne and ſubſcribed. (Articl. of Engl. proteſt. Relig. articul. 19.) The viſible Church of Chriſt is a congregation of faithfull men, in which the pure worde of God is preached, and the Sacraments bee duly miniſtred, according to Chriſts ordinance, in all thoſe things that are requiſite to the ſame. Which bee the verie wordes of their owne ſubſcribed, and sworne Article of Religion.
                  Therefore when they require three things to the true Church, true and lawfullie conſecrated preists, and preachers, the pure word of God preached, and Sacraments duely ministred, and all theſe shall be found in the Roman Church in all ages from the firſt preaching of Christ, and not any one of them in the proteſtant parlamentary Church of England, or any ſuch other, but a manifeſt oppoſition and perſecution of thoſe ſacred preachers of the word, and miniſters of the Sacraments, as of the word, and Sacraments themſelues, ſo preached, and miniſtred, none of theſe can poſsibly bee the true Church of Chriſt, but a company of profeſſed aduerſaries and enemies vnto it: and that the onely true Church which they haue ſo vnchriſtianly perſecuted the Catholike Romā church is that true and most holy church of Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE PREFACE PROVING THE CONTENTS OVT OF THE Prophets.
                  
                     Wherin ſacrificing and Maſsinge Preiſthood, Preiſts, and the ſacrifice of Maſſe, are proued by learned Proteſtants, and other testimonies, from the history of Melchiſedech. Gen. 14. THE I. CHAPTER.
                     
                     SO vndoubted a veritie, and neceſſary a thinge it was, for our bleſſed Sauiour cominge into the worlde, to perfect the Lawe of Moyſes, and euacuate the externall, vnperfect preiſthood, ſacrifices, and ceremonials thereof, and to inſtitute and ordeine a ſacrifice, and preiſthood more perfect and independant, to continue for euer, as his lawe and Religion is to doe, and to geue a moſt ſure, and timely warning and notice of this to the world, that when God had made the firſt promiſe of the Meſſias vnto Abraham, in the 12. and 13. chapter of Geneſis, in the very next the

14. chapter following, hee reuealed by the preiſthood and ſacrifice of Melchiſedech longe before either the lawe, preiſthood, or the ſacrifices thereof were deliuered to Moiſes, what the euerduringe preiſthood, and ſacrifice of the Meſſias, and his lawe ſhould bee. For ſo both the Prophet Dauid, S. Paule to the Hebrues, S. Peter in the canon of the holy Maſſe, being Author therof, as ſhall bee proued hereafter, the auncient Rabines before Chriſt, as proteſtants them ſelues acknowledge, ſo likewiſe by their warrant, the moſt auncient and holy Fathers of the Church of Chriſt, doe proue their preiſthood, and ſacrifice of Chriſt, and his ſacrificinge preiſts, in the lawe of the Ghoſpell, from the wordes of Moiſes: theſe be our engliſh proteſtants trāſlation.
                     2. Melchiſedech Kinge of Salem, brought forth bread and wine: and hee was the preiſt of the most high God. The greeke readinge, is: For hee was the preist of the most high God: ſignifying thereby, that hee did the preiſtly ſacrificall office, with that breade and wine: and although in the hebrue the verbe Hotzi, which our proteſtants tranſlate, brought forth, ordinarily where it is

not otherwiſe limited and reſtricted, hath that ſignification, yet beeing confined as here it is, to the office of a ſacrificing preiſt, ſuch as Melchiſedech was, it muſt bee appropriated to his office of ſacrificinge, otherwiſe the reasō which the ſcripture maketh. becauſe hee was a preiſt, is ſuperfluous. And the rather in this caſe, becauſe in the hebrue text, this bringinge forth of breade and wine by this extraordinary preiſt, hath relation vnto God; and ſo muſt needes bee a ſacrificall action: for the bringinge forth of bread and wine, or matter of any ſacrifice to God, by a preiſt that is a ſacrificer, muſt needes bee a ſacrifice. The hebrue is thus: Melchiſedech Kinge of Salem brought forth breade and wine, hee beeing a preiſt, to God the moſt highe. The name God here in Hebrue Leeb, beeing the datiue caſe, and anſweringe the production of the breade and wine, and not the word preiſt, for otherwiſe it would not bee true conſtructiō in that language, the particle le there ſeruinge to the datiue, and not genitiue caſe. And therfore, as Franciſcus Stancarus that great proteſtant profeſſor of hebrue, and others tell vs, Rabbi Samuel vppon this

place of Geneſis, doth thus expound it: actus Sacerdotij tradidit: erat enim ipſe ſacrificans panem & vinum Deo ſancto & benedicto. Hee deliuered the acts of preisthood, for hee was ſacrificing bread and wine to God holie and bleſsed. Where hee plainely expoundeth it, as I did before, referring the bringing forth of the bread and wine by Melchiſedech the preiſt, to God holy and bleſsed. Which is more plaine by the words immediatlie following in the hebrue: veicbarechehu and hee bleſſed him: That is to ſay, hee bleſſed or prayſed God, of whome the immediate laſte ſpeach was. Rabb. Samul. in cap. 14. Geneſſ. Franciſc. Stancar. in l. 10. de art. fid. Petr. Galat. ibid. c. 6. & alij.
                     
                     3. So that a preiſt that vſed to ſacrifice, beeing proued by the original text of ſcripture to haue offered or brought forth bread and wine to God the moſt high and bleſſed, and praiſed him, muſt needes bee ſaid as the Rabbine expoundeth it, to haue ſacrificed bread and wine vnto him. So doe the holy fathers: panem & vinum obtulit: Melchiſedech offered bread and wine: ſaith S. Cyprian, the old Roman Maſſe and S. Ambroſe: Quod tibi obtulit ſummus Sacerdos

Melchiſedech: The high preist Melchiſedech offered ſacrifice to God. S. Hierome ſaith: In Typo Christi panem & vinum obtulit, & myſterium Chriſtianum in Saluatoris corpore & ſanguine dedicauit. In figure of Chriſt, hee offered bread and wine, and dedicated the Christian myſtery, in the body and blood of our Sauiour. So S. Auguſtine, S. Leo, Arnobius, Eucherius, Primaſius, Euſebius Caeſarienſis, Theodoretus and others of the primatiue church, both greeke and latine. Cyprian. epiſt. 63. Miſſ. Rom in can. Ambroſ. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 6. l. 5. c. 1. ad cap. 5. ad Hebr. Hierom. epistol. 17. ad Marcell. c. 2. in quaest. in Gen. in pſal. 75 109. ad cap 26. Math. August. in pſal. 33. de cia
                              •…
                           tat Dei. l. 6. c. 22. epiſt. 95. Arnob. Rom. in pſal. 109 Leo ſerm. 2. anni verſ. Aſſumpt Eucherius Lugd. homil. 5. de Paſch. Primaſ. in c. 5. ad Hebr. Theodoret. quaeſt. 63. in Geneſ. & ad pſalm. 109. Protest. Articl. of Relig. articul. 7. ſcriptures.
                     
                     4. And except wee will ſay there was a tradition of ſo great a miſtery and neceſſarie to ſaluation (which the Religion of our engliſh proteſtāts denieth) or that the Prophet Dauid had ſome new particular reuelation

of this thing, which though it ſhould bee gratis ſpoken by proteſtants, doth inuinciblie confirme what hath bene ſaid of this matter; wee muſt needes graunt that this holy prophet, did expound and vnderſtand that action of Melchiſedech, as ſo many authorities remembred did, for hee maketh it a thinge ſo certaine, that hee bringeth in God him ſelfe teſtifyinge by oath, that it was ſo: Thus by proteſtantes tranſlation hee ſpeaketh of Chriſts preiſthood and conſequently ſacrifice, from this place: The Lord hath sworne and will not repent, thou art a preiſt for euer: after the order of Melchiſedech. (pſal. 109. or 110. verſ. 4.) For wee doe not reade in any other paſſage of ſcripture, before Dauids time but in that place of Geneſis, what the order, preiſthood, or ſacrifice of Melchiſedech was. The ſame is teſtified by S. Paule the Apoſtle to the Hebrues. (Hebr. 5.6. & 7.17.) And all learned texts Hebrue, Chaldy, Greeke and Latine agree; onely the Hebrue maketh it plaine, that God had made ſuch a promiſe to Melchiſedech, that Chriſt ſhould bee a preiſt after his order for euer.
                     5. For where our Engliſh proteſtantes

takinge vppon them to tranſlate and followe the Hebrue, and as before tranſlate: Thou art a preist for euer after the order of Melchiſedech: The Hebrue is: Our Lord hath sworne, and will according to my word, or, as I promiſed to Melchiſedech. Hal dibrati Malchiſedech. Where wee cannot without corrupting the Hebrue dibrati, takinge the laſt letter away reade otherwiſe. Therefore ſeing S. Paul plainely ſaith, that Chriſt was a preist after the order or maner of Melchiſedech: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         repeating it in diuers places: And the Prophet Dauid ſaith, that God ſwore it, and ſo promiſed to Melchiſedech: wee muſt needes beleeue that Chriſts preiſthood and ſacrifice, after this order to continue for euer is vndeniably teſtified and expreſſed in that place of Geneſis, and act of Melchiſedech. Which, to leaue S. Paul vntill I come to the new teſtament, is proued by the greateſt proteſtants that euer were.
                     6. Luther vppon that place alleaged by Dauid. (in pſalm. 110. Tom. 8.) ſaith: Melchiſedech Rex erat, & Sacerdos, obtulit panem & vinum, pro Patriarcha Abraham & eius familia. Quid eſt vero oblatio panis & vini

pro Abrahamo? Hoc exprimit Sacerdotium Chriſti ab hoc tempore vſque ad finem mundi, quo myſterium altaris Sacramentum pretioſi corporis & ſanguinis ſui offert Eccleſia. Melchiſedech was a Kinge and Preiſt, hee offered bread and wine for Abraham, and his family. What doth the offeringe of bread and wine for Abrahā meane? This doth expreſſe the preiſthood of Chriſt from this time to the end of the world, in which the church doth offer the miſtical Sacrament of his pretious body and blood. Philip Melancthon in concil. Theolog. part. 2. pag. 373. ſaith: Excipit Melchiſedech redeuntem ex praelio Abraham, & eum ad ſacrificium admittit, eique benedicit. Melchiſedech receaueth Abraham returninge from battaile, and admitteth him to ſacrifice, and bleſſeth him. Caluine diuers times confeſſeth. in c. 7. ad Hebr. verſ. 9. pag. 924. That this was the opinion of the old Fathers, and hee plainely ſaith. Veteres Eccleſiae Doctores in hac opinione fuerent, vt in oblationem panis & vini inſisterunt, ſic autem loquuntur. Christus Sacerdos est ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech, atqui panem & vinum Melchiſedech obtulit, ergo panis & vini ſacrificium Sacerdotio Christi conuenit. The auncient Fathers

were in this opinion, that they inſiſted in the oblation of bread and wine, for ſo they ſpeake, Christ is a preist after the order of Melchiſedech, but Melchiſedech did offer breade and wine, therefore the ſacrifice of bread and wine agreeth to the preisthood of Christ.
                     
                     7. The godly and learned man, as Maſter Doctor Sutcliffe calleth Andreas Craſtouius the Caluiniſt. (l. 5. de Miſſ. papist. c. 26. Andr. Craſteuius l. de opific. miſſ. 1. ſect. 66.) ſaith: wee may not reiect the conſent and harmony of the auncient Fathers, both for their nearenes to the Apoſtles age, and the ſingular agreemēt of them al together: yet he addeth: hic omnium veluti conſpiratione oblatio Melchiſedechi ſacra proponitur, vt non tantum Abrahae militibusque, ſed etiā Deo incruentum ſacrificium ſimboli
                              •…
                           è oblatum videatur. Here as it were with conſent of all, the holy oblation of Melchiſedech is propoſed; that it was not onely to Abraham and his ſouldiers, but that it ſeemeth to haue beene an vnbloody ſacrifice ſimbolically offered alſo to God. Theodor Bibliāder a learned proteſtant. (l. 2. de Trinit. pag. 89.) writeth: erat apud veteres Hebraeos dogma receptiſsimum, in aduentu Miſsiae benedicti ceſſatura eſſe omnia legalia

ſacrificia, tantumque celebrandum ſacrificium Thoda gratiarum actionis, laudis & confeſsionis: & illud peragendum pane & vino, ſicut Melchiſedech Rex Salem & Sacerdos Dei altiſsimi, temporibus Abrahami panem & vinum protulit. It was among the old Hebrues a moſt receaued Maxime, that at the coming of the bleſſed Meſſias, all legall ſacrifices ſhould ceaſe, and onely the ſacrifice Thoda of thankes geuing, praiſe and confeſſion, ſhould bee celebrated, and that to bee done with bread and wine, as Melchiſedech King of Salem and preiſt of God moſt high in the time of Abraham brought forth breade and wine. Thus this learned proteſtant.
                     8. But where hee ſaith, onely that the Rabbines wrote thus; Melchiſedech did bringe forth bread and wine, that is his gloſſe; for Frāciſcus Stancarus (Apud Petr. Gallat. l. 10. de arcan) The beſt learned proteſtant of his time in the Hebrue antiquities, doth aſſure vs from the moſt auntient Rabbines (of which I haue cited Rabbi Samuel before) the like, or more plaine, for the ſacrificing of Melchiſedechs bread and wine; and that onely neuer to ceaſe,

but to continue in the time of the Meſſias So haue R. Moſes Hadarſan, R. Pinhas, and R. Ioai, as the ſame proteſtant with others teſtifieth. So that wee plainely ſee, by all authoritie, the holy ſcriptures, the auncient Rabbines, and the generall conſent of the holy primatiue Fathers of Chriſts church, as they are warranted by the beſt learned proteſtants of forrein natiōs whether Lutherans, or Caluiniſts, that both Melchiſedech (the plaine figure of Chriſt in this) did offer ſacrifice in bread & wine: and this kinde of ſacrifice though after a more excellent maner, as the lawe of the Meſſias ſo requireth, was to bee offered by him, and his holy preiſts in that lawe. Now let vs come to our Engliſh proteſtants: to make all ſure from any contradiction, and learne of them that the beſt learned of thē doe ſo write, and all of them ought ſoe to acknowledge by their owne Religion.
                     9. For euidence whereof, it is a common maxime and ground of Religion among them, that the ſcriptures eſpecially as they tranſlate them, and logically deduced concluſions from them, are the word of God. (Feild. pag. 226. wotton def. of Parkins

pag. 467.) To ſpeake in their wordes: all matters concluded logically out of the ſcriptures ar the word of God, aswel as if they were expreſſely ſet downe in it word by word. And ſo of neceſſitie muſt they all ſay, if they will maintaine any externall ſhew of Religion, for reiecting traditions, and the authoritie of the church, as they doe, and claiminge onely by ſcriptures in all matters of faith, they muſt needes allowe ſoe ample authoritie to deductions from ſcriptures: for euident it is, and they willingly confeſſe, that all things which they hold euen as matters of faith, are not expreſſely ſett downe in ſcriptures. And this is an expreſſe article of faith with them, ſett downe in the 6. article of their Religion, confirmed by parlaments, and ſubſcribed and ſworne vnto, by all proteſtant Biſhops, and miniſters of England. The wordes of this their ſworne and ſubſcribed vnto Religion in this point are theſe. Articles of Engl. proteſt. Religion ratified by the parlaments and canons of Q. Eliz. and King Iames articul. 6.
                     10. Holy ſcripture conteyneth all thinges neceſſary for ſaluation: ſo that whatſoeuer is not read therin, nor may bee proued thereby,

is not to bee required of any mā, that it should bee beleeued as an article of the faith. Therfore things ſo reade in ſcripture and therby proued, muſt needes bee articles of faith, otherwiſe Religion ſhould bee without articles of faith, which is vnpoſſible, for by this proteſtant Religion, there is no other meanes to make or proue them ſuch. Being thus directed by theſe proteſtants and by their direction, I make this Argument and proofe from ſcriptures as they tranſlate thē: Euery high preiſt is ordeined to offer ſacrifice for ſinnes. (Hebr. 5.1.8.3.) But Melchiſedech was an high preiſt: Therefore ordeyned to offer ſacrifice for ſinnes. The firſt or maior propoſition, is the very wordes of S. Paule, as our proteſtants tranſlate him. The minor or ſecond propoſition, is theire tranſlation of the Prophet Moiſes: Melchiſedech was the preist of the most high God. (Gen. 14.18.) Where hee is called, the preist, by excellency and bleſſing Abraham, and called by S Paule, better or greater then Abraham. (Hebr. 7.6.7.9.) Who alſo was a great preiſt and patriarke, and as a ſuperiour receauing tithes of him: and ſo eminent and cheife, that the order of

which hee was, is not onely called the order of Melchiſedech, but Chriſt himſelfe often termed high preiſt after the order of Melchiſedech: and as our proteſtants alſo tranſlate, after the ſimilitude of Melchiſedech, as both the Greeke and Latine texts alſo are: Therefore Melchiſedech of neceſſitie was an high preiſt. Therefore againe the concluſion, which in a true Argument and Sillogiſme, as this is, cannot bee denied, that Melchiſedech offered ſacrifice, beeing therto ordeyned, is moſt certaine and an article of faith by theſe proteſtants Religion before.
                     11. And becauſe by the rule of their Religion, wee may not ſeeke but in ſcripture to knowe what ſacrifice it was, which hee offered, it muſt needes bee that ſacrifice of bread and wine, which the ſcripture Rabbins, Fathers, and forreine proteſtants haue told vs of before: for wee do not find any other ſacrifice, or matter like a ſacrifice in ſcripture attributed to Melchiſedech. If any man ſhall ſay, that S. Paule ſpeaking of all high preiſts offering ſacrifice, meaneth ſacrifice vnproperly, as prayers and ſuch deuotions: I anſwere this is not onely

vnproperly, but by true conſequence blaſphemouſly ſpoken, vtterly denyinge that either the preiſts of the Lawe of Nature, or Moiſes, or Chriſt did offer any ſacrifice, and ſo no ſacrifice for ſinne beeinge offered by Chriſt, mans redemption was not wrought by Chriſt, but man is vnredeemed, and Chriſt was not the Sauiour of the world; for in that place as S. Paul ſpeaketh of euery high preiſt and preiſtly orders, he alſo ſpeaketh of the externall ſacrifices of of them, in their order and time. And ſo doth the proteſtant publicke gloſſe vppon thoſe wordes of S. Paule: Euery high preiſt is ordeyned to offer ſacrifice: expound them in theſe termes: Hee bringeth a reaſon, why it muſt needes bee, that Chriſt should haue a body that hee might haue what to offer, for otherwiſe hee could not bee an highe preist. (Proteſt. Annotat. in cap. 8. Hebr. v. 3) Therfore by theſe proteſtants S. Paul ſpeaketh of an externall and properly named ſacrifice, and that therefore Melchiſedech, as well as other high preiſts, did offer an external ſacrifice, otherwiſe by their owne reaſon the ſame which S. Paul alleageth, hee could not bee an high preist, as the holy

ſcripture proueth hee was, not offering any externall ſacrifice, which both by S. Paule ſo many teſtimonies before, and the publicke and authoritatiue expoſition of Engliſh Proteſtants, is eſſentially and vnſeparably belonging to al true preiſts & preiſthood.
                     12. The Proteſtant Biſhop D. Morton. (Appeale l. 3. c. 13. pag. 394.) plainely graunteth that Melchiſedech offered an externall ſacrifice, wherein there was really bread and wine. Hee further proueth from the Rabbins and Bibliander. (ſupr. cent. 1.) That at the cominge of the Meſſias, all legall ſacrifices should ceiſe, and a ſacrifice in bread and wine should onely ſtil continue. And conſtantly auoucheth for the common doctrine of Engliſh Proteſtants in theſe wordes: The protestants acknowledge in the Eucharist a ſacrifice Euc
                              •…
                           aristicall. (Mort. ſup. l. 3. c. 13) The preſent proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury director of Maſter Maſon, and hee directed by him directly graunt, that the words of Chriſt concerning his body and blood to bee giuen, argue a ſacrifice to God. (Franc. Maſon lib. 5. pag. 233.) And cite and graunt further in

this maner. (pag. 243.) Chriſt hauinge offered himſelfe for a ſoueraigne ſacrifice vnto his Father, ordeyned that wee should offer a remembrance thereof, vnto God, inſtead of a ſacrifice. An other ſaith (Middle. papistom. pag. 92.113.) The ſacrifice of the Altare, and vnbloodye ſacrifice, were vſed in the primatiue church: and the auncient Fathers called the ſacrifice of the body and blood of Chriſt, a ſacrifice. And againe. (pag. 49.137.138.47.45.) The primatiue church did offer ſacrifice at the Altar, for the dead. Sacrifice for the dead, was a tradition of the Apoſtles, and the auncient Fathers. And Iſaac Caſaubon the knowne french ſtipendary champion for the Proteſtants of England, writeth thus of our Kinge in this matter. (Reſpons. ad Card. Peron. pag. 51.) The Kinge is neither ignorant of, nor denieth, that the Fathers of the primatiue church did acknowledge one ſacrifice in Chriſtian Religion, that ſucceeded in place of all the ſacrifices in the lawe of Moſes. And leaſt any man ſhould doubt, what ſacrifice hee ment, by ſo ſpeaking, hee telleth vs, it is. The body of Chriſt in the Euchariſt, as Catholicks hold: and addeth there: Haec eſt fides Regis, haec eſt fides Eccleſiae

Anglicanae. This is the faiih of the Kinge, this is the faith of the English church. And writeth to Cardinall Perron in theſe wordes: The Kinge ſaid in the hearing of manic, and wished him ſo to ſignifie to Cardinal Perron, that hee agreed with the Cardinal in his opiniō, de duplici ſacrificio, expiationis nempe, & commemorationis, ſiue Religionis. Concerning two kinds of ſacrifice, the one of expiation for the world, the other commemoratiue, or of Religion. Which laſt Cardinall Perron with all Catholicks take to bee the ſacrifice of Maſſe: Therefore if the Engliſh Proteſtant church and his maieſtie, agree ſo far with Catholicks, the attonement wil ſooner bee made in this matter.
                     13. Neither did Caſaubon here aſſume for his maieſtie, and Engliſh Proteſtants, any new thinge, but the ſame, which they had profeſſed and graunted in their moſt ſolemne and publicke decrees and proceedings, from the firſt beginning of their parlamentary Religion in the time of Queene Elizabeth, or ſooner. For wee are taught by theſe proteſtants, that in the firſt parlamēt of that Queene, when Catholick Religion was ſuppreſſed, yet both ſhee, her nobles,

new Biſhops, and the reſt continued in this opinion, that there was an externall ſacrifice in the church, and the Maſſe was this externall ſacrifice: for appointing a kinde of diſputation in queſtions they moſt diſliked in Catholike Religion, or wherin they thought themſelues to haue moſt aduantage, they ſet downe but three concluſions: The firſt of a ſtraunge tongue, in common prayer: the ſecond concerninge ceremonies: And the third and laſte is thus: It cannot bee proued by the worde of God, that there is in the Maſſe offered vp a ſacrifice propitiatory for the quicke and the dead. 
                              •…
                           h. Stow and Howes histor. an. 1. Elizab. Theater of Brit. an. 1. Eliz.) Where they do not deny an externall ſacrifice, in the churche of Chriſt, 
                           •…
                        hether that the Maſte is this externall ſacrifice, but ſo farre agree with Catholicks; but they only deny, that by ſcripture, which they onely vnderſtand by the worde of God, the ſacrifice of Maſſe can bee proued a ſacrifice propitiatory for the quick and dead. Neuer denying it to bee a commemoratiue and Euchariſtical ſacrifice, or of Religion as his maieſty before calleth it, by the mouth of Caſaubon. Neither doe

they abſolutly deny it to bee a propitiatory ſacrifice for the quicke and dead, but that it cannot bee ſo proued by ſcripture: neuer denying but by traditiō it may ſo bee proued, as ſome proteſtants haue confeſſed before, and ſhal manifeſtly be proued hereafter by all teſtimonies.
                     14. And to make euident demonſtration by theſe proteſtants of England, that they all doe, or ſhould, both allowe an external ſacrifice, and ſacrificing preiſts, and preiſthood, which they haue ſo longe and greeuouſly perſecuted, there was yet neuer any proteſtant Prince, Kinge, or Queene in England, but by publick authoritie and lawe of Parlament allowed, and receaued the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, & conſequentlie ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſts and preiſthood, beeing as al learning teacheth, indiuiſible and vnſeparable correlatiues, maturally and mutually dependinge one of the other. It is euident that Kinge Henry 8. (Stat. Hen. 8. testament. vlt.) Both by Parlament, and his laſte wil allowed Maſſe both for the quick and dead. King Edward the ſixt. (Theat. of great Brit. in Henr. 8. Statut. an. 1. Edward. 6. cap. 1.) Enacted a

a particular ſtatute thereof confirming the doctrine of reall preſence, and it was in force, al his life: & was repealed by Queene Mary in reſpect it did allow to communicants to receaue in both kindes. (Stat. an. 1. Mar. parlam. 1. ſeſſ. 2. cap. 2.) Queene Elizabeth in her firſt parlament, reuiued this ſtatute againe and it continued in force all her life. Parlam. an. 1. Elizab. And his maieſtie that now is, in his firſt parlament receaued and confirmed this very ſtatute of the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, & the reall preſence, and is ſtill in force neuer by him repealed. Parlament an. 1. Iacobi cap. 5. The ſtatute it ſelfe is ſo cleare in this point, as it cannot bee contradicted. And beſides this, the iniunctions of Kinge Edward the ſixt, the beſt interpretors of his lawe doe ſo aſſure vs, where in the 3.21.22. Iniunction of his time wee finde then by his Regall Authoritie Maſſe, high Maſſe, altare, high altare, lights vppon the altare before the Sacrament, Chriſts reall preſence therein, and tranſubstantiation, vſed commonly in England after this ſtatute was enacted. (Iniunct. of Kinge Edw. 6. iniunct. 1.21.22.) And both for the time of Queene Elizabeth,

as alſo his maieſtie that now is receauinge that ſtatute.
                     15. The publicke collection of our ſtatutes. (Collectiō of Engl ſtatutes an. D. 1611. Titul. ſeruice and Sacraments cap. 1.) Printed cum priuilegio, by his maieſties allowance and commonly vſed by our proteſtant lawyers & others, hath this note and theſe words vppon this ſtatute: Anno 1. Eduardi ſexti cap. 1. This act was repealed by 1. Mar. parl. 1. ſeſſ. 2. cap. 2. and is reuiued by 1. Iacobi cap. 25. But note the time of the firſt making of this statute, which was before that the Maſse was taken away, when the opinion of the reall preſence was not remoued from vs. Whereby it is manifeſt, that both Queene Elizabeth, and Kinge Iames reuiuing and giuing full life, and validitie to this ſtatute, of the doctrine of Maſſe, and reall preſence, muſt needes giue the ſame allowance to thoſe holy doctrines confirmed by that ſtatute, and ſoe ought all Engliſh Proteſtants cōforming themſelues in matters of Religion, to the lawes and parlaments of Proteſtant Princes, the cheifeſt rules and ſquares by them in ſuch proceedings. And ſo neither any Catholicke or

Proteſtant of England, except they will bee ſingular againſt the lawe of their owne Religion, can or may take exception againſt that is ſaid before, or profeſſe himſelf an aduerſary or perſecutor of holy conſecrated ſacrificinge Catholicke preiſts, or ſacrifice of holy Maſſe, but rather reuerence & embrace them And thus much from the booke of Geneſis, that the true Meſſias was to bee a ſacrificinge preiſt, according vnto the order of Melchiſedech, to inſtitute a new ſacrificinge preiſthood, and the externall holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, to bee cō
                        tinued in his church for euer.
                  
                  
                     The ſame proued with like allowance, and approbation of Protestants, out of the booke of Exodus. THE II. CHAPTER.
                     
                     NOw let vs come to Exodus the next booke of Moyſes. Where the proteſtants ſhall informe vs, that both the auncient Rabbines before Chriſt, the Fathers of the primatiue church, and the ſcripture it ſelfe expounded by the grounds of proteſtant

Religion doe warrant vs, not onely that there was an externall ſacrifice to bee continued in the time, and Religion of Chriſt, but that this ſacrifice in particular was the bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt, vnder the formes of bread and wine, as it is offered in the holy Maſſe, by maſſinge and ſacrificinge Catholicke preiſts; wee are told aſſuredly not onely from Catholicks ſome of them liuing and writing before theſe controuerſies began, and which had beene eye witneſſes of theire relation, but from proteſtants alſo, and thoſe Sacramentary Caluiniſts, the greateſt enemies to the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and tranſſubſtantiation, that vppon theſe wordes of Exodus in the 25. chapter where the vulgare latine readeth: Et pones ſuper menſam panes propoſitionis in conſpectu m
                              •…
                           o ſ
                              •…
                           mper: and our Engliſh Proteſtants tranſlate: and thou shalt ſet vppon the table shew bread before mee alwaies. Petr. Gallatin. de Arcan Cathol. veritat. l. 10. cap. 6 Ioh. Vitus epiſt. Wintonicus. l. dure oſiomart. rion. Franciſcus Sta
                              •…
                           car. in correct. Petri Gallatini l. 10. c. 6. Praefat Proteſtant. ad lectorem ante Petr. Gallatin. edit. Francofurti an. 1612.
                     
                        2. That the auncient Rabbines longe before Chriſt, expounded this place of the holy ſacrifice of Chriſtians, inferinge alſo from thence, as the text will giue warrant vnto (as I ſhall proue hereafter by proteſtant Religion) that this bread did ſignifie the ſacrifice of the Meſſias, and that in his time, & in this ſacrifice bread ſhould be miraculouſly chaunged into his body: Stancarus the great Sacramentary linguiſt, citeth and approueth Rabbi Iudas, liuing as hee ſaith many yeares before Chriſt, to write in theſe wordes: Erit hic panis duaerum facierum, de quo ſcriptum est Exodi 25. capite. Lehem Phanim Aephanai tamid. panis facierum coram me ſemper. Quare autem dicatur panis facierum, ratio est, quia ait R. Iudas, tranſmutabitur ex ſubſtantia panis, cum ſacrificabitur, in ſubstantiam corporis Meſsiae, qui deſcendet de caelis. Et ipſe idem erit ſacrificium. Eritque inuiſibilis atque impalpabilis, cuius rei fidem facit ſedes Eliae. Et Magistri aiunt, eam ob rem dictum eſſe panem facierum, quia in ipſo ſacrificio erunt duae ſubstantiae, diuinitas & humanitas. This bread ſhall bee of two faces, of which it is written in the 25. chapter of Exodus. Bread of faces before

mee continually. And why it is called bread of faces, the reaſon is as Rabbi Iudas ſaith, becauſe it ſhall bee chaunged when it is ſacrificed out of the ſubſtance of bread into the ſubſtance of the body of the Meſſias which ſhal come from heauen, and hee himſelfe ſhall bee the ſacrifice, and ſhal bee inuiſibly and vnpalpable. To which the ſtate of Elias giueth credit, and the Maſters ſay, that for that cauſe, it is called bread of faces, becauſe in that ſacrifice, there ſhal bee two ſubſtances, diuinitie and humanitie.
                     3. Neither doe the auncient Fathers of the Law of Chriſt expound it otherwiſe, but not finding how the things there ſpoken can bee rightly applied to the figuratiue ſacrifices of the Lawe of Moiſes, doe gloſſe it, as the old Rabbins did, expounding it, of the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, in the Law of Chriſt: among whome, Theodoret that auncient learned greeke Father, (Quaeſt. in Exod. quaest. 60.) expoundinge that ſcipture, and not finding how it could bee ment or intended for the things of that Law of Moſes, ſaith in reſpect of that: perſpicuum eſt iſta fuiſſe ſuper 
                              •…
                           ua, Deoque minime

grata. Nos autem ſacrificium interiora penetrans celebramus, offerentes Deo incenſum cum lumine lucernarum, & mystica ſacrae menſae conſecratione. It is euidēt that theſe thinges were ſuperfluous and not acceptable to God. But wee (Chriſtians) doe celebrate the ſacrifice that penetrateth the internall thinges, offering vnto God incenſe with light of candels, and the myſticall conſecration of the holy table. Which in other places. (In Philotheo c. 20. Dialog. 2. & ad cap. 6. epiſtol. ad Hebr.) Hee calleth, mysticum diuinum & ſalutare ſacrificium, corpus & ſanguinem Christi: The myſticall, diuine, and ſauing ſacrifice, the body, and blood of Chriſt. Which he commannded the preiſts of the new lawe to offer when hee ſaid to his Apostles, doe this in my commemoration.
                     
                     4. Neither can this place of ſcripture, if wee will bee directed by proteſtants, carry any other ſo proper interpretation: for firſt by their rule of the originall Hebrue tongue, in this place to bee followed, it is as I haue ſhewed before Lehem, Phanim, bread of faces, Aquila readeth as the Hebrue, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The common Greeke, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        bread before God, as Sebaſtian Caſtalio,

                        panis appoſitiuus, bread ſet before God, and our proteſtants ſeeme to meane no other, when they tranſlate it, ſhew bread: for by their owne tranſlation God thus commaundeth: Thou shalt ſet vppon the table shew bread before mec alway. (Exod. 25. v. 30.) The table on which this bread was thus to bee placed, was of Shittim incorruptible wood, the table to bee couered with pure gold, with a crowne of gold rounde about it. And foure rings of gold, and ſtaues of Shittim incorruptible wood couered with gold to beare it by. All the veſſels belonginge to this holy table were of pure gold, and ſeuen golden lamps of gold beſides cādlesticks of gold to burne before this holy ſacrifice, and a table continually, and all this in the moſt holy place the propitiatory, where God ſpake vnto that people: which beeing ſo ſtrictly commaunded by God, of this, and noe other ſacrifice, argueth, that which was figured herin ſhould bee the moſt honorable, and continuinge ſacrifice, not to end with the propitiatory, and Gods appearing there, but to continue in the holy Religion of the Meſſias, therin prefigured. Which muſt needes bee of that excellency there

deſcribed with ſo great glory, to bee euer in the ſight of God.
                     5. What ſuperſtition and idolatrie by Proteſtant Religiō allowing (no ſuch Reuerence but to Chriſt himſelfe) was this, except ſome great ſupernatural miſtery and worthie that reuerence, had beene figured therin? and nothing there is by their Religion, that can haue ſo much, but the bleſſed body of Chriſt. Therefore they muſt needes graunt this moſte holy, continuall, and moſt pleaſing ſacrifice to God, to bee there prefigured. And if wee follow their rule of concordance of places, they paralell with this, the 24. chapter of Leuiticus, where this ſacrifice is made of pure flower, baked into cakes, ſet vppon the pure table before the Lord, it is a memoriall, an offeringe made to the Lord, an euerlasting couenant, to be eaten in the holy place, moſt holy of all offerings, by a perpetuall ſtatute. Thus our proteſtants. Which as it cannot bee verified of any ſacrifice of Moiſes Lawe, vnperfect, figuratiue, and ended by Chriſt ſo longe ſince, neuer to bee reuiued againe, neuer holy in themſelues, and proteſtants pretend no ſuch ſacrifice for them, beeing in all

thinges moſt euidently conſonant, and agreeinge with that, which Catholickes maintaine, and proue of the moſt bleſſed ſacrifice, of Chriſts moſt ſacred body, and blood, offered vpon an euer duringe altar, and moſt acceptable in the ſight of God, it muſt needes be vnderſtood of this, and nothing els.
                     6. Alſo in the ſame Booke of Exodus written by Moſes, the ſacrifice of the Paſchall Lambe (a figure of this moſt holy ſacrifice) was inſtituted: for although this may be ſaid to forſhew the death of Chriſt, yet it cannot bee denied denied, but it alſo & properly repreſented this our holy commemoratiue ſacrifice, and that this Paſchal lambe was alſo a ſacrifice, for ſo the ſcriptures witneſſe. (Exod. c. 12. v. 6.) Ve shahatu otho: and they ſhal ſacrifice him: Thus the Hebrue, ſo the Greeke, ſo the Latine, immolabitque eum: and our proteſtants tranſlatinge: shall kill it: make it a new text, the ſcripture beeing otherwiſe, and ſo they themſelues tranſlate in the ſame chapter. (Exod. c. 12. v. 27.) It is the ſacrifice of the Lords paſſouer, as the Hebrue, Sebac, Greek Cobia, Latine victima is. And in the booke

of members. (c. 9. v. 13.) Our proteſtants tranſlate it, offerringe equiualent with ſacrifice, ſo it is in the new teſtament in diuers places, (Marc. cap. 14. Luc. c. 22. v 7.) And that it more properly ſignifieth Chriſtes holy oblation in the Euchariſt, then vpon the Croſſe, the reaſons ar many and manifeſt. His oblation vpon the Croſſe did not fall vppon the fourteenth day, neither at eueninge, as the commaundement of this was. (Exod. 12. Num. 9.) but vpon the fifteenth day at none time and not the eueninge. Neither was Chriſt crucified in memory of any paſſouer or deliuery, neither crucified ſo to bee eaten, neither did or might any eate or drinke his body or blood ſo ſacrificed. Neither was hee ſo ſacrificed in any houſe as the commaundement was, or in Hieruſalem, but without the towne in the open feild. And not onely the baptized and cleane, but all others ought to eate and receaue by faith Chriſt ſacrificed vppon the Croſſe: which was forbidden in the Paſchall Lambe and that which was figured in it as an euerlaſting memoriall. (Exod. 12. v. 14. Leuit. 23. Num. 28. Exod. c. 12. v. 45.46.47.48. Num. c. 9.22.)
                     
                        7. And this ſacrifice of the Lambe was inſtituted before Aarons preiſthood, as that of Melchiſedech was, and ſo as Philo writeth. (l. 1. de vita Moiſis.) The old cuſtome therein continued, that the cheife of families ſhould exerciſe the preiſtly function, and ſo that ſacrifice of the Lambe as wel as that of Melchiſedech, figures of our moſt holy ſacrifice and Sacrament, were eaten and receaued by all: whereas the ſacrifices of Moiſes Law offered by the preiſtes of Aarons order, were onely receaued by the preiſts, & thoſe of the tribe of Leui. (1. Corinth. 9.13. Deuter. 18.1. Num. 10.9. & 18.20.) And of all men our proteſtantes that would haue the Euchariſt celebrated only with a communion for others beſides the preiſt to receaue, and communicate ſhould bee of this opinion, if they would ſpeake conſequently, as learned and truely religious men muſt doe: and except they can proue a bit of Bakers breade to bee a more excellent and honorable ſigne, and more perfectly to figure and repreſent the oblation and death of Chriſt, then an Innocent Lambe ſo ceremoniouſly, and religiouſly ſacrificed and receiued as that was,

and ſay with the blaſphemous Iewes, that the lawe of Chriſt is not more perfect then the lawe of Moiſes, and ſtill offer vp a Paſchall Lambe, they muſt needes acknowledge, that wee Chriſtians haue a farre more excellent ſacrifice, figured by that Lambe, then Caluins communion is.
                     And this is plainely proued by our bleſſed Sauiour himſelfe, who ſo ſoone as hee had celebrated the ſacrifice of the Paſchall Lambe, and impoſed an end vnto thoſe ſacrifices of the law, there preſently at the ſame time, and in the ſame ſacrificing wordes wherewith bee ended that which was to ceaſe, hee founded and inſtituted the moſt holy ſacrifice of the law of the ghoſpell to continue for euer, and neuer to bee altered or taken away. (Matth. c. 26. v. 18. Luc. c. 22. v. 19.) And the Hebrue worde, Gasha, in which language Chriſt ſpake at that time, is an vſuall ſacrificinge word, in holy ſcriptures, and muſt needes bee the ſame, wherwith hee ſpake in S. Luke, and S. Paul thus repeateth. Doe this in my commemoration. (1. Corinth. cap. 11. v. 25.) For although wee haue not any Hebrue text of thoſe places, yet that ſacrificinge Hebrue

word, beeing the Hebrue to that Greeke and Latine which wee haue, ſeing Chriſt ſpake in Hebrue, wee muſt needes affirme, they were both alike, and is a ſacrificinge word, ſo vſed ſeuen or eight times, in one (the 29.) chapter of Exodus, and ſo many other ſcriptures, as I haue here quoted: as likewiſe the greeke which wee haue, and proteſtants ſhould as they proteſt to doe, follow in the new teſtament. Leuit. c. 16. v. 9. Exod. c. 10. v. 25. Numer. c. 6. v. 10.11. Leuit. c. 9. v. 7. c. 16.22. Leuit. 14. v. 18.19.29.30.31. cap. 15. v. 14.15.29.30. c. 16. v. 9.24. c. 17.9. c. 22. v. 23.24. c. 23. v. 11.12.18.19. Numer. c. 6. v. 10.11.16.17. c. 8. v. 12. cap. 9. v. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.10.11.12.13.14. cap. 15. v. 3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.24. cap. 15. v. 29.30. Fr. Maſ. l. 5. cap. 6. pag. 235.243.
                     9. And our proteſtants of England freelie acknowledge, that both the primatiue Fathers and councels doe ſo teſtifie: The preſent proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, director to Maſter Maſon, together with his directed ſcribe confeſſe: This is the iudgement of the Fathers: Irenaeus ſaith, that Christ did then teach, the oblation of the new

teſtament, which the church throughout all the world doth vſe. Chriſoſtom ſaith, the wordes of the Lord, giue ſtrength to the ſacrifice vntill the end of the world. So they and others write of S. Cyprian, S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, S. Cyrill, S. Leo Fulgentius, and others. (Park. problom. pag. 153.154. Morton. appeall. 2. cap. 6. Maſon. l. 5. pag. 243.) And for councels ſay: The Nicen (firſt) councell in that Canon which Caluine and all others receaue, ſaith plainely, that the Lambe of God offered vnbloodely, is laide vppon the holy table. And for their owne opinion are forced to confeſſe, that Chriſt did in that place offer his body and blood in ſacrifice: for beeinge vrged with this Argument. Christ ſaid: This is my body which is giuē for you, or as it is in S. Paul, which is broken for you: and againe. This is my blood of the new teſtament, which is shedd for you, is shedd, is broken, is giuen not to you, but to God for you, doe not theſe wordes argue a reall, actuall and proper ſacrifice? They aunſwere and graunt in theſe words: They argue a ſacrifice to God. (Prot. Archb. Abb. and Franc. Maſon ſupr. l. 5. pag. 233.) Therefore of neceſſitie muſt alſo graunt, that it is the moſt holy ſacrifice

of Chriſts body, and blood figured in that Paſchall Lambe, as ſo many authorities haue told vs: and except the ſacrifice of Chriſts body and blood be not a propitiatory ſacrifice for ſinnes (which they may not ſay) they muſt needes confeſſe, that in holy Maſſe preiſts doe offer, not onely a commemoratiue, but a propitiatorie ſacrifice.
                  
                  
                     The ſame proued with allowance and conſent of Protestants out of the booke of Leuiticus. THE III. CHAPTER.
                     
                     THe Proteſtant correctors of Petrus Gallatinus doe aſſure vs. (Franciſcus Stancar. in l. 10. c. 7. Petr. Gallatin. de Arcan. Leuit. cap. 21. v. 8.) That where our Engliſh Proteſtants trāſlate in the 21 chapter of Leuiticus: Thou shalt ſanctify him therfore, for he offereth the breade of thy God: They ſhould reade: & ſanctificabis cum, quia carnem Dei tui ipſe est, vel erit ſacrificans. Thou shalt ſanctifie him (the preiſt) becauſe hee is, or shall bee ſacrificinge the flesh of thy

God. There teaching, that the preiſts of the new law are vnderſtood, as alſo their holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, wherein they offer the bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt our God: and therefore great ſanctification and ſanctitie is required to their callinge. And they proue by the Iewes themſelues. (Leuit. c 21. v. 6.8.17.21.) That the worde Lehem, which our Engliſh Proteſtantes tranſlate bread, doth in that place ſignifie fleſh and not bread, as it often doth, and except thoſe proteſtants deceaue vs, it ſo ſignifieth foure times in that chapter. Accordinge to that ſaying of Chriſt by Engliſh Proteſtants: My flesh is meate in deed, and my blood is drinke in deede. (Ioh. cap. 6. v. 55.) And their frēd Froſterus with other Hebritians acknowledgeth, that it is taken for fleſh euen in ſacrifices, and citeth: Gen. 3. Exod. 18.1. Samuel. 14.2. Samuel. 9. pſal. 136. Prouerb. 30. and concludeth with Malachias c. 1. v. 6. In which places the word is Lehem, the ſame which in this place of Leuiticus. And the cited proteſtants correctors of Gallatinus bringe Rabbi Dauid Kimhi. (in Seraſsim apud protest. ſup.) alleaging for this reading of Lehem, not onlie

this place of Leuiticus) but cap. 8. Deuter. Numer. 28. Ioh. cap. 6. Where they proue this to bee ſenſe of that place, and of the Hebrue word, ſignifying there the moſt holie ſacrifice of Catholick Chriſtians.
                     2. They further proue it, by the auncient Rabbins R. Simeon & others. (Franciſc. Stanc. ſup. l. 10. c. 7. in Gallatin.) That when this ſacrifice ſhould bee offered, all others were to ceaſe, and this to be celebrated, in bread and wine, and by the great power of words from the mouth of the preist, this ſacrifice on euery altare shall bee chaunged into the body of the Meſsias▪ Virtute ingenti verborum Sanctorum quae ab ore Sacerdotum manabit, illud omne ſacrificium quoad in vnaquaque ara celebrabitur, in corpus Meſsiae conuertetur. And this is no more then our Engliſh Proteſtants doe by publicke allowance publiſh and print, both of the doctrine of the primatiue church of Chriſt, and themſelues alſo in this: ſome of them aſſure vs the holy Fathers taught, that breade is made the body of Christ. It is chaunged, not in shape but nature. Chriſtes body is made of breade, and his blood of wine. The preist by ſecret power doth chaunge the viſible creatures

into the ſubſtance of Chriſts body and blood. The bread doth paſse into the nature of our Lords body. The primatiue church thought the ſanctified and conſecrated elements, to bee the body of Christ. (Maſon. pag. 243. Parkins: pag. 153.154. Morton. appeale l. 2. c. 6. Sutcliff. Subuers. pag. 32. Feild. pag. 150.
                     3. And to ſhew that diuers of the beſt learned of them for themſelues are wholly of this opinion, beſides diuers cited in other places, one of their moſt iudicious writers writeth with publick priuilege. (Couel. def. of Hooker pag. 116.117.276.) The omnipotency of God maketh it his bodie. And againe: To theſe perſons (preiſts) God imparteth power ouer his miſtical bodie, which is the ſocietie of ſoules, and ouer that naturall, which is himſelfe, a worke which antiquitie calleth the making of Chriſts bodie. And confeſſeth it for a reaſonable ſatisfaction, to ſay, it is done by tranſubſtantiation. And in an other worke ſpeakinge of this preiſtlye power, hee addeth. (Couel. examin. pag. 105) By bleſsing viſible elements, it maketh them inuiſible grace, it hath to diſpoſe of that flesh, which was giuen for the life of the world, and that blood which was powred out, to redeeme

ſoules. And yet if wee neither had the auncient Rabbins, nor Fathers thus allowed vnto vs by proteſtants, neither the conſent of forreine and domeſticall proteſtants in this matter, but ſtand onely vpon the text of holy ſcripture it ſelfe in that one chapter of Leuiticus, and let it bee graunted that the word Lehem, may ſignifie in that place Breade, as probably as fleſh, or more probably, if any man would ſo deſire; yet ſeing wee finde it ſo often as foure times in one chapter. (Leuit. cap. 21. per totum.) The bread of God, with an excellency aboue other bread, and offered in ſacrifice to God by preiſts, that are appointed and commaunded to bee ſo extraordinarily holy by annointing with oile bleſſings and ſanctifications, and to bee ſo chaſte, continent, and holy as is there commanded, & knowing it was there but a figuratiue ſacrifice, a figure of a more excellent to come, and preiſthood alſo, when we ſee no ſuch thing either for preiſtly dignitie, or holy ſacrifice in the Sacramentary Religion, but all reallie and truely verified in the Catholicke Romane Church, wee muſt needes interpret it of the holy preiſthood and ſacrifice

thereof.
                     4. Wee reade in the ſame booke of Leuiticus often mention of the ſacrifice Thodah: in one (the ſeuenth) chapter: (v. 11.12.13.14. Leuitic. cap. 22. v. 28.) there is diuers times ſett downe this Sebac Thodah, ſacrifice Thodah. And it is deſcribed to bee Caloth Matzoth. Our proteſtants tranſlate it: Sacrifice of thāks giuing, vnleuened cakes, and, Caloth Beluloth, vnleuened wafers, by our proteſtants tranſlation. Who there can it alſo. (v. 13.15.) Sacrifice of thankſgiuing, of peace offerings. And againe: Sacrifice of peace offerings, for thankſgiuing: Such was the dignitie of this ſacrifice, at leaſt in that which it prefigured, for of it ſelf but meane as we ſee, that as many learned proteſtants Theodor Bibliāder, Franciſcus Stancarus, the Engliſh Proteſtant Biſhop D. Morton, and others aſſure vs: erat apud veteres Hebraeos dogma receptiſsimum: It was a moſte commonly receaued opinion amonge the olde Hebrues, that at the cominge of the bleſſed Meſſias, all other legall ſacrifices ſhould ceaſe, and onely the ſacrifice Thodah, of thankſgiuing praiſe & confeſſion, ſhould bee celebrated: and that to bee celebrated

with bread & wine. Theod. Bibliād. 2. de Trinit. pag. 89. Franciſ. Stancar: in emēd. lib. Petr. Gallatin. l. 10. Morton appeale Hieronym. à Sancta fide l. 1. contr. Iud. cap. 9. Talmuld. apud. eund. 16. Froſter. Lexic. v. Thoda.
                     
                     5. And to make all ſure from exception, the Prophet Dauid teſtifieth as much. (pſal. 50. v. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.) For making relatiō in the 49. (by the Hebrues 50.) pſalme, how God would reiect the ſacrifice of the Iewes, and haue a new more pleaſinge ſacrifice offered vnto him: when hee had reiected the former, hee addeth for the new that was to continue: Sebac Leholim Thodah. Sacrifice to God Thodah. Where both by the ſacrificing Verb Sebac, and Thodah to bee offered in ſacrifice vnto him, he addeth of them that ſhall offer it: and thou shalt glorifie mee: as our proteſtants tranſlate it. And wheras in Leuiticus is onely mention made of cakes or wafers in this ſacrifice, the ſame Prophet Dauid in the 116. pſalme as the Rabbines before, maketh alſo mention of the cup or challice in this ſacrifice. For ſaying there. (pſal. 116. v. 17.) I will ſacrifice the ſacrifice Thodah Sebac Thodah: hee ſaith alſo, as our Proteſtants

tranſlate. (v. 12.13.) What shall I render vnto the Lord for all his benefites towardes mee? I will take the cup of ſaluation, and call vppon the name of the Lord. Where the Hebrue readeth: I will lift vp or offer, Eſe the cup of ſaluation: for that which in the Greeke Latine and Proteſtant Engliſh is: I will take the cup or chalice, calicem ſalutaris accipiam, of ſaluation. So that if wee will iuſtifie both readings, it is euident that an holy chalice, was both to bee offered and receiued in this: and to take which text we will (as one wee muſt) becauſe thinges offered in ſacrifices were receiued, and thinges alſo in them receiued, were before offered, it is manifeſt by the Prophet, that the holy conſecrated challice, was to bee offered and receiued in this ſacrifice Thodah, as it is with Catholicks at this time.
                     6. And this was ſo knowne a veritie amonge the Iewes, that as Hieronymus, à ſancta fide, proueth againſt the Iewes. (l. 1. contr. Iudaeos cap. 9.) hee himſelfe a Iew, it is often reiterated in theire Thalmud it ſelfe, eſt quaedam locutio ſaepe in Thalmud reiterata, quae dicit ſic: in tempore futuro vniuerſa ſacrificia, excepto ſacrificio confeſsionis

annihilata erunt. And wee doe not finde in any Religion Chriſtians or others, any cup or chalice, which truely or putatiuely, is termed the cup or chalice of ſaluation, but that which is conſecrated and offered in holy Maſſe: of which Chriſt ſaid as our proteſtants tranſlate it. (Luc. cap. 22. v. 20. 1. Corinth. cap. 11. v. 24.) This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Marc. 14.24. This is my blood of the new teſtament, which is shed for many. Matth. 26.28. This is my blood of the new teſtament which is shed for many, for the remiſsion of ſinnes. So that except wee will bee Antichriſtians, and deny the truth of the words of Chriſt, that which hee then gaue and offered, and is lawfully conſecrated, preiſts doe ſtil offer in holy Maſſe, was and is this cup or chalice of ſaluation, fortold by the Prophet Dauid in this place.
                     7. And howeſoeuer wee will interpret this word Thoda with proteſtant Hebritians, to ſignifie gloria gloriatio, laus laudatio, celebratio confeſsio, glory, glorification praiſe, commendation, celebration, confeſſion. (Froſter. in Lexic. in v. Thoda pag. 355.) it cannot poſſibly bee better expreſſed and

verified in any thinge then the holy ſacrifice of the bleſſed body & blood of Chriſt, which therfore the old canon of the Maſſe calleth ſacrificium laudis, ſacrifice of praiſe. For as S. Auguſtine ſaith. (l. 1. contr. aduerſar. leg. & Prophetar. cap. 18.) Quid est ſacratius laudis ſacrificium, quàm in actione gratiarum? Et vnde maiores agendae ſunt Deo gratiae, quam pro ipſius gratia per Ieſum Chriſtum Dominum nostrum? quod totum fideles in Eccleſiae ſacrificio ſciunt, cuius vmbrae fuerunt omnia priorum generum ſacrificia. What ſacrifice of praiſe is more holy, then in thankſgiuing? and wherefore are more or greater thankes to bee giuen to God, then for his grace by Ieſus Chriſt our Lord? All which the faithfull doe know in the ſacrifice of the church, of which all ſacrifices of the former kindes were ſhadowes. And our proteſtants of England haue graunted as much before, acknowledginge the Euchariſt to be a ſacrifice of Religion, a ſacrifice of thankſgiuing, a commemoratiue ſacrifice, and a remembrance and memoriall of Chriſt offered and ſacrificed for the ſinnes of the worlde, and mans redemption: which deſerue and binde all Chriſtians to

giue the greateſt glory, praiſe, commendation, thankes and confeſſion to God for ſo an ineſtimable grace and benefite they poſſibly are able.
                     7. Therefore moſt truely and properly this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, which Catholicks vſe, was by the holy Scriptures, Rabines, Fathers, Catholicks and proteſtants before termed Thoda. For beſides all thoſe Etimologies, and ſignifications thereof, before alleaged from proteſtant Hebritiās, they further add. (Ioh. Froster. Lexic. Hebraic. in Thoda pag. 355.) Vocat ſcriptura hoc nomine ſpeciem ſacrificij, quo offerentes confitebantur accepiſſe ſe beneficium à Deo, celebrantque & praedicabant gloriam clementiae, & benignitatis, de graeci tranſtulerunt 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            ſacrificium laudis, Germani Liboffer. (Leuit. cap 7. verſ. 11.) Acconstabat vt eius deſcriptione Leuitici 7. habetur, ex placenta Azimae, offerebanturque ab illis, qui cum à periculo aliquo liberati, gratos ſe Deo declarare volebāt. The ſcripture calleth by this name Thoda the kinde of ſacrifice, by which they that offered it, did confeſſe, that they had receiued benefits from God, and they celebrated, & declared the glory of the mercy,

and bountifulnes of God, the Greeks tranſlated it, ſacrifice of praiſe, the Germans Libopffer, and it conſiſted, as appeareth by the deſcription of it, in the 7. chapter of Leuiticus, of an vnleuened Cake, and it was offered of them, that beeing deliuered from any daunger would ſhew themſelues thankfull to God. All which properties in a moſt excellent manner, are found and proued to belonge to the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, for more then any other rite or ceremonie vſed by any Chriſtians.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE IIII. CHAPTER. Prouing the ſame, by the ſame warrant from the Prophet Dauid.
                     NOw let vs come to the Prophet Dauid: who in the 21.22. pſalme by the Hebrues ſpeaking of the conuerſion of the gentiles and all nations to Chriſt, and ſetting downe many particulars of his holy life and paſſion, amonge the reſt, when by proteſtants tranſlation hee had ſaid: all the ends of the world shall remember and turne to the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations

shall worship before thee. For the kingdome is the Lords, and hee is the gouernor among the natiōs, which we ſee performed by Chriſt, hee immediatlie addeth: all they that bee fat vppon the earth (the potent and mightie) shall eate and worship. The Hebrue which our proteſtants ſhould follow there, is Iſtachahu haue bowed downe themſelues in worſhip. So is the Greek 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         So the vulgare Latine: manducauerunt & adorauerunt, ſo Sebaſtian Caſtalio the proteſtant, comedent & adorabunt: ſo readeth S. Auguſtine, (Augustin. in pſal. 21.) Manducauerunt & adorabunt omnes diuites terrae. Euen all the rich vppon earth haue eaten, and ſhall worſhip. And examining what holy food this ſhould bee, which euen the ritcheſt and moſt potent ſhould worſhip, when they did eate it, not findinge any other food, worthie ſuch worſhip, hee concludeth: manducauerunt corpus humilitatis Domini ſui etiam diuites terrae. Euen the ritch of the earth haue eaten the body of the humilitie of their Lord. Whereuppon a very learned writer & linguiſt before theſe times of controuerſies. (Iacob. Perez de Valentia quaest. 5. contra Iudaeos.) Writing againſt

the Iewes ſaith: although this Sacrament was figured by many ſignes and figures in the Lawe, yet Dauid in manifest wordes hath expreſſed it in the 21. pſalme. And citing the wordes before alleaged, thus hee writeth: vbi manifestè oſtenditur, quòd fideles debebant māducare & adorare Deum ſuum. Where it is manifeſtly ſhewed, that the faithful ought to eate and adore their God.
                     2. And whereas the ſame holy Prophet in his 98. pſalme ſaith: adorate ſcabellum pedum eius, quoniam ſanctum eſt. Adore the footeſtoole of his feete, becauſe it is holy: The ſame S Auguſtine hauing related thoſe wordes of God in the Prophet Iſay, as our proteſtants trāſlate them. (Iſay cap. 66. v. 1.) The heauen is my Throne, and the earth my footestoole: thus ſpeaketh: Fluctuans conuerte me ad Chriſtum, quia ipſum quaro hic, & inuenio quomodo ſine impietate adoretur terra. Sine impietate adoretur ſcabellum pedum eius. Suſcepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de terra eſt, & de carne Mariae carnem accepit, & quia in ipſa carne hic ambulauit, & ipſam carnem nobis manducandam ad ſalutem dedit: nemo autem illam carnem manducat, niſi prius adorauerit: Inuentum eſt quemadmodum

adoretur tale ſcabellum pedum Domini, & non ſolum non peccemus adorando, ſed peccemus non adorando. Doubtfull I conuert mee to Chriſt, becauſe I ſeeke him here, and I finde, how without impiety earth may be adored. For from earth hee receaued earth, becauſe fleſh is from the earth, and from the fleſh of Mary he receaued fleſh, and becauſe he walked here in the ſame fleſh, and gaue the ſame fleſh to bee eaten of vs, to ſaluation: and no man eateth that fleſh, but firſt he adoreth it: we haue found how ſuch a footeſtoole of the feete of our Lord may bee adored, and wee doe not onely not ſinne in adoringe it, but wee ſhould ſinne, if wee did not adore it. Thus this holy and learned Doctor.
                     3. And of all men our Engliſh Proteſtants, which vtterly deny all worſhip or adoration to relicks, and holy material thinges, and ſingularly at their communion, differently from all other proteſtantes by ſtrict and very penall commaundement vſe the ordinary act and geſture of adoration, kneeling to their communion, muſt needes bee of this opinion: for in their Religion there is nothinge vnder God but the

bleſſed body, blood & humanitie of Chriſt which may haue that externall religious and adoring geſture vſed vnto it. The wordes of their article Religion to which they are all bound. (Articul. 22.) are theſe: worshipping and adoration aswell of Images as of relicks, and alſo inuocation of Saints is a fond thinge, vainely inuented, and grounded vppon no warrant of ſcripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. Where wee ſee all other thinges prohibited to haue any worſhip or adoration, or acts thereof done vnto them. And the Prophet here is plaine euen in the originall tongue, Hebrue, which theſe men appriſe ſo much, that it is Gods commaundement, that wee ſhould worſhip this body of Chriſt, Gods footeſtoole, incuruate vos ſcabello, Laharum, pedum eius ſanctum ipſum, Chadosh hu. It is holy. And our proteſtants profeſſinge to allowe and follow the Hebrue do falſely tranſlate: worship at his footeſtoole, for hee is holy. For the Hebrue is plaine: worship or adore his footeſtoole. And ſo the proteſtant Sebaſtian Caſtalio tranſlateth, eius pedum ſubſellium veneramini: worſhip the footeeſtoole of his feete. So the Greeke 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Adore his footestoole. And our proteſtants cannot excuſe themſelues, becauſe it is in the Hebrue La harom, to the footestoole, and the particle la, is an adiect to Harom, but by this more condemneth them, for the word Haſtitachu, incuruate vos, bowe downe your ſelues in worship, to the footestoole, or his footestoole, doth demonſtrate the worſhip was done to the footeſtoole. And theſe men condemne themſelues in this matter: for in the 20. chapter of Exodus. (v. 5.) Where they would haue adoration to creatures forbidden, they tranſlate the very ſame worde: Thou ſhalt not bowe downe thy ſelfe to them: La hem: and yet here the expreſſe commaundement is: bowe downe yourſelues to his footestoole.
                     
                     4. Againe, where the Prophet Dauid ſpeaketh as our proteſtants tranſlate him. (pſal. 39 alias 40. ver. 7.) Sacrifice and offering thou didst not deſire &c. ſpeaking of the old ſacrifices to ceaſe, and the lawe of Chriſt to bee receaued: S. Paul. (Hebr. 10.5.6.7. thus expoundeth it of Chriſt: when hee cometh into the world hee ſaith, ſacrifice and offeringe thou wouldeſt not, but a body thou hast prepared mee in burnt offerings and

ſacrifices for ſinne thou haſt had no pleaſure, then ſaid I, 
                              •…
                           oe I come to do thy wil o God &c. And in that place of the pſalme the Greeke reading is as S. Paule readeth, a body thou haſt prepared mee: 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . So readeth S. Auguſtine, S. Baſile, and others. And S. Auguſtine thus concludeth from that place. (Augustin. in pſal. 39. l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 20. Baſil. in pſal. 72.) vocem illam in pſal. 39. Mediatoris per prophetiam loquentis agnoſcimus: ſacrificium & oblationem noluisti, corpus autem perfecisti mihi. Wee acknowledge that voice of the Mediator ſpeaking by propheſy in the 39. pſalme: Thou wouldeſt not haue ſacrifice and oblation, but thou haſt perfected a body for mee. And then thus hee declareth how this the body of Chriſt our Mediator was made our ſacrifice, in place of thoſe that were abrogated. (Augustin l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 20.) Quia pro illis omnibus ſacrificijs & oblationibus corpus eius offertur, & participantibus ministratur. Becauſe for all thoſe ſacrifices and oblations his body is offered, and miniſtred to the participants.
                     5. And vppon thoſe words of that pſalme thus hee writeth. (Auguſtin. in pſal. 39.

                        v. 7.) Sacrificia ergo illa, tanquam verba promiſsiua, oblata ſunt. Quid eſt, quod datum est completiuum? corpus quod nostis. Videte quando dictum eſt, Christus enim ille est Dominus noster, modo loquens ex perſona ſua, ſacrificium inquit. & oblationem noluiſti. Quid ergo? Nos iam hoc tempore ſine ſacrificio dimiſsi ſumus? abſit, corpus autem perfecisti mihi: Ideo illa noluisti, vt hoc perficeres: illa voluiſti antequam hoc perficeres, perfectio abstulit verba promittentia. Nam ſi adhuc ſunt promittentia, nondum impletum est, quod promiſſum est. Hoc promittebatur quibuſdam ſignis, ablata ſunt promittentia, quia exhibita eſt veritas promiſſa. Therefore thoſe ſacrifices, beeing as promiſing wordes, are taken away, what is that which is giuen fulfilling them? The bodie which you know conſider when it was ſpoken, for that Chriſt is our Lord now ſpeaking in his owne parſon, ſacrifice ſaith hee, and oblation thou wouldeſt not haue. What therfore? are we in this time left without a ſacrifice? God forbid. But thou haſt perfected a body to mee: Therefore thou wouldeſt not haue thoſe ſacrifices, that thou mighteſt perfect this; Thou wouldſt haue them before thou

diddeſt perfect this. Perfection tooke away the promiſing wordes, for if ſtill they are promiſinge, that is not yet fulfilled, which was promiſed. This was promiſed by certaine ſignes, the promiſing ſignes are taken away, becauſe the truth which was promiſed, is giuen.
                     6. Neither may this place bee otherwiſe expounded of any, ſeing S. Paul himſelfe. (Hebr. 10. v. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.) doth ſo expound it, being beſt acquainted with the meaning of the holy Ghoſt: and therfore at large proueth from hence, the ceaſing of the ſacrifices of the Lawe of Moiſes, for their vnperfectnes, and a new and perfect ſacrifice of Chriſts body to ſucceed in place of them: and thus concludeth by our proteſtants tranſlation: hee taketh away the firſt, that hee may eſtablish the ſecond. So it is in Greeke: ſo in the Latine readinge. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Aufert primum, vt ſequens statuat. Therefore our proteſtants makinge this concordance of theſe ſcriptures, and graunting before an external ſacrifice of Religion among Chriſtians, cannot poſſibly make other conſtruction of this place of the Prophet, then

S. Paule, and S. Auguſtine after him hath done before, and to endeuour the contrary, would be to recal the ſacrifices of the Iewes to bee ſtill in force, and euacuate the Law of Chriſt. S. Chriſoſtome writing vppon the 95. pſalme ſaith plainely, that the Prophet there plainely interpreteth the misticall table, the vnbloody-ſacrifice, the heauenly and exceeding venerable ſacrifice of Christians, Luculenter, & dilucidè myſticam interpretatus est menſam, quae est incruenta hostia, caeleste ſumme que venerandum ſacrificium. And in the 72. pſalme by the Hebrues ſpeaking at large of the cominge of Chriſt, our Meſſias, as our proteſtants. (protest. argum. in pſal. 72.) and all agree, about many miſteries of him, and many excellencies which hee ſhould haue, as that he ſhould rule from ſea to ſea, all Kings should fall downe before him. Hee shall bee a deliuerer, shall redeeme ſoules, hee shall daily bee prayſed. (Pſal. 72. v. 11.10.12.13.14.15.) and the like.
                     7 It immediatly in the next verſe followeth of him in the Hebrue readinge, which by proteſtants wee muſt followe, without any interruption, or interpoſition of any one word: Iehi Piſsath Barbaaretz

be Roh Harim. Hee shall bee a little cake of bread, placentula panis, as Iacobus de Valentia before theſe controuerſes, readeth▪ 
                        in pſalm. 72. as an handfull of meale, fietque vt farris pugilli: by the proteſtant Sebaſtian Caſtalio. Sebaſt. Caſtal ibid. a cake of wheate, placenta frumenti, a ſacrifice of bread. Franciſc. Stancar. in l. 10. Petr. Gallatin. ſacrificium panis: as an other proteſtant linguiſt readeth, a little cake of bread, a ſacrifice of bread: placentula panis & ſacrificium panis, as Hieronimus a S fide a Iew readeth, from the auncient Hebrues and Chaldeans in the ſame maner. Hieronymus à S. fide l. 1. contra Iud. cap. 9▪ both Iewes, Catholicks, and proteſtants as Sebaſtian Munſter, Franciſcus Stancarus, and others aſſure vs, that Rabbi Salomon reading vppon this place, Iehi Piſath B
                              •…
                           r, erit placenta frumenti: a cake of wheate: confeſſeth further: Magistri nostri expoſuerunt hoc eſſe genus placentarum in diebus Meſsiae, & totum pſalmū de Rege Meſſia explanauerunt. Our Maſters or Rabbines expounded this to bee a kinde of cakes in the dayes of the Meſſias, and interpreted the whole pſalme of the Kinge Meſſias. The ſame authors proue vnto vs, that the

Chaldy Paraphraſes read on: erit ſubstantificus panis: The Meſſias ſhall bee ſubſtantificall bread. R. Salmon in pſal. 72. Petr. Gal. l. 10. Petr. Burg. apud Genebr. in pſal. 72. Genebr. ib. Sebast. Monſter. incenſura errorum Iudaeor. pag. 56. Franciſc. Stancar. in l. 10. Gallat. Hieronymus à ſancta fide l. 1. contra Iudaeos.
                     
                     8. The other Rabbi Ionathā Ben Vziel, which wrote before the coming of Chriſt as the Iewes themſelues, beſides both Catholick and Proteſtant witneſſes, approue, and cite him in their booke, Beſepher Bibakim, of collections: here readeth: erit ſacrificium panis in terra in capite montium Eccleſiae: he, the Meſsias shal bee a ſacrifice of bread on the head of the mountaines of the church. Let him conſider that hath eyes, that as it is ſaid, hee is the Meſsias of whome the whole pſalme ſpeaketh, therefore when hee ſaith, and hee shall bee a cake of wheate on earth, on the head of mountaines, hee meaneth, and would ſay, that a cake of bread shal bee the ſacrifice ouer the heads of preists vvhich are in the church. And Iacobus de Valentia. (in pſal. 72.) longe before theſe times, proueth againſt the Iewes, that theire Targum readeth:

                        erit placeutula tritici ſuper capita Sacerdotum. Hee ſhall bee a little cake of wheate aboue the heads of preiſts. Neither doth either the Greeke, or any Latine readinge contradict theſe moſt auncient and approued readings: the Greeke ſterigma ſignifieth, fulcimentum flabilimentum or firmamentum, that which ſuſteineth, beareth vp or ſtrengtheneth ſome other: ſo is the Latine, what exemplar ſoeuer wee follow, or readinge, frumentum or firmamentum, or as Iacobus de Valentia writeth. (vt ſupra) S. Ierome readinge, memorabile triticum, memorable wheate. For all theſe ſignifications and properties, in an excellent maner are verified of Chriſt, and the holy ſacrifice of his body. And the Copula, or verbe in all learned languages, Hebrue, Greeke, Latine, Iehi, eſtai, erit, muſt needes haue relation, and connection with the Meſſias, onely there ſpoken of both immediatlie before, and after: the next verſe beeing, by our proteſtantes tranſlation, the Hebrue Greeke and Latine agreeing. (pſal. 72. Hebr. verſ. 17.) his name shall endure for euer: his name shall bee continued as longe as the ſunne: and men shall bee bleſſed in him, all nations

shall cal him bleſſed. And ſo to the end of the pſalme: ſo the whole pſalme before the 16. verſe.
                     9. Therefore ſtraunge it ſhould be, that in a whole pſalme, both by Iewes, Catholicks, and proteſtants, entreating onely of the Meſſias, there ſhould bee one only verſe, relatinge a matter quite extrauagant by proteſtants tranſlation, beeing thus: There shall bee an handful of corne in the earth vpon the toppe of the mountaines: the fruite therof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the citie shall florish like graſſe of the earth. And then immediately followeth, of the Meſſias by theſe proteſtants tranſlation: His name shal endure for euer. Which hath no connexion with the former, if we expound it of materiall corne, and for the prophet to ſay only, there shall be an handful of corne in the earth vpon the top of mountaines, neuer was, or can bee in that materiall ſence, any ſigne or diſtinction to knowe the Meſſias by, which is the ſcope of that pſalme. And yet in their pſalmes in meeter printed. (an. 1614. cum priuilegio Regis regali, conferred with the Hebrue, as theſe men write) they make the matter worſe: thus it is:

                           
                           The mightie mountaines of the land
                           of corne shall bringe ſuch thronge,
                           That it like Cedar trees shall stand
                           in Libanus all alonge.
                           Their cities eke full well shall ſpeed,
                           the fruites thereof shall paſse:
                           In plenty it shall far exceede,
                           and ſpringe as greene as graſſe.
                        
This is the Rithme, the reaſon I leaue to others to finde, it paſſeth my skill▪ But this I am certaine of, that neuer any ſuch thing chaunced in the time of Chriſt, ſince, or before to my readinge: and for any proteſtant, or other, to ſay, that come as high as Cedar trees, with the reſt deſcribed in their Rithme, ſhall bee at the cominge of the Meſſias, is to deny Chriſt, and with the Iewes to expect an other, yet to come, when ſuch things may bee performed.
                     10. Therefore to let others paſſe, I will conclude this matter with Iacobus de Valentia, that learned Biſhop of Criſtopolis. (in pſal. 71. and Hieronymus à S. fide a Iew.) both longe before this time of controuerſies: The firſt ſaith: per hoc quod additur, in ſummis montium: by that which is added in the tops of mountaines, is expreſſed that this

aboundance is not to bee vnderstood of wheate, or materiall corne, as the blind Iewes doe ſay, that in the cominge of the Meſsias there shal bee great aboundance of corne, and wine, and oyle. Therefore here is recompted, and foretold, the ſacrifice of the Eucharist, in which Christ is daily offered in the forme of breade, for Christ is daily lifted vp ouer the heads of preists, as it is figured in the 29. chapter of Exodus, where God commaunded a peece of breade to bee lifted vp, ouer the heads of the preiſts before the people. The ſame figure was of the bread of propoſition in the 25. chapter of Exodus, and 24. of Leuiticus. Therefore in an other tranſlation which is called Targum, it is: erit placentula tritici ſuper capita Sacerdotum. Hee ſhall bee a little cake of wheate aboue the heads of preiſts. Therefore Dauid ſaith ſoe: This Kinge the Meſsias shall bee firmament, or corne, or memorable wheate in earth vpon the tops of mountaines, that is, he shall bee lifted vp ouer the heads of preists in the forme of breade, for preists are often in ſcriptures vnderstood by mountaines, for their eminency of dignity, as is ſaid before. And againe: after the Prophet had foretold, that the Meſsias should bee God and man, and

worshipped of all nations, and Kings of the world, after hee addeth, that this Kinge Meſſias shall bee corne and wheate, and a peece of of bread on the tops of mountaines, and ouer the heads of preiſts, as hath beene declared there by many tranſlations. And ſo it is manifeſt, how this Sacrament is not onely poſsible, but alſo many wayes figured, and foretold in the lawe, and Prophets. And ſo it plainely appeareth, that Christians doe not adore bread, as the blind Iewes doe lie, but we adore Chriſt conſecrated vnder thoſe accidents.
                     
                     11. The learned Iew. Hieronym. à S. fide l. 1. contr. Iudaeos. hauing diſputed in the like maner, thus concludeth: we learne that the Iewes affirme that pſalme, Deus iudicium tuum Regi da: ſpeaketh all thinges of the Meſſias: now therfore vvhere it ſaith: hee shall bee firmament on earth on the tops of mountaines, and the Caldy trāſlation ſaith, that hee (the Meſsias) shall bee a ſacrifice of bread on earth on the head of the mountaines of the Sinagogue: The mountaines of the Sinagogue are the preiſts of the church, which de facto euery day doe eleuate or lift vp the Meſsias ouer their heads: and this is ſo manifest, that it cannot bee denied but by them, to

whom the malediction of Eſay the Prophet is come, that they should bee made blinde in eyes and hart. Iſ. 42. And to this caſe and condition are all they brought, by theſe holy and learned authorities, which deny the truth of this holy ſacrifice: for it is euident that in the ſence of proteſtant Sacramentaries, this propheſie to bee fulfilled at the cominge of the Meſſias, was neuer performed: when in this Catholick conſtructiō it is iuſtified & effected in the whole world: And if we ſhould come to Libanus it ſelfe, though now many hundred yeares vnder the Mahumetans, yet wee are aſſured euen by proteſtants themſelues, that Chriſt in the forme of bread is there moſt religiouſlie and aboue other places, eleuated dailie by preiſts ouer their heads in the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe; there bee Catholicke Chriſtians in greate number, with Patriarke, Archbiſhop, Biſhops and religious men obedient to the Pope of Rome in all the dominions of the grād Segnior of the Turke, there bee ſo many Chriſtians frequenting Maſſe, that a proteſtant telleth vs: They make aboue two third parts of his Empire. Cytraeus lib. de ſtatu. Eccleſiae pag. 20.21. Munster.

in Coſmograph. Ed. Grimstom. booke of eſtates pag. 1053. & 1064. of that, which the Prophet ſpeaketh of Chriſts beeing a preiſt after the order of Melchiſedech, I haue ſpoken before: onely I add here from the learned Father (Anastaſius Abb. l. contra Iudaeos) diſputing againſt the Iewes, who hauing proued from the hiſtory of Geneſis, and S. Paule, the dignitie of the preiſthood of Chriſtians, aboue that of the old teſtament, and that of Melchiſedech greater alſo then that was, inferred, that the ſacrifice of Chriſtians muſt needes be much more excellent: Si Typus ille excellētior erat Iudaico Sacerdotum, profecto multo magis erit ipſa veritas. If that Type or figure was more excellent then the Iewiſh preiſthood, ſurelie the truth it ſelfe muſt needes bee much more excellent: which is no other by any Chriſtiās, but Chriſts moſt holy body and blood in the ſacrifice of Maſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE V. CHAPTER. Wherin the ſame holy doctrines are ſo alſo proued out of the Prouerbs of Salomon. cap. 9.
                     
                     S. Ciprian. ep. 63. ad Cecil. hauing cited the hiſtory of Melchiſedech & how Chriſt

inſtitutinge the moſt holy ſacrifice of his body and blood, to be offered by his preiſts, in holy Maſſe, therein fulfilled that figure of Melchiſedech, he addeth: Sed & pe
                              •…
                            Salomonem Spiritus Sanctus typum Dominici ſacrificij ante praemonstrat, immolatae hostiae & panis & vini, ſed & altaris & Apostolorum faciens mentionem. Saptentia, inquit, aedificabit ſibi domum, & ſubdidit columnas ſeptem. Mactauit ſuas hoſtias, miſcuit in cratera vinum ſuum, & parauit menſam ſuam & miſit ſeruos ſuos, conuocans cum excelſa praedicatione ad crateram dicens: Quis est inſipiens declinet ad me: & egentibus ſenſu dixit: venite, edite de meis panibus, & bibite vinum quod miſcui vobis. But by Salomon alſo the holy Ghoſt doth ſhew before the figure of our Lords ſacrifice, making mention of an offered hoſte, and bread and wine, as alſo of an altare, and the Apoſtles Wiſedome, ſaith hee, did build for himſelfe an houſe, and put vnder it ſeuen p
                           •…
                        lers, killed his hoſtes, mingled his wine in a boule, and prepared his table, & ſent his ſeruants calling with a loude preachinge to his cup, ſayinge: who is vnwiſe, let him decline to mee: and to needy in ſence hee ſaid: come

you, eate you of my breads, and drinke the wine which I haue mingled for you. This expoſition of S. Cyprian is approued by the church of Chriſt. Breuiar. Roman. in fest. corpor. Christ. and S. Auguſtine in his 4. booke of Chriſtian doctrine. cap. 21. & l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 20. And in his bookes, de ciuitate De
                              •…
                           , hee likewiſe ſo expoundeth it: and calleth the ſacrifice there figured, corpus, & ſanguinem Chriſti, the body, and blood of Chriſt, ſucceedinge the old ſacrifices, id enim inquit ſacrificium ſucceſsit omnibus illis ſacrificijs veteris testamenti, quae immolabantur in vmbra futuri. For that ſacrifice, ſaith hee, hath ſucceeded all thoſe ſacrifices of the old teſtament, which were offered in ſhadow of that was to come.
                     2. And Rabbi Samuel in his booke of the cominge of the Meſſias, which he ſent to Rabbi Iſaac Maſter of the Sinagogue, writeth thus, vppon that place, and of this holy ſacrifice: Rabbi Samuel l. de aduentu Meſsiae cap. 20. hoc ſacrificium pulcherrime & apte deſcribit Salomon Propheta. Salomon the Prophet doth moſte excellently and aptly deſcribe this ſacrifice (of Christians) in the 9. chapter of his booke of Prouerbs: when

hee ſaith,
moſt high wiſedome hath communicated his ſacrifice, mingled his wine, and prepared his table, then hee ſente his ſeruants, ſayinge, who is a little one, lett him come to me, and the vnwiſe ſhall eate my bread, and drinke my wine tempered with water, ô my Maſter what is this prepared table of the moſt high wiſedome but the altare, ô my Maſter? what is the breade & wine mingled, but the ſacrifice of bread and wine, and of water which is offered on the altare? who are the vnwiſe called by the ſeruants of wiſedome, but the gentiles, or nations which knew not God, called by the Apoſtles? and it is to be noted, he ſaith, his bread and his wine, for by that hee doth inſinuate, that this ſacrifice is acceptable to God, and that to this banquet ſo high, and ſo ſpirituall, hee did not call our Fathers which were wiſe in the lawe, who were occupied in the ſacrifice of the lawe, which carnall ſacrifice hee hath not left vnto vs. Whereuppon it cometh, that wee (the Iewes) deteſt in the gentiles the ſacrifice of bread & wine which God hath appointed, and in no reſpect reiecteth, as he doth reiect ſacrifices of fleſh.
                     
                     
                        3. And Hieronymus à S. fide. l. 1. contra Iudaeos cap. 1. by whoſe booke diuers thouſandes of Iewes (hee beeing alſo a Iewe) were conuerted, proueth againſt them, that a principall reaſon why they did not receaue Chriſt, was becauſe he taught a new law▪ preiſthood, and ſacrifice, which cannot conſiſt together with the lawe, preiſthood and ſacrifices of Moyſes. If we reſort to the originall text of Hebrue, as our proteſtants would ſeeme beſt to allowe, wee haue a greater allowance there for theſe myſteries; for wheras S. Cyprian with the vulgare latine readeth, wiſedome builded to herſelfe an houſe, ſapientia aedificauit ſibi domum: the Hebrue is Banetha Beithah, builded his houſe: Chriſt the wiſedome of his father builded his houſe, his church, as it is commonly expounded: And where S. Cyprian readeth, mactauit ſuas hostias, killed his ſacrifices, in the plurall number, as the latine vulgare, immolauit victimas ſuas, ſacrificed his victims, the Hebrue in the ſingular number, to deſigne one ſingular ſacrifice, is, Tabechah Tibchah, offered vp his ſacrifice; and therefore our Engliſh Proteſtants in their late priuiledged tranſlation

readinge quite otherwiſe: shee hath killed her beaſtes: haue prophaned that holy text in this point, ſoe the Hebrue readeth of Chriſt in this place: his table: his bread: his wine which hee mingled. And this is ſo euident and manifeſt, that Sebaſtian Caſtalio the proteſtant linguiſt tranſlated: victimam ſuam immolauit, vinum libauit: hee offered his ſacrifice hee ſacrificed his wine: Caſtal. in hunc loc. Prou. 9. So that the ſacrifice here mentioned, muſt needs be that, which Chriſts eternal wiſedome, offered, & therfore the altar wheron it is offered is called, his table, & when it is called bread, or food, or flesh, the Hebrue Lehem ſignifying them all, or wine, it is not abſolutely ſo called, but his bread, or his food, or his fleſh, and his wine, which hee mingled, or ſacrificed, as this proteſtant before hath taught vs. Therefore we muſt needes conclude from hence, that the preiſthood of Chriſtians, is a true ſacrificinge preiſthood, and neither proteſtant or other, finding other ſacrifice then holy Maſſe, it muſt needes bee this.
                  
                  
                     
                     Wherin the ſame mysteries are proued by the ſame maner out of the Prophet Eſay, and others. THE VI. CHAPTER.
                     
                     OVr Proteſtants of England in the Titles of the 56.60. and 61. chapters of Eſay the Prophet interpret them of Chriſt, and his holy Religion: ſo doe many ſcriptures, all readers may ſee cited and alleaged in the Margins there by them: and yet in theſe places the holy Prophet doth teſtify, that there ſhall bee a ſacrificing preiſthood an externall ſacrifice, and altar whereupon it ſhal bee offered in this lawe of Chriſt, In the firſt place which Chriſt him ſelfe expoundeth of himſelfe and his law, the Prophet ſpeaking of the conuerſion of the gentiles to Chriſt, writeth thus by proteſtants tranſlation: Euen them will I bringe to my holy mountaine (his church) and make them ioyfull in my houſe of prayer: their burnt offerings and ſacrifices, shall bee acceptable vppon my altar: for my houſe shall be called an houſe of prayer for all people. The Hebrue, Greeke,

and Latine readings doe all manifeſtly expreſſe ſacrifice and altar, whereon it was to bee offered, and that ſacrifice to bee acceptable to God: therefore ſeeing an altar, wheron ſacrifice is offered, a ſacrifice theron offered, and a preiſt ſacrificinge or offeringe ſuch ſacrifice, are in all learninge mutuall correllatiues, and cannot poſſibly bee ſeparated, theſe muſt needes bee found among Chriſtians by this place of the Prophet.
                     2. And in the 60. chapter v. 7. ſpeaking alſo of the conuerſion of the Gentiles, there foretelleth, howe the preiſtes, which hee ſhould chooſe in them, whome hee vnderſtandeth by the Rammes of the flock, theſe beeing cheife of naturall ſheepe, as preiſts be in the ſpiritual fold and ſheep of Chriſt, ſhall offer acceptable ſacrifice vpon the altar of God in the church of the Gentiles conuerted. The Hebrue Greeke and Latine texts all agree propoſing vnto vs, a ſacrifice offered on the altare in the lawe of the Meſſias: and can haue no other conſtruction, except we will returne to Iudaiſme: for as a learned Father proueth. (Anastaſius Abb. l. contra Iudaeos.) ſignificat gentes ſacrificaturos

eſſe Deo ſacrificijs acceptis, quare non de ſacrificijs legis intelligi potest, neque de altari t
                              •…
                           rrestris Hieruſalem, ergo ſpiritualis. The Prophet ſignifieth, that the Gentiles ſhall ſacrifice to God with acceptable ſacrifices, wherefore hee cannot bee vnderſtood of the ſacrifices of the lawe, nor of the altar of the material Hieruſalem (being euacuated. Iſ. c. 61. v. 5) therfor of the ſacrifice & altar of the ſpiritual Hieruſalē, the church of Chriſt: as the whole chap. ſheweth of the glory of the houſe of God, among the gent
                           •…
                        es, wanting among proteſtants. And in the next chapter, where our proteſtantes reade: ſtraungers shall stand and feede your flocks, and the ſonnes of the Aliens, shall bee your plow-men, and your vine dreſſers: The ſame Father together with S. Cyrill gloſſeth: clarè hic vt annotauit Cyrillus, ſignificat futuram eſſe tranſlationem legis, & Sacerdotij: non enim amplius ex tribu Leui erant futuri Pastores & Sacerdotes. Quod ſi alia erit lex, & aliud Sacerdotium, ergo & alia hoſtia, & aliud Templum. The Prophet doth here clearely ſignifie as S. Cyrill hath noted, that there ſhould bee a tranſlation or chaunge of the lawe and preiſthood: for

paſtors & preiſts were not to be any more of the tribe of Leui: But if there ſhould bee an other lawe, and preiſthood, therefore alſo an other ſacrifice and Temple muſt needes bee. So other holy and learned Fathers, all of them vnitinge to euery true lawe, & Religion, a ſacrificinge preiſthood and ſacrifice: amonge whome Theodoret vpon thoſe words of S. Paul, by proteſtants tranſlation, ſaith: For the preiſthood being changed, there is made of neceſsitie a change alſo of the lawe: lex coniuncta est Sacerdotio, neceſſe eſt enim, vt ceſſante Sacerdotio, idipſum legi quoque accidat. The lawe is ioyned to preiſthood, for of neceſſitie it is, that the preiſthood ceaſing, the ſame muſt alſo chaunce to the law. Hebr. cap. 7. v. 12. Theodor. in hunc locum. This our proteſtants haue yeelded vnto before: Therfore, if now contrary to themſelues, & ſo great reaſon, and authoritie, they would take a ſacrificinge preiſthood and ſacrifice from the lawe of Chriſt, they muſt alſo take away the lawe of Chriſt, and Chriſt himſelfe, except they will leaue him without a lawe.
                     3. Againe in his 66. and laſte chapter, the ſame Prophet ſpeakinge of the gentiles

to bee conuerted to Chriſt, and his church of them, as our proteſtants expound him by publicke warrant. Proteſt. title of the 66. chapter of Iſay. ſpeaketh thus in the parſon of God: I will alſo take of them (the gentiles) for preiſts and for Leuites, ſaith the Lord. The learned tongues, Hebrue, Greeke, and Latine reade, Lachonim, eis Iiereis, in Sacerdotes, for preiſts, ſacrificing preists, as they name the preiſtes of the lawe of Moyſes. Therefore except wee ſhould deny (which wee may not doe) there was no ſacrificing preiſthood, or ſacrifice in that lawe, wee muſt allow the like, though in a more excellent maner to the lawe of Chriſt. This may ſuffice for this holy Prophet.
                     4. S. Auguſtine proueth the ſacrificinge preiſthood of Chriſtians, and theire moſt holy ſacrifice out of the books of the Kings of reiecting the ſonnes of Hely and the old preiſthood, and to inſtitute the new. Auguſtin. l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 5.1. Reg. 2. Quod addit manducare panem: that which hee addeth to eate breade, doth elegantly expreſse that kinde of ſacrifice, of which our preiſt himſelfe (Chriſt) ſaith. Ioh. 6. the bread which I shal giue is my flesh for the life of the world:

that is the ſacrifice, not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchiſedech. Anaſtaſius proueth the like out of Aggeus the Prophet, of the externall glory of the churches of ſacrificinge Chriſtians there foretold. Others proue the ſame from other places of the lawe, and Prophets. Anaſtas. l. cont. Iud. Agg. 2. S. Auguſtine expounding the 33. pſalme and there ſpeakinge much of the holy ſacrifice, which Chriſt inſtituted of his bleſſed body, and blood, vnder the formes of bread, & wine, and Gods reiecting the ſacrifices of the law of Moſes, writeth how this was figured by Kinge Dauid, diſſemblinge and concealing himſelfe, before Kinge Achis, in the firſt booke of the Kinges cap. 21. a figure how Chriſt did ſhadow his diuinitie, therby the better to alter and change the lawe, preiſthood and ſacrifices of Moiſes, and inſtitute the new.
                     5. This was there forewarned, ſaith this holy Father, eſpecially by two thinges, in that hiſtory. Firſt that the ſcripture ſaith of Kinge Dauid, hee chaunged his countenance before them: immutauit os ſuum coram eis. S. Auguſtine readeth, vultum ſuum. The

ſecond is as S. Auguſtine readeth: ferebatur manibus ſuis. Hee was borne in his owne hands. And ſo the Greek in al copies, plainlie is: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . (v. 10.) as in the former, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . (v. 9.) Hee chaunged his face or parſon. Vppon the firſt hee ſaith: Mutauit vultum ſuum, quia erat ibi ſacrificium ſecundum ordinem Aaron, et postea ipſe de corpore & ſanguine ſuo instituit ſacrificium ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech. Mutauit ergo vultum ſuum in Sacerdotio, & dimiſit gentem Iudaeorum, & venit ad gentes. Hee chaunged his countenance, becauſe there was ſacrifice accordinge to the order of Aaron. And after hee inſtituted a ſacrifice of his body, and blood, after the order of Melchiſedech. Therfore he chaunged his countenance in the preiſthood, & forſooke the people of the Iewes, and came to the gentiles.
                     6. And againe ſpeakinge how the deniers of this holy ſacrifice and Chriſts reall preſēce there as he promiſed in the 6 chapter of S. Iohn were like to King Achis, condemning this for folly in Chriſt, as Achis cenſured Kinge Dauid for his geſtures in concealinge himſelfe. He addeth, (conc. 1.)

                        Erat in illis regnum ignorantiae, quaſi Rex Achis. Id eſt regnum erroris eis dominabatur. Ille autem dicebat: niſi quis manducauerit carnem meam, & biberit ſanguinem meum: quia mutauerat vultum ſuum: quaſi furor iste & inſania videbatur, dare carnem ſuam manducandam hominibus, & bibendum ſanguinem. Ideo quaſi inſanus putatus eſt Dauid, quando dixit ipſe Achis arreptitium hunc mihi adduxistis. Nonne videtur inſania, manducate carnem meam & bibite ſanguinem meum, & quicunque non manducauerit carnem meam, & biberit ſanguinem meum, non habebit in ſe vitam? quaſi inſanire videbatur, ſed Regi Achis inſanire videbatur, id eſt stultis & ignorantibus. There was in them the kingdom of ignorance, as Kinge Achis, that is the kingdome of error ruled in them. For hee ſaid, except a man eate my fleſh and drinke my blood: becauſe he had chaunged his countenance, as fury and madnes it was thought to giue his fleſh to bee eaten, and his blood to bee drunken of men. Therefore Dauid was reputed as a madd man, when Achis himſelfe did ſay, you haue brought this madd man vnto me, is it not thought madnes to ſay, eate my fleſh, and drinke my

blood, and whoſoeuer doth not eate my fleſh and drinke my blood, shall not haue life in him? hee did ſeeme to bee as madd, but hee did ſeeme to be madd to Kinge Achis, that is to ſay, vnto fooles, and ignorant men.
                     7. The ſecond which this holy learned Father, expoundeth to bee propheticall of this miſtery, in that place is that which I noted: hee was borne in his owne handes: of this ſaith S. Auguſtine, & ferebatur in manibus ſuis. Hoc vero fratres quomodo poſſet fieri in homine, quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur in manibus ſuis? in manibus aliorum poteſt portari quis, manibus ſuis nemo portatur. Quomodo intelligatur in Dauid ſecundum litteram, non inuenimus, in Christo autem inuenimus. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus ſuis, quando commendans ipſum corpus ſuum, ait. Hoc eſt corpus meum. Matth. 26. Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus ſuis. Ipſa eſt humilitas Domini nostri Ieſu Christi, ipſa multum commendatur hominibus. And hee was borne in his owne handes: ô my bretheren who can vnderſtand, how this can bee done in a man. For who is carried in his owne handes? ſome man

may bee carried in other mens hands, but no man is carried in his owne hands. How it can be literally vnderſtood in Dauid, we doe not finde. But wee finde it in Chriſt. For Chriſt was carried in his owne hands, when ſpeaking of his owne body, he ſaith. This is my body. For he carried that body in his owne hands. That is the humility of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that is much commended vnto men. And in his next ſermon vpon that pſalme, expounding all the geſtures of Kinge Dauid, before King Achis, to bee figures of, and fulfilled in Chriſt, he writeth againe in this manner of the ſame matter. Augustin. conc. 2. ſupr. in pſal. 33.
                     8. Et ferebatur in manibus ſuis. Quomodo ferebatur in manibus ſuis? Quia cum commendaret ipſum corpus ſuum, & ſanguinem ſuum, accepit in manus ſuas, quod norunt fideles: & ipſe ſe portabat quodamodo cum diccret: Hoc eſt corpus meum: And hee was carried in his owne hands. How was hee carried in his owne hands? Becauſe when hee recommended his owne bodie and blood, he tooke that which the faithfull know, into his owne handes: and hee after a certaine maner carried himſelfe, when he ſaid, this

is my bodie. And ſpeakinge plainely, that Chriſt was figured, and repreſented in that hiſtory of Kinge Dauid, hee ſaith: Quis est? notus eſt Dominus noſter Ieſus Christus. In corpore & ſanguine ſuo voluit eſſe ſalutem nostram. Vnde autem commendauit corpus & ſanguinem ſuum? de humilitate ſua. Niſi enim eſſet humilis, nec manducaretur, nec libaretur. Who is it that was ſignified by Dauid, it is our knowne Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Hee would haue our ſaluation to be in his body and blood. From whence did hee recommend his body and his blood? from his humilitie. For if he had not beene humble, he would neither haue beene eaten, or been our drinke. Many ſuch teſtimonies more may bee brought from the lawe and Prophetes, & ar ſo vſed of the beſt learned holy Saints that liued in the primatiue church, which I muſt and wittingly doe paſſe ouer to auoide tediouſnes, not ſo well ſuteinge with a preface or introduction: therefore I will now laſtely come to the laſte Prophet Malachias, and his propheſie of this holy miſtery.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE VII. CHAPTER. Wherin the ſame is proued at large by all expoſitions and testimonies, euen by our protestants themſelues, out of the Prophet Malachy.
                     MAny of the holy learned Fathers of the primatiue church, demonſtrate againſt the Iewes, Chriſt to bee the true Meſſias by this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, thē offered by the conuerted gentiles, in all the world: for citinge the propheſie of Malachias, of Gods reiectinge the ſacrifices of the law of Moyſes, and his acceptinge of the pure ſacrifice of the gentiles, they proue therby, that whoſoeuer denieth that propheſie to bee fulfilled and verified, in the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, conſequently denieth Chriſt Ieſus to bee the true Meſſias, and muſt, as yet the miſbeleeuinge Iewes doe, expect an other. S. Auguſtine ſaith: Hoc ſacrificium per Sacerdotem Chriſti ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech, cum in omni loco à ſolis ortu vſque ad occaſum, Deo iam videamus offerri, ſacrificiuum autem Iudaeorum quibus

dictum est, non eſt mihi voluntas in vobis, nec accipiam de manibus vestris munus, ceſſaſſe, negare non poſſunt, quid adhuc expectant alium Christum, cum hoc quod Prophetatum legunt, & impletum vident, impleri non potuerit niſi per ipſum. When we ſee this ſacrifice to be offered to God by the preiſthood of Chriſt according to the order of Melchiſedech, in euery place from the riſing of the ſunne, euen to the ſetting therof, and they cannot deny, but the ſacrifice of the Iewes to whom it was ſaid, I haue no will in you, neither will I receiue guift from your handas, to haue ceaſed, why doe they yet expect an other Chriſt, when this which they reade to haue beene propheſied, and ſee to bee fulfilled, could not bee fulfilled but by him. Augustin. l. 18. ciuitat. cap. 35. Malach. cap. 1. Augustin. l. 1. cont. aduerſar. leg. & Prophet. c. 20. orat. contr. Iudaeos c. 9.
                     2. The very ſame argument, and expoſition of that propheſie, vſe theſe holy Fathers following (to omit others too many to be cited) within the firſt 400. yeares: S. Clement, S. Iuſtine, S. Irenaeus, S. Martial, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Euſebius, S. Chriſoſtome, Aurelius Biſhop of Carthage, and

others, all againſt the Iewes, therby inuincibly prouing againſt them, that the ſacrifices of that people had then ceaſed, and their Religion euacuated, and the Religion of Chriſt onely true, becauſe according to that moſt vndoubted true propheſie, the ſacrifice of Chriſtians, the holy Maſſe was then in their times offered in all the world. And this is ſo euident in all antiquitie, that both the Magdeburgian proteſtants, Caluine, and others confeſſe, that S. Irenaeus, S. Ciprian, S. Athanaſius, S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine and Arnobius doe ſoe expound it. And our proteſtants of England in their newly authoriſed bible, by his maieſtie, doe proue as much: for thus they tranſlate that paſſage, of the Prophet Malachias: I haue no pleaſure in you (the Iewes) ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, neither will I accept an offering at your hand (from your hand) the Hebrue, as they note in the margine, for from the riſing of the ſunne, euen vnto the goinge downe of the ſame, my name shall bee greate among the heathens, ſaith the Lord God of hoſtes. Clem. l. 7. Const. Apostolic. cap. 31. Iustin. dial. cum Tryphon. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. Martial. epistol. ad Burdegal. c. 3. Tertul. l.
                        
3. cont. Marcion. c. 22. Ciprian. l. 1. cont. Iud. c. 16. Euſch. Caeſar. l. 1. demonstr. euangelic. cap. 10. Chryſostom. ad pſal. 95. Aurel. Carthag. epist. ad Marcellinum. Magdeburg. cent. 2. col. 63. cent. 3. col. 83. Calv. l. de ver. eccleſ. reform. Proteſt. Bible Malach. 1. v. 10.11.
                     3. Where the Prophet expreſſely maketh this greatnes of the name of God amonge the gentiles and the pure ſacrificing which with incenſe ſhoulde by them bee offered vnto God in all places, to bee a notion, and diſtinctiue ſigne to bee aſſured by, that the ſacrifices of the Iewes were to ceaſe, and determine, and to demonſtrate, that as the lawe of Chriſt is more excellent then the lawe of Moiſes, ſo the ſacrifice of the ſame, and the preiſts which offered the ſame, taking their dignitie from the worthines of the ſacrifice which they ſhould offer, ſhould bee more worthie, then thoſe of the Iewes, which hee did reiect. For ſo it is in all languadges, Mincha tehora, a pure oblation in Hebrue: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            a pure ſacrifice in Greek: in omni loco ſacrificatur, & offertur nomini meo oblatio munda. In euery place a cleane oblation is ſacrificed and offered to my name: in Latine. Fertum purum: a pure ſacrifice: as

the proteſtant Sebaſtian Caſtalio readeth: a pure offeringe: as our Engliſh Proteſtants tranſlate. And it is ridiculous, for any man to expound it of prayer, without ſacrifice externall, for the Prophet there plainly oppoſeth this the externall ſacrifice of Chriſtians, which was to be receaued, to the others of the Iewes which were then to ceaſe, & the cheife proteſtāts haue ſo expounded and tranſlated it before: and here hee ſpeaketh of both prayer expreſſed in the word thymiama in Greeke, Muctar in Hebrue, as the Engliſh Proteſtantes, together with S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, Euſebius and others expound it: and externall ſacrifice in the other as is before recited. proteſt. of Engl. and Fr. Maſon. of conſecrat. of Bish. pag. 219.220. Auguſtin. Hierom. & Euſeb. apud Maſon. ſupr.
                     
                     4. Which being ioyned with the known ſacrificing verbe or verball Maggash, cannot poſſibly haue any other interpretation, but as plainely and literally expreſſeth the publicke ſacrifice of the Maſſe, vſed by Chriſtians, as any miſſale, or Catholicke writer doth, or can doe in generall termes, not deſcendinge to the particular expreſſing

of the bleſſed body and blood of the Meſſias there offered, which belonged onlie to the time of the lawe of Chriſt, and not thoſe figuratiue dayes: yet by many attributes and properties ſo deſcribeth it, that it cannot bee applied to anie other. For it termeth this ſacrifice, a pure offering, the pure ſacrifice, the ſacrifice wherein onely God woulde bee pleaſed, the ſacrifice that should ſucceede the ſacrifices of the lawe, and euacuate them, a ſacrifice to bee offered in all places, as Christ was to bee honored in all, and to continue for euer. Neuer to be abrogated by any other; all which are before remembred by the Prophet, and cannot by any poſſibilitie be truely ſpoken of any other ſacrifice, then this of the moſt bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt, offered by his holy preiſtes in that ſacrifice, which from the Hebrues we cal Maſſe in our language.
                     5. Neither can any thinge be ſo briefly ſpoken by God, to confute the friuolous & vaine obiections, of ſome proteſtants, allmoſt now quite exploded out of the world, by Catholicke arguments, about dimenſions, and pluralities of places & locations

of this moſt bleſſed Sacrament, and ſacrifice; for God here by the mouth of his holie Prophet, aſſuringe vs that this ſacrifice ſhall bee but one, and no more, as it is before expreſſed in all holie languages, Hebrue Greke and Latine, yet ſo miraculous and extraordinary it ſhall bee that. Be cal Machom, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , in omni loco, in euerie place, by proteſtant tranſlation out of Hebrue, Greeke and Latine iuſtifyinge it, this onely pure ſacrifice ſhall bee offered to God: That if theſe men will either beleeue naturall or ſupernatural reaſon, and authoritie, God or man, they may ſee the vanitie of theire contradiction. For whereas they would perſuade their adherēts and others, that one and the ſame ſacrifice cannot bee offered in many places, God himſelfe teſtifieth the quite contrary, that this ſhall bee offered in all places, and yet bee but one pure ſacrifice, as is before declared, by all tranſlations, and the originall text it ſelfe, from the worde of God by his holie Prophet.
                     6. And it is as euident, from this onely clauſe: in euery place: that this could be no other ſacrifice, then the ſacrifice of Maſſe,

vſed in the Catholicke church of Chriſt, now dilated into all nations, and in euery place: for there bee now in the world but foure great profeſſions of Religion, Chriſtians, Iewes, Mahumetans, and Pagans. No Chriſtian will or may ſay, that propheſie of the true worſhippers of God, & pure ſacrifice to bee offered vnto him, is, or can bee vnderſtood of any of them; for firſt the pagans ſacrifices were not offered to God, but to Idols: they were not pure and holy, but moſt wicked and abhominable: they had not any one ſacrifice, that was generally offered in all places. Euſeb. Tertul. cont. Iud. Iuſtin. cont. gent. Ariſtid. Plutarch. in vit. &c. The Mahumetans haue no externall ſacrifice at all to offer in any place. Mahum. in Alcor. hiſtor. Turric. and theire whole Religion, by all Chriſtians is damnable, and their ſect could neuer yet be called vniuerſall, in all places. And to ſpeake with proteſtants, as before, in thoſe contries, which the Turke poſſeſſeth: The Chriſtians make aboue two third parts of his Emipre. Edw. Grymſt. pag. 1064. Auth. of the booke of the estates in the great Turke in Aſia. Therfore there is nothing in that Religion

that can bee called this pure ſacrifice, offered to God in euery place.
                     7. The ſacrifices of the Iewes were manie, and not one by one, and all of them reiected by God in this place of the Prophet, as our proteſtants thus tranſlate. (Malach. cap. 1.10.) I haue no pleaſure in you, ſaith the Lord of hostes, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. And then immediatly the conuerſion of the Gentiles, and their pure ſacrifice to bee offered to God. (verſ. 11.) in euery place, is ſet downe. So that not any one ſacrifice of the Iewes, could after this time be acceptable to God, none could bee this pure ſacrifice, in any place, much leſſe in euery place, when the Iewes Religion was neuer ſo extended. And as the holy ſcriptures and Hieronymus, à Sancta fide a Iewe. (l. 1. contr. Iudaeos cap. 9.) proueth, the Iewes might neuer offer ſacrifice out of Hieruſalem, and ſo this could not poſſibly be ment of them: ostendit nobis in hoc quod dicit: In omni loco: quod haec oblatio munda, fienda erat per vniuerſum mundum, vbicumque per modum eſſet aſsignatum: per contrarium ſacrificiorum antiquorum, de quibus erat prohibitum ne alibi quàm in Temple

Ieroſolymitano fierent. The Prophet ſheweth vnto vs, by that hee ſaith: in euery place: that this pure oblation, was to be made in all the world, whereſoeuer it was aſſigned in the world: by the contrary of the old ſacrifices of which it was forbidden, that they ſhould not be offered in any other place, then in the Temple of Hieruſalem. And proueth there out of the Iewes Thalmud, often repeating, that their ſacrifices were to ceaſe: quaedam locutio ſaepe in Talmud reiterata quae dicit ſic: in tempore futuro, vniuerſa ſacrificia, excepto ſacrificio confeſsionis annihilata erunt. All ſacrifices ſhould be annihilated but the ſacrifice of confeſſion, called Thoda in breade and wine: meaninge the ſacrifice of Chriſtians, as I haue proued in due place.
                     8. And Rabbi Samuel. (Marrochian. l. de aduent. Meſsiae cap. 20.) writing to Rabbi Iſaac Maſter of the Sinagogue, vppon this propheſie of Malachie ſaith. Timeo Domine mi, quod Deus eiecit nos à ſe, & ſacrificium nostrum, & acceptauit ſacrificium gentium, ſicut dicit per os Malachiae: ô my Maſter, I feare, that God hath caſt vs away frō him, and our ſacrifice alſo, and hath accepted

the ſacrifice of the gentiles, as hee ſpeaketh by the mouth of Malachy. And immediatlie citing the wordes of that Prophet, as before, concludeth thus for the ſacrifice of Maſſe vſed by Chriſtians: ſacrificium gentium, est mundus quam ſacrificium noſtrum. The ſacrifice of the gentils (ſo he called Chriſtians conuerted of the gentiles) is more pure then our ſacrifice.
                     
                     9. Thus commonly alſo the holy Chriſtian Fathers, among whom S. Auguſtine citinge that propheſie of Malachie, thus ſpeaketh to the Iewes. (Auguſtin. orat contra Iudaeos cap. 9.) Quid ad haec reſpondetis? aperite oculos tandem aliquando & videte, ab oriente ſole vſque ad occidentem, non in vno ſicut vobis fuerat constitutum, ſed in omni loco ſacrificium Christianorum offerri, non cuilibet Deo, ſed ei, qui iſta praedixit, Deo Iſrael. What do you anſwere to theſe things? open your eyes ſometime at the laſte, and ſee, that the ſacrifice of Chriſtians is offered from Eaſt to Weſt, not in one place as it was appointed vnto you, but in euery place, not to euery one that is called God, but to him, the God of Iſrael, that foretold th
                              •…
                           ſe thinges. Therefore ſeeing the word of God

propoſed by his holy Prophet cannot bee vntrue, but muſt needs be verified in ſome ſacrifice, offered thus vnto him by ſome profeſſors of Religion, and all others beſides Chriſtians are thus clearely excluded, and Chriſtians haue only one externall ſacrifice of the Maſſe, conteining the oblation of Chriſts moſt bleſſed body & blood, the onely moſt pure ſacrifice and acceptable vnto God, and offered in euery place in the whole world, it muſt needs bee this pure and generall ſacrifice.
                     10. To which our proteſtants themſelues (to make all ſure) do thus giue teſtimonie. Firſt his Maieſtie, as Caſaubon hath publiſhed by warrāt. (Caſaub. Reſp. ad Card. Per. pag. 51.52.) neither is the Kinge Ignorant, nor denieth, that the Fathers of the primatiue church did acknowledge one ſacrifice in Christian Religion, that ſucceeded in the place of the ſacrifice of Moiſes lawe. And both from our Kinge, and D. Andrewes, the Proteſtant Biſhop now of Wincheſter, affirmeth of this ſacrifice. (pag. 50.51. ſup.) It is Christs body, the ſame obiect and thinge which the Roman church beleeueth. An other diuidinge Chriſtians into the Latine and

Greeke church, as the common diuiſion is, and telling vs, as all acknowledge, that in all contries of the Latine church, remayning ſtill in obedience to the ſee of Rome, the ſacrifice of the Maſſe is publickly in all places offered, and in the contries that haue reuolted lately from it, the ſame ſacrifice is priuatly with many ſtill celebrated, thus hee writeth of the Greeke church. (Edwine Sands relation of Religion cap. 53. or 54.) with Rome they concur in the opinion of tranſſubstantiation, and generally in the ſeruice and whole body of the Maſſe, in praying to Saints, in auricular confeſsion, in offeringe of ſacrifice and prayer for the dead. They hold purgatory alſo, and worshipping of pictures. Their Liturgies bee the ſame, that in the old time, namlie S. Baſils, S. Chriſostoms, and S. Gregories (that which the Roman church now vſeth) tranſlated without any bendinge them, to that chaunge of language, which theire tongue hath ſuffered.
                     
                     11. Chytraeus a German protestant, writinge de statu Eccleſiae, of the state of the church. (pag. 7.8.11.13.15.18.20.21.) ſaith: Among all the nations of Greece, Aſia, Africa, Ethiopia, Armenia &c. all places are full of

Maſſes, the ſacrifice of the Maſſe is offered for the liuing and the dead. The Georgians inhabiting old Iberia, and Albania. The Syrians name S. Baſile author of their Maſſe. The Armenians inhabitinge moſt large ſpaces of the earth from the bounds of Cappadocia and Cilicia vnto Iberta the Caſpian ſea, Media and Aſsiria, are moste like the papists in Religion and ceremonies, in their Maſſe they remember inuocation, and interceſsion of Saints, offering vp of the Sacrament. Alſo euery where in Perſia, and all the east, the Chriſtians doe the ſame. The Maronites at mount Libanus, are conformable to the Latine church in all thinges. The Iacob is in Aſia and Africke, are more by much propagated and haue their Maſſes.
                     
                     12. Our Engliſh Proteſtant tranſlator of the author of the booke, of the estates, Empires, & principalities of the world. (Edw. Grymston. pref. to the Reader.) although as he confeſſeth he altereth and addeth at his pleaſure, cannot finde out any one prouince, or contry of note in al the whole world, where hee dareth to affirme, and can proue that this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe is not there offered vnto God. The ſame proueth. (pag. 102. to pag. 283. in the eſtate of the K. of Spaine.)

that the Kinge Catholicke of Spaine, by land and Sea in all parts of the worlde Europe, Aſia, Africke, and America, is the greateſt Emperour and Kinge that now preſently is, or euer heretofore hath beene in the world, poſſeſſinge more territories, and dominions, then all Turkes, Tartars, Pagans, and enemies of Chriſtianitie, that be, and yet in all theſe dominions this moſt holy ſacrifice of Maſſe is publickly offered and celebrated with great honor, and glorie. So that if it were receued no where els, but in his territories, the propheſy of Malachias is fulfilled in his dominions, as well appeareth by this, and all Coſmographers of theſe dayes, that truely ſett downe the eſtates of great Princes. There is no maine part, ab ortu ſolis vſque ad occaſum, from the riſinge of the ſunne vnto the ſetting thereof, nor from the ſettinge to the riſing againe, but he hath ſome dominion there: as a late verſe is of the Enfante Mary of Spaine her Father, and her brother is in the ſame condition:

                           
                           Vnto her greatnes witnes giues the ſunne,
                           tasked no houre, to shine at any hand,
                           As he his courſe about the globe doth runne,
                           but on ſome part of her late Fathers land.
                           An homage which hee neuer did before,
                           to any Prince, nor like to doe no more.
                        
                     
                     13. And yet beſides theſe ſo many and vaſte countries, our proteſtants haue told vs before, that all the other three parts of the world, Aſia, Africke, and Europe, are full of Maſſes, and ſacrificinge Chriſtian preiſts. Which this proteſtant alſo confirmeth. (Grymston. ſupr. in theſe kingdoms pag. 700. &c.) teaching that not only in the territories, but in Tartaria, China, Iapan, Peru, Magor, Calicut, Narſing, Perſia, all the Turks eſtates in Europe, Africk and Aſia, Monomotapa, Congo, Moraco, and from the riſing to the ſetting of the ſunne, the propheſie of Malachie is iuſtified and performed, for in all theſe places, Mincha tehora, thuſia Cathara, the pure ſacrifice, hee ſpeaketh of, the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, is offered to the name of God, and his name is great among the Gentiles.
                     
                     14. This is the ſtate of thinges at this time. Thus it was from the firſt planting

of chriſtianity in the whole known world, by the holy Fathers before: and appeareth in the moſt auncient Maſſe of S. Marke, the Euangeliſt, vſed among the firſt Chriſtians of this nation, as I ſhall ſhew hereafter, in which thus wee finde. Per quem (Chriſtum) offerimns rationabilem & incruentam oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi Domine omnes gentes, ab ortu ſolis vſque ad occaſum, à Septentrione ad meridiem: Quia magnum nomen tuum in omnibus gentibus, & in omni loco incēſum offertur nomini tuo Sancto, & ſacrificium & oblatio. By whome (Chriſt) wee offer this reaſonable and vnbloody oblation, which ô Lord all nations doe offer vnto thee, from the riſing of the ſunne, to the ſetting therof, from North to South, becauſe thy name is great in all nations, and in euery place incenſe, and ſacrifice & oblation, is offered to thy holy name. Liturgia. eccl. Alexandr. & S. Marci Euang. M. S. per antiq. tempore Britan.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  AN HISTORIE OF THE HOLY PREISTHOOD, AND ſacrifice, of the true church. The firſt age.
                  
                     
                        THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherin is proued by all kinds of testimonies, Catholicks, Proteſtants, and whatſoeuer, that Chriſt the true Meſsias as his calling and dignitie required, in abrogatinge the preisthood and ſacrifices of Moſes lawe, instituted an other more perfect ſacrificinge preisthood, and ſacrifice of his ſacred body, and blood in Maſſe.
                     HAuing declared and proued at large out of the holy Prophets and lawe of Moſes, by all learned languages, and tranſlations, Hebrue, Greeke, and Latine, by all learned interpreters of ſcriptures, aſwell before, as after Chriſt, the auncient Rabbines, and primatiue Fathers of the church of Chriſt, as they are allowed and receiued both by Catholicke and Proteſtant writers, and their conſent herein. That our

bleſſed Sauiour Chriſt our Redeemer, and high preiſt, after a more excellent manner accordinge to the order of Melchiſedech, was to euacuate the legall preiſthood, and ſacrifices of the lawe of Moſes, as in themſelues figuratiue, and vmbraticall, beeing to ceaſe & determine at the coming of the Meſſias, & to found and inſtitute a preiſthood and ſacrifice more perfect, effectuall, & as S. Paul ſtileth it. Hebr. cap. 7. v. 24. and our proteſtants tranſlate it, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , an vnchaungeable preiſthood, and conſequently a ſacrifice and law vnchaungeable, for ſo theſe men tranſlate the ſame holy Apoſtle: euery high preist is ordeyned to offer guifts and ſacrifices for ſinnes, and: for the preisthood beeing chaunged, there is made of neceſsitie a chaunge alſo of the lawe. (protest. tranſl. Hebr. cap. 5. v. 1. Hebr. cap. 7. v. 12.
                     2. Therefore the time of this moſt happie chaunge and alteration beeinge now come, at his laſte paſſouer, or eating of the Paſchall lambe, a figure (as I haue by greateſt allowance, and warrant formerly declared) of this moſt holy chriſtian ſacrifice, although our Sauiour had often celebrated

that legall feaſt before, or none or ſmal memory thereof left in ſcripture, yet when in this laſte hee was to end the olde, and ordeine the new, hee ſent his two great Apoſtles and moſt beloued, S Peter and Saint Iohn, to prouide the firſt Chriſtian church as ſome not vnworthly call it. (Proclus apud Flor. Rem. l. 8 Luc. cap. 22. v. 12.) to inſtitute this moſt ſacred preiſthood & ſacrifice in, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , a large vpper Roome furnished (as our Engliſh proteſtāts tranſlate) but as the Greeke word is, and frēch Hugonots alſo do read, a great Roome strewed with carpets. (Hugon. gallic. apud Florim. Raemund. ſupr. de origin. haereſ. l. 8. cap. 12) into which our high preiſt and Sauiour did enter, vt Rabbinorum nonnulli affirmant, veste ſacra, quam ipſi appellant Taleth indutus, as ſome of the Rabbines affirme, hauinge on a ſacred or ſacrificinge veſtement, which they call Taleth. And there after hee had ended the ceremony of the lawe about the Paſchall Lambe, he inſtituted this new ſacrifice of Chriſtians, and gaue power and commaundement to his Apoſtles preſent, to doe the ſame; Hoc facite, doe this, which I haue done, in this

miſtery.
                     3. Wee haue heard already, and it is infidelitie to deny it, that he was a preiſt, according to the order of Melchiſedech, that hee muſt needes by that title offer a ſacrifice with ſome reſemblance to that of Melchiſedech, in bread and wine, that he was to chaunge the lawe, preiſthood, and ſacrifice: hee had not done any of theſe offices of the Meſſias, and high preiſt before, onely hee had in the ſixt chapter of S. Iohn, giuen his faithfull promiſe (which he could not violate) that he would performe it: this was the laſte day, time, and oportunitie wherein he could poſſiblie effect it, with his holy Apoſtles, to whom this charge before al others was firſt and chiefly to be recommended, hee being that very night to be betrayed, violently taken, and ſeperated from them, and neuer to communicate with them againe in the ſhort time of his life; Therefore now or neuer he was of neceſſitie to make performance of this moſt holy dutie; and if not now, the lawe, preiſthood, and ſacrifices of the lawe, had not beene abrogated and chaunged, but Iudaiſme had beene ſtill in force, and Chriſt

could not truely and lawfully haue enioyed the title of the true Meſſias, if ſo excellent, and euident ſigne, and propertie, of the holy Redeemer, had beene wantinge and defectiue in him.
                     4. Therefore all kinde of witneſſes that be or then were in the world, frends or enemies, whether Iewes Gentiles or Mahumetans, whether Chriſtians, Catholicks, either the auncient Fathers or later writers, and the beſt learned proteſtants themſelues giue euidence, that Chriſt at that time inſtituted a new ſacrifice, and ſacrificinge preiſthood. The auncient Rabbines before Chriſt, ſo expounded the ſcriptures, of the old teſtament, as I haue ſhewed before, and both Catholicks, and proteſtants ſo aſſure vs. (Franciſc. Stancar. & Petr. Gallat. l. 10. cap. 4.5.6.7.) The Iewes that liued in the time of Chriſt, ſoone after, and at this day acknowledge it, hauinge proued by their lamentable experience, that after the inſtitution of the new ſacrifice, and preiſthood by Chriſt, as hee forewarned them of the ceaſing of their ſacrifices, and deſolation of the Temple of Ieruſalem, where onely by their lawe they might bee offered, they

lie in that forſakē ſtate which al the world obſerueth, and the Prophet thus by proteſtants tranſlation foretold of them. (Oſee c. 3. v. 4.) The children of Iſrael shall abide manie yeares without a Kinge, and without a Prince, and without a ſacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Seraphim, preiſtly and ſacrificing veſtures. Iudic. cap. 17. v. 5.
                     5. And al that write againſt the Iewes, as the holy Archbiſhop S. Gregentius, Iulianus Pomerius Archbiſhop of Toletum, Rabbi Samuel, Hieronymus a S. fide, Paulus Burgenſis, Petrus Gallatinus, Franciſcus Stancarus a proteſtant, and others and their owne Thalmud is witnes, that the hate of the Iewes againſt Chriſt and Chriſtians, is not ſo great for any thing, as that Chriſt at that time ordeyned a new ſacrifice and ſacrificinge preiſthood, and reiected thoſe of the lawe of Moyſes. The gentiles ſoone after conuerted did confeſſe it in all places, and in this kingdome of Britanie as I ſhall inuincibly demonſtrate herafter. The Mahumetans in their Alcaron and other authors giue teſtimony to this. So doe the moſte holy and beſt learned Fathers

of the primatiue church Greeke and Latine, S. Denis the Areopagite conuerted by S. Paul, S. Irenaeus, S. Baſil, S. Iohn Chriſoſtome, Theodoret, S. Martial ſcholler to S. Peter the Apoſtle, S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, Primaſius, and longe before theſe S. Clement, Ignatius, Anacletus, with Pope Alexander, liuing in the firſt hundred yeares, & others after, without number, plainlie ſome of them ſayinge that Chriſt then taught the new ſacrifice of the new teſtament, which the church receauing from the Apostles, doth offer to God in the whole world. And that it is ſo certaine and vndoubted a truth, that Chriſt did then make his Apoſtles ſacrificing preiſts, that in their iudgement, no man had called it into question. Quod Dominus potestatem celebrandi, & conficiendi noui testamenti myſteria, Apostolis per haec verba contulerit, hoc nemo opinor in dubiū vocat. Gregent. Archiep. Tephren. diſput. cum Herban. Iudeo. Iulian. Pomer. l. 1. & 2. contr. Iudaeos. Rabbi Samuel Marrochian. l. de Aduent. Meſsiae cap. 19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27. Hieronym. à S. fide l. 1. & 2. contr. Iud. Paul. Burg. cont. Iud. Petr. Gallat. & Franciſc. Stancar. l. 10.11. Thalm. & Abraham.

Mahum. Rabb. Sam. ſupr. cap. 27. Dioniſ. Areopag. Eccleſ. Hierar. part. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. cont. haer. Victor Antiochen. in c. 14. Marci. Baſil. de ſacrificijs ritu & Miſ. celebr. forma. Chriſoſt. de ſacrificijs, & Homil. 8. & ad cap. 26. Matth. & alibi ſaepe. Theodoret. in c. 8. ep. ad Hebr. Martial. epiſt. ad Burdegal. cap. 3. Ambroſ. l. praep. ad miſs. ad cap. 11. epiſt. 1. ad Cor. & alibi. Auguſt. l. 17. ciuitat. c. 20. & quaeſt. 43. l. 1. quaeſt. in Euang. Primaſ. in epist. 1. Corinth. c. 11. can. 3. Apoſt. Alexand. 1. epist. ad Orthodox.
                     
                     6. And this ſacrifice was, and is his ſacred body, and blood, vnder the formes of breade and wine, ſo miraculouſly effected both then, and ſtil by the miniſtery of conſecrated preiſts by his omnipotent power, annexed by promiſe to this ſacred and conſecrating words, this is my body: this is my blood: & that his holy Apoſtles were then made ſuch ſacrificinge preiſts, and ſupernaturally enabled to that higheſt and holieſt function. Neither can any proteſtant of England bee of other opinion: for except contrary to the iudgement and teſtimony of all people, Iewes, Mahumetans, Pagans, and Chriſtians, which acknowledge

Ieſus Chriſt to haue beene, and ordeined a new ſacrifice, and preiſthood, they will caſt off all nature and name of Chriſtianitie, and goe further then any infidell yet hath done, moſt fooliſhlie and blaſphemouſly to ſay, there was neuer any ſuch as is called Ieſus Chriſt: they muſt confeſſe with the reſt, that hee ordeined theſe thinges, they muſt ſay, either with Turks and Pagans his inſtitution was not holy herin, or with the Iewes, that this ſacrifice is, panis polutus, poluted bread, and not his body. (Hieronym. à S. fiae l. contr. Iud. 2. Iud. in Thalm. & alibi.) & his holy preiſts, be, tonſi, shauelings, as ſome of them prophanely do: or acknowledg with true Catholick Chriſtians in all ages, times, and places, that the ſacrifice and preiſthood he then ordeyned, are the moſt perfect, abſolute, and permanent for euer. For ſo all teſtimonies and euidences vpon which Chriſtian Religion buildeth, the word of God deliuered in holie ſcriptures, or tradition with the warrant and practiſe of all the holy Apoſtles, and church of Chriſt, haue already, or will in this enſuing treatiſe aſſure vs.
                     7. Therefore many of our beſt learned

proteſtants, and with publicke warrant, and priuiledge haue graunted before. (pref. cap. 1.) that Chriſt did not onely inſtitute and offer this moſt holy ſacrifice, but did giue power vnto his Apoſtles, & commaundement alſo, to doe the ſame. That it ſucceeded to the ſacrifices of Moiſes lawe, that is was from the beginning the ſacrifice of the altare, and vnbloody ſacrifice, ſacrifice offered for the liuing and the deade (Morton appeale l. 3. c. 13. Franc. Maſon l. 5. pag 233 243. Middlet. Papistom. pag. 92 113.49.137.138.47.45.) And among others to make al ſure, his maieſtie is auouched to be of the ſame minde. (Iſaac Caſaub. reſp. ad Card. Peron. pag. 51.) that from that time of Chriſts inſtitution, there is in his Church, and hath euer beene an externall ſacrifice, wherin is conteined the body and blood of Chriſt. And a proteſtant Biſhop amonge them ſpeakinge in all their names. (Morton appeale l. 3. cap. 13.) ſaith: The proteſtants acknowledge in the Eucharist, a ſacrifice Euchariſticall. Which, and more, they are all bound to doe, by an expreſſe ſtatute of parlament receaued & confirmed by three proteſtant Princes, Kinge Edward the ſixt, Queene Elizabeth, and

our preſent ſoueraigne Kinge Iames, wherin is expreſſely thus enacted. (Statut. an. 1. Edu. 6. cap. 1. an. 1 Elizabeth cap. 2. an. 1. Iacobi cap. 25.) The moſt comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, commonly called of the altare, instituted of no leſſe author then our Sauiour, both God and man. The inſtitution of which Sacrament being ordeyned by Chriſt, as is aforeſaid, and the words, this is my body which is broken for you; This is my blood of the new teſtament, which is shed for you, and for many, for the remiſsion of ſinnes, ſpoken of it, beeing of eternall infallible and vndoubted truth, the most bleſsed Sacrament &c. Theſe bee the wordes of the ſtatute eſtabliſhed by his preſent maieſtie in parlament, with publicke aſſent of all Engliſh Proteſtants, miniſters or others: in which ſtatute penalties bee decreed againſt al gaineſayers of this holy ſacrifice, and prouide an eſpeciall writ againſt ſuch tranſgreſſors. statut. ſupr.
                     
                     8. And to make all matters vnqueſtionable in this point, this ſtatute was enacted when there were none but ſacrificing preiſtes in England, diuers yeares before the booke of making miniſters was inuented.

Which the wordes of the abridgement of our ſtatuts approued by his maieſty (to reiterate them) thus doe teſtifie. (Abridgm. of ſtat. an. Dom. 1611. Titul. ſeruice and Sacraments cap. 1) the first makinge of this statute was before the Maſſe was taken away, when the opinion of the reall preſence, was not remoued from vs. Therefore this ſtatute wholly and without any other exception, limitation, or reſtriction beeing publickly made, approued, reuiued and confirmed by three ſeuerall publicke parlaments, of three Proteſtant Princes, cannot be contradicted by any Engliſh Proteſtant: and except contradictions can both bee true, which is vnpoſſible, it is not poſſible but the contents of this ſtatute of Chriſts inſtitutinge the holy ſacrificinge preiſthood, and ſacrifice of Maſſe at his laſt ſupper, muſt needes bee an article of faith, and infallible truth, in the Religion and iudgement of Engliſh Proteſtants. Therefore ſome of their beſt learned. (Feild l. 3 cap. 29. pag. 138. Couell examin. pag. 114.) haue with publicke applauſe, and warrant written, that it is hereſie, to bee of other opinion. For ſo they ſhould deny and gainſay the vniuerſally receaued,

and practiſed opinion, of the primatiue church. Whoſe cuſtome vniuerſall and from the beginninge was, to offer the ſacrifice of Maſſe, both for the liuing and the dead. Which all men know, cannot be performed, but by maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, Maſſe and maſſinge preiſts, ſacrifice and ſacrificing preiſts, beeing vnſeperable correlatiues, in al euē humane knowledge, and learninge, both of Catholicks, and Proteſtants, Chriſtians, Iewes, Mahumetans, Pagans, or whatſoeuer infidels, profeſſinge learninge, or followinge the light and warrant of nature.
                     9. And for the very vſuall name it ſelfe of this moſt holy ſacrifice, called generallie in the latine church, Miſſa, or ſacrificium Miſſae, Maſſe, or the ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſeing it was to be the ōly external ſacrifice of the whole church of Chriſt, it could not poſſibly be named by any denomination more aptly, then the word Miſsa, Maſſe, beeing by diuers learned in the holy tongs, a name both in Greek Hebrue and latine fittly ſignifyinge ſacrifice, or equiualent thereof: of the Greeke there is moſt difficultie, and yet ſome learned gretians, as Albericus (dictione

Miſſa.) teſtifie, that Miſſa is a Greeke word, ſignifyinge interpellation, or interceſſion, ſuch as ſacrifice to God 
                           •…
                        s. That it is an Hebrue word, and aptly taken for ſacrifice, we haue the conſent allmoſt of all Hebritians, both Catholicks, and proteſtāts, as of the firſt Alc
                           •…
                        atus, Hector Pintus, Claudius Sanctus, Pamelius, Demochares, Caſalius, Capino, Cauus, Couarrunias, Pauinus, Heruetus, and others. Alciatus l. 7. parerg. cap. 10, Hect. Pint. in cap. 3. Dan. Claud. Sainct. praef. ad Liturg. Pamel. in Tertull. l. de orat. & praef. in Liturg. Graecor. Demochar. tract. 2. de Miſſ. c. 1. Caſalius l. 1. ſacrif. Miſſ. Io. Capr. Can. l. 12. de loc. c. 13. Couarr. l. 4. Var. reſol. c. 22. Pagn. v. Mitza.
                     
                     10. And amonge Proteſtants, Sebaſtian Munſter, Philip Melancthon, and Iohn Froſter Profeſſors of Hebrue ar of the ſame opinion, and to iuſtifie our Engliſh name of that holy ſacrifice, to be taken alſo from the Hebrue, where wee call it Maſſe, or Mas, the worde or radix Mas in Hebrue, ſignifieth tribute or due paiement, ſuch as wee owe in this ſacrifice beeing commaunded to doe it, hoc facite, and the vnleuened breade that was eaten with the Paſchall

Lambe, and conſecrated by Chriſt is Maſſah, in Hebrue. Monſter. in gramatica & lexic, Hebraic. Philip. Mel. Apolog. confeſſ. Auguſtan. Iohn. Froster. in Lexic. Hebraic. edit. Baſil. an. 1557. Petr. Veg. in pſal. 101. And to come to the Latine word, Miſſa, Maſſe, S. Albinus our learned countryman, expoundinge thoſe laſte wordes in Maſſe, ite miſſa est, ſaith: id est directa, ſiue miſſa est, id eſt perfecta est pro nobis oblatio & oratio. That is, ſacrifice or oblation and prayer for vs is directed, or ſent, or perfected. S. Albin. l. de diuin. officijs. ſo doth Remigius Antiſiodorenſis, ſaying. Miſsa dicitur, quaſi tranſmiſſa, vel quaſi tranſmiſsio. Remig. Antiſiodoren. expoſitio. de celebrat. miſſae. And Petrus Lombardus. Miſſa dicitur quia miſſa eſt hoſtia, cuius commemoratio fit in illo officio: vnde dicitur: Ite miſſa eſt. Petr. Lumbard. l. 4. ſent. Where we ſee that it is called Miſſa, becauſe it is a ſacrifice ſent, or offered vnto God, and not of diſmiſſinge the people. Which is euident by the practiſe of the church in all places, which at the ende of all Maſſes diſmiſſeth the people: but as our proteſtants themſelues confeſſe (Foxe tom, 2. in Queene Mary.) ſaith not alwaies, ita miſſa eſt, but

ſometimes, benedicamus Domino, ſoometimes, requieſcant in pace, and in the old Muzaraban Maſſe, in ſolemne feaſts, where wee ſay in the end of Maſſe, ite miſſa est, they ſaid, ſolemnia completa ſunt, the ſolemne ſacrifice is ended, and in other feaſts: miſſa acta eſt: maſse or the ſacrifice, is ended. (miſſa Muzarab. antiq. in concil. 4 Toletan. & alibi.) And in this ſence it was alwayes accepted, in all ages, from the Apoſtles, as our proteſtants themſelues ſhall euidently confeſſe hereafter, in this hiſtory.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge how the Apostles in generall being by Christ ordeyned ſacrificinge preiſts, did accordinge to that power and commaundement giuen vnto them, offer the ſacrifice of Christs body and blood in Maſse, and ordered other preists to that end.
                     ANd by this it is alſo manifeſt, that the Apoſtles were ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſts, and did, as that preiſtly dignitie confered vpon them, required, offer this holy ſacrifice, accordinge to the warrant

and commaundement of Chriſt vnto them, to doe, that which he did in that behalfe. So that if we had no further authoritie, for their ſacrificinge preiſthood, and dutie to offer this bleſſed ſacrifice, but that they were, as before is ſhewed, made ſacrificing preiſts by Chriſt, ſeeing that preiſthood and ſacrifice was neuer to ceaſe, but to bee continued in the church of the Meſſias, vnto the end of the world, and theſe men were the cheifeſt inſtruments, and rulers, which our Sauiour inſtituted, to conuert the nations, and communicate this ſacred preiſthood and power, to offer this ſacrifice, vnto others, ſtill to bee continued, without interruption, wee muſt enforcedlie yeelde, that they left ſuch a ſacrificinge power, and ſome maner and order how this ſacrifice was to bee ſolemnized, to ſucceedinge generations. Which I ſhall proue of euery one of the Apoſtles in particular, in the next chapters, onely here of them all in general, that this doctrine of conſecration, preiſthood & ſacrifice of Maſſe, they taught and deliuered to the churches where they liued and preached, wee haue many and worthie arguments and witneſſes.
                     
                        2. S. Chriſoſtome telleth vs plainly, how the Apoſtles practiſinge and deliuering the order of this ſacrifice, decreed that the faithfull departed should bee remembred then, and prayed for. Ab Apostolis ſancitum est, vt in celebratione venerandorum myſteriorum, memoria fiat eorum qui hinc deceſſerunt. Nouerunt illis multum hinc emolumenti fieri, multum vtilitatis, ſtante ſiquidem vniuerſo populo, manus in caelos extendente, caetu etiam ſacerdotali, venerandoque poſito ſacrificio: quomodo Deum non placaremas pro istis orantes? (Chriſoſtom. Homil. 3 in cap. 1. epist. ad Philipp.) It was decreed by the Apoſtles, that in the celebration of the venerable myſteries, a memory ſhould bee made of them that were departed this life. They knew much gaine, much profit did therby come to them, for all the people ſtandinge holdinge vp their hands to heauen, the preiſtlie company, and the venerable ſacrifice offered: how could it bee that wee ſhoulde not appeaſe God, prayinge for them? The very like hee writeth in an other place. (Chriſost. Homil. 69. ad popul. Antiochen.) And S. Baſile ſetting downe many thinges deliuered by the tradition of the Apoſtles,

ſaith. (S. Baſil. l. 5. de vniuerſal. eccl.) this tradition did commend the words of long prayer, and conſecration ouer the breade and chalice, ſet downe in order: multifariam digesta ſuper panem & calicem prolixae orationis & conſecrationis verba commendauit? Irenaeus ſaith the church receaued this order of ſacrifice, from the Apoſtles, and in his time offered it to God in all the world. Oblationem noui testamenti Eccleſia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerſo mundo offert Deo. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 32. contr. haereſ. The auncient learned Biſhop Stephanus Eduenſis writtinge of this holy ſacrifice, ſetteth down the maner how the Apoſtles practiſed and preached it. (Stephan. Eduen. Epiſc. l. de Sacramento Altaris cap. 20.) Sicut Magister docuerat Apoſtoli ſe & alios communicando conſecrationem corporis & ſanguinis Domini facere caeperunt, & fieri per vniuerſas Eccleſias instituerunt. Primo ſine aliquo ornatu fiebat canonis myſterium, postea cum canone legebatur epiſtola, & Euangelium. Deinde à Romanis Pontificibus, quibuſdam additis ad ornatum & decoratum; Eccleſiae celebranda aliqua ſuſceperunt. As Chriſt theire Maſter had taught them, the Apoſtles communicating

themſelues, and other began to make the conſecration of the body and blood of our Lord, and preachinge inſtituted it to bee done throughout all churches. Firſt without any ornament the miſtery of the canon of Maſſe was practiſed, afterward with the canon were reade the epiſtle, and Ghoſpel. After this ſomethings for ornament, were therto added by the Popes of Rome, the churches receiued the reſt to be celebrated.
                     3. Where wee ſee the whole body and ſubſtance of the Maſſe, conſiſtinge in the holy canon perfected, practiſed, and deliuered by the Apoſtles. And what was after added by the Popes of Rome, were onely ceremoniall for honor and ornament ſake and not neceſſitie, as hee there expreſſeth, and I wil demonſtrate herafter by our proteſtants themſelues, and for this place their prime man and firſt proteſtantlye made Archbiſhop, teſtifieth as much as this holy Biſhop hath done before. For he ſaith plainlie. (Matth. Parker. l. de Britan. antiq. cap. 17. pag. 47.) that the order and forme of Maſſe, which the Apoſtles vſed, and deliuered to the church, ducētis āplius ānis in prima Eccleſia durauit, continued aboue two hundred

yeares in the primatiue church without alteration. And then beeing ſomewhat altered, by Pope S. Zepherine, the chaunge which was made, was to a more excellent forme and matter. Ad pulchriorem materiam formam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           . S. Proclus Patriarch of Conſtantinople and ſucceſſor to S. Chriſoſtome there teſtifieth, that Saint Clement receaued the forme of Maſſe from the Apoſtles, and publiſhed it to the world. (Proclus tractat. de traditione diuin. Liturgiae. infra. cap.) Quia Sacroſancta illa myſteria à Sanctis Apostolis ſibi reuelata in lucem edidit. And how daily after Christs Aſcenſion they aſſembled and found great comfort in this holy ſacrifice of Christs body and blood, ſaid Maſſe with longe prayers. Cum multam conſolationem in mistico illo Dominici corporis ſacrificio poſitam inueniſſent, fuſiſsimè & longa oratione Liturgiam decantabant; and more plainely, as hereafter, preferringe it before all other holy duties and exerciſes. And Amalarius Fortunatus maketh this reaſon, why the forme and order of this ſacrifice, was by our Sauiour recommended to the care of the Apoſtles (Amalar. Fortunat. l. 3. de Eccleſ. offic. cap.) Saluator quo vehementius commendaret mysterij illius altitudinem

vltimum hoc voluit infigere cordibus & memoriae diſcipulorum, a quibus ad paſſionem digreſſurus erat, & ideo non praecipit, quo deinceps ordine ſumeretur, vt Apostolis per quos Eccleſias diſpoſiturus erat, ſeruaret hunc locum. Our Sauiour that hee might more vehemently commend the worthines of that miſtery, would haue it the laſt thing hee was to faſten into the harts and memorie of his diſciples, from whom he was to depart to his paſſion, and therefore did not commaund in what order it ſhould afterwards bee receaued, that hee might reſerue that dutie to the Apoſtles, by whom hee was to diſpoſe the churches.
                     4. To this all the holy Fathers before, that teſtifie Chriſt ordeyned this holy ſacrifice, and recommended it to his Apoſtles, beare witnes; for none but Antichriſtians will ſay, that the Apoſtles taught or practiſed, otherwiſe then Chriſt inſtituted and commaunded. And they were ſo zelous in this holy doctrine, that as both Catholicks and Proteſtants haue proued before, they were wicked Hereticks by S. Ignatius teſtimony that then denyed this B. ſacrifice to bee the body and blood of Chriſt,

which were giuen and ſhed for the ſinnes of the worlde. (Ignat. apud Theodoret. Bezam. Whitaker. & al. ſupr.) And Leontius Bizantinus writing againſt the Hereticks Neſtorius and Eutiches charging them firſt with denyinge the Nicen creed, and producinge a pſeudoſimbolum of their owne inuention, taxeth the Hereticke with an other prophane impietie not inferior to the other, to deny the holy order of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, ordeyned and inſtituted by the Apoſtles, receaued by the Fathers, and that of S. Baſil penned by the ſame holy ſpirit; & inuented an other Maſſe of his owne to ſuſteine his hereſie full of blaſphemies. Audet & aliud malum non ſecundum ad ſuperiora, aliam enim Miſſam effutiuit praetor illam qua à patribus tradita est Eccleſijs, neque reueritis illam Apostolorum, nec illam magni Baſilij in eodem ſpiritu conſcriptum, in qua Miſſa blaſphemijs non precationibus mysterium Eucharistiae oppleuit. And this wickednes was ſo great by this renowned author, that hee calleth it Antichriſtianitie and the denier of the Apoſtles Maſſe, Antichriſt. An vt alius Antichriſtus adhuc expectetur par eſt, qui ſic Chriſtum oderit, & quae Christi ſunt

mutare nitatur? And our Engliſh Proteſtants themſelues both ſay that the ſacrifice of Maſſe for the liuing and the dead, was a tradition of the Apoſtles, and Aerius was iuſtly condemned of hereſy by the primatiue church, for denyinge ſacrifice for the dead. And this is publickly and authoritatiuely approued by the remembred ſtatute of Queene Elizabeth, Kinge Eduard the 6. and Kinge Iames our preſent ſoueraigne, aſſuringe vs, that this holy ſacrifice of the altare, was inſtituted by Chriſt at his laſte ſupper with his Apoſtles, deliuered to thē, and by them to the church and ſucceeding Chriſtian preiſts to the end, and conteyneth the oblation of the moſt ſacred body and blood of Chriſt. Middleton. Papistom. pag. 49.137.138.47.48. Feild. l. 3. cap. 29. pag. 138. statut. an. 1. Edu. 6. an 1. Elizab. & an. 1. Iacob. Reg.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE X. CHAPTER. Wherin is particularly proued of all the holy Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, that they were ſacrificinge maſsinge preists, and did both practiſe and teach the ſame doctrines. And first the 4. Euangelists and S. Paule, who haue remēbred theſe misteries in holy ſcriptures.
                     THis being thus inuincibly proued, and acknowledged, both by Catholicke and Proteſtant authoritie, that both Chriſt our Sauiour inſtituted this holy ſacrifice, and ſacrificinge preiſthood; and his Apoſtles receauinge them from him, did all in generall both exerciſe and deliuer the ſame vnto the churches, there can bee no Chriſtian deſirous to retaine that name, that may oppoſe againſt the ſame; yet for a further manifeſtation of theſe truthes, vnto all, that will not deſperatly dwell in error, I will now proue in particular, how euery one of the Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts, both beleeued, practiſed, and taught theſe miſteries. And firſt to begin with the foure Euangeliſts,

and S. Paule, who haue committed theſe Chriſtian holy ſecrets, to holie writinge; I will ſhew how both in theſe their ſacred ſcriptures, they teach and allowe the ſacrifice of Maſſe, and a ſacrificinge or maſſinge preiſthood, by order and ſacred office to offer that ſacrifice. And to put vs out of all doubt or queſtion that this is and was theire meaninge in thoſe holy ſcriptures, I will proue, that euery one of them was a true maſſinge preiſt, and actually did offer, and celebrate the moſt honorable ſacrifice of Maſſe, in eſſential thinges, as the holy Catholicke maſſing preiſts of the church of Rome now doe, and haue euer moſt religiouſly done, in all ages. The ſame I will likewiſe proue, of all the other Apoſtles, in their order, onely I will craue leaue of S. Peter, the firſt, and cheifeſt, to remember him laſte in this matter; for as I haue proued at large in other places, as amonge the Apoſtles hee was the firſt, and allmoſte onely Apoſtle, which planted the faith of Chriſt in theſe parts of the world: So wee in Britanie did firſt receaue from him, our holy maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and preiſthood, neuer hitherto altogether

diſcontinued, or interrupted, but by him and his ſucceſſors in the Apoſtolicke ſea of Rome firſt founded, and euer after ſucceſſiuely in all ages preſerued in this kingdome, as will appeare hereafter.
                     2. Therefore to begin with the Euangeliſts and S. Paule, which ſpeake of theſe miſteries in ſcripture, S. Mathew the Apoſtle (and firſt in order amonge the Euangeliſts) writeth of Chriſts deliuery of this ſacrifice in theſe wordes, as our Engliſh Proteſtants by his maieſties priuiledge tranſlate them. (Matth. cap. 26. v. 26.27.28.) Ieſus tooke breade and bleſſed it, and brake it, and gaue it to his diſciples, and ſaid, take eate, this is my body. And hee tooke the cup, and gaue thankes, and gaue it to them ſavinge, drinke ye al of it for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many, for the remiſsion of ſinnes. The Greeke text, which theſe men ſay muſt bee here preferred, is word by word as they tranſlate, ſpeakinge of Chriſts body, that it was at that preſent giuen there, and his blood in the preſent tence ſhed for remiſſion of ſinnes 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Therefore if Chriſts oblation, and giuing his body, and blood,

vppon the Croſſe was a ſacrifice, as all agree, ſeeing it was ſo in reſpect it was there giuen and offered for remiſſion of ſinnes, here beeing the very ſame body and blood, and giuen for remiſſion of ſinnes, it muſt needes bee alſo a ſacrifice, and not onely euchariſticall or of thanks giuing, but ſatisfactory: for whatſoeuer tal
                           •…
                        eth away ſinnes, by its owne vertue, as the Euangeliſt here ſpeaketh of this, muſt needes be ſuch, and Chriſts body and blood beeing of infinite value in themſelues and of their own nature, can not but be ſatisfactorie for ſinnes, whenſoeuer, howſoeuer, & by whomſoeuer they are offered, or giuen for remiſſion of ſinnes, though the limited power of preiſts may bringe ſome limitation to their ſatisfaction, the ordinance and inſtitution of Chriſt, ſo diſpoſing in this ſacrifice, as it is now daily offered by conſecrated preiſts, as the common opinion is, otherwiſe a thing of illimited worth, ſhould bee of like deſeruinge, and ſatisfaction.
                     3. And this is ſo euident, that not onely all learned Fathers, and antiquitie do from hence teach, that Chriſt in this place inſtituted the ſacrifice of the new teſtament, as

I haue cited diuers before, but our greateſt enemies and perſecutors, as namly the preſent Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury the director of Maſter Maſon, and hee alſo with others. (Maſon. praefat. & lib. 5. cap. 6. pag. 235. Abb. ibidem. Magdeburgent. in S. Iren.) acknowledge, particularly naminge S. Irenaeus, S. Chriſoſtome, and S. Gregorie, from them concluding in theſe words: That Chriſt did then teach the oblation of the new testament, which the church throughout all the world doth, when shee ſaith, this is my body. And they plainly ſay. (Maſon and D. Georg. Abbots ſupr. pag. 233.) that theſe wordes of Chriſt recited before by S. Matthew, this is my body which is giuen for you, and this is my blood of the new teſtament which is shed for you, doe argue a ſacrifice to God. And if this was not a ſacrifice, then by proteſtant Religion, admittinge nothing but ſcriptures in matters of faith, Chriſt Ieſus was not the preiſt after the order of Melchiſedech, which was promiſed; for exceptinge this, the whole new teſtament is ſilent of any preiſtly act, of that order, which hee performed in all his life, and ſo that being a diſtinctiue ſigne, of the true Meſſias, they

would depriue all mankinde of Redemption, and our moſte bleſſed Sauiour of the title, and honour of redeeminge vs. Therfore thus they graunt. (Abbots and Maſon ſupr. pag. 243.) Christ hauing offered himſelf, for a ſoueraigne ſacrifice, vnto his Father, ordeyned, that wee should offer a remembraunce thereof, vnto God, in steade of a ſacrifice. Which they muſt needes vnderſtand of Chriſts oblation in this place, before his paſſion, for they make this before his commaundement, and power giuen to his Apoſtles, of celebrating this miſtery, by theſe words as theſe men tranſlate. (Luc. cap. 22. ver. 19.) doe this in remembrance of mee. So that Chriſt ordeyninge, that we ſhould do what hee did, as the words bee manifeſt, and Chriſt as they confeſſe there, offered himſelfe for a ſoueraigne ſacrifice vnto his Father, we muſt offer Chriſt in the ſame maner, for a ſoueraigne ſacrifice vnto God.
                     4. And for a cleare demonſtration, that together with the cōmaundement a preiſtlie ſacrificinge power was giuen by thoſe wordes, to his holy Apoſtles, and they by them made maſſing, and ſacrificing preiſts, to ſacrifice, as Chriſt by theſe proteſtants,

and the ſcripture before, did at that time his bleſſed body, and body, it is not lawfull, or validate in either Religion of Catholicks, or Proteſtants, for any Chriſtian man, or woman to intermeddle to offer, or miniſter in theſe things, whatſoeuer we ſhall name them, or iudge them to bee, but a Catholickly conſecrated preiſt, by the one, or proteſtant miniſter by the other, therfore thoſe ſacred words, do this (Matth. cap. 26. v. 20. Marc. cap. 14. v. 17. Luc. c. 22. v. 14.) gaue preiſtly and ſacrificing power to his Apoſtles, only preſent, by the Euangeliſts: for if they had beene generally ſpoken vnto all Chriſtians, all Chriſtians ſhould both haue power, & were boūd vnder dānation to take vpon them to miniſter in ſuch things; for the wordes, doe this, to whomſoeuer they were ſpoken, conteyne an expreſſe commaundement, to bee performed.
                     5. And to make this matter more euident, it is manifeſt by the proteſtant parlament ſtatute of Kinge Edward the ſixt, Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames. (Statut. 1. Edw. 6.1. Eliz. & 1. Iacob. ſupr.) That the Proteſtants of England neither doe,

nor by their Religion may, make it a matter of commaundement and neceſſitie, for lay parſons to communicate vnder both kindes, but doe freely acknowledge, that in the firſt fiue hundred yeares of Chriſt, the Sacrament was miniſtred vnto, and receaued of the laitie ſometimes in one, ſomtimes in both kindes, and yet the practiſe of the church was holy in thoſe dayes; therfore there neuer was a generall commaundement to al Chriſtians to receaue in both kindes: yet S. Paul ſettinge downe Chriſts ordinance, and inſtitution of this holy ſacrifice, he ſaid both concerninge his body and blood, he gaue this expreſſe commaundement: doe this in remembrance of mee. (1. Corinth. cap. 11. ver. 24.25.) And therefore Tatianus Alexandrinus diſciple to S. Iuſtine the martyr, in his harmony of the ghoſpels, doth ſet downe thoſe wordes of Chriſt to his Apoſtles. Doe this in commemoration of me, both after the deliuery of his body and blood vnto them. (Tatianus Alexand. Harmon. Euang. cap. 155.) Therfore all they being preiſts, and onely preſent then, muſt needs bee made preiſts and ſacrificinge preiſts, by thoſe conſecratory

words of Chriſt, then onely ſpoken vnto them.
                     6. Which is made moſte euident in the caſe of S. Thomas the Apoſtle, who by opinions Catholicke and Proteſtant was a preiſt, and as hereafter a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt, yet hee was not preſent when Chriſt ſaid to the other Apoſtles in the 20. chapter of S. Iohns ghoſpell; receue yee the holy Ghost, whoſe ſoeuer ſinnes yee remit, they are remitted vnto them: and whoſe ſoeuer ſinnes yee retayne, they are retayned. And as proteſtants affirme made them preiſts; and they themſelues in their booke of pretended conſecration, only vſe theſe in making miniſters; for the ſcripture ſaith plainly, and immediatly in the next words: But Thomas one of the twelue, called Didimus, was not with them when Ieſus came. (ver. 24.) neither when hee ſaid theſe words vnto them; but when the reſt of the Apoſtles told him they had ſeene Chriſt, it followeth in the ſame place by Engliſh Proteſtants reading: The other diſciples therefore ſaid vnto him, wee haue ſeene the Lord. (ver. 25.) But hee ſaid vnto them, except I shall ſee in his hands the print of the nailes, and put my finger into

the print of the nailes, and thruſt my hand into his ſide, I will not beleeue. (v. 26.) Theſe be the very next words of the Euangeliſt, vnto the former; and then immediatly followeth, how eight dayes after, Chriſt appeared againe, S. Thomas beeing preſent, and cured his incredulitie.
                     7. So that it is moſt plaine, and euident, that S. Thomas receaued the cheife preiſtlie power in the laſt ſupper of Chriſt, and by thoſe his powerfull wordes, when hauing celebrated the high preiſtly function of ſacrificinge after the order of Melchiſedech, in conſecrating and offeringe for our ſacrifice, his moſt bleſſed body and blood vnder the formes of breade and wine, and beeinge to leaue this preiſtly ſacrificinge power in his church, hee did firſt communicate and giue it to his Apoſtles, ſayinge vnto them as our proteſtants tranſlate. This doe in remembrance of mee. (Luc. cap. 22. ver. 19.1. Cor. 11. ver. 24.25.) where wee may boldly reade, ſacrifice this in remembrance of me, or in commemoration of me. For ſo both the Hebrue, and Greeke, and Latine alſo wil giue allowance, as I haue proued before. Yet if wee ſhould take them

onely, for the common action of doinge, ſe
                           •…
                        ing in the very common ſence of doing, it conteyneth both a power & commaundement, to doe that, which Chriſt there did, which by all teſtimonies before, and allowance of proteſtants themſelues, was his moſte holy offeringe, and ſacrificinge his ſacred body, and for ſinnes; It muſt needes giue both power, and precept to his Apoſtles to doe the ſame, doe this, or, this doe: otherwiſe neither the Apoſtles, nor preiſts truely conſecrated after them, had done that, which Chriſt did, and which he gaue power and commaund vnto them to do; but ſome other thing, not commaunded, and which they had no authoritie, or warrant to doe; which is the tranſgreſſing, vncōmaunded, and vnwarranted lamentable condition of all thoſe, that deny this holy ſacrifice, and preſume to practiſe any other thing in place thereof.
                     8. Therefore ſeeinge no man doth, or can pretend, but there was onely one true conſecrator, time, place, maner, and order of conſecratinge, both S. Thomas, and the other Apoſtles, for holy preiſts, it euidentlie followeth, they were all conſecrated by

Chriſt in the action, time, place, and order as is before remembred; and that they were ſo conſecrated ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts. Which our learned Proteſtants of England plainely teach vs to bee ſo. The great Archbiſhop, champion for the Engliſh Proteſtants, when he ſo profeſſed him ſelfe, writing with their greateſt applauſe, and priuiledge, ſpeakinge of the time, place, and maner, when, where, and how the Apoſtles were made preiſts, and of theire two ſpirituall powers, iuriſdiction, and order, hee ſaith of this. (Marcus Ante. Reipub. Eccleſiast. l. 2. cap. 1. num. 3.) Ordinis ego potestatem intelligo nunc ad conficiendam Euchariſtiam, & ſacrificij in cruce per Ieſum Chriſtum peracti memoriam celebrandam: ad quod Sacerdotium quoddam est neceſſarium. Ad hoc Sacerdotium promoti ſunt Apostoli à Chriſto Domino, in vltima caena, quando eis dixit: hoc facite in meam commemorationem. (Luc. 22. & 1. Cor. 11.) By power of order, I now vnderſtand power to conſecrate the Euchariſt, and celebrate the memory of the ſacrifice, which Chriſt perfected vpon the Croſſe, to which a certaine preiſthood is neceſſary: to this preiſthood the Apoſtles

were promoted in the laſt ſupper, whē hee ſaid vnto them, do this in my commemoration.
                     9. And againe. (Marcus Anto. ſupr. l. 2. cap. 4. pag. 19.) Quando Euchariſtiae conficiendae ipſis dabat potestatem, dixit eis: hec facite in meam commemorationem: nimirum id quod me videtis nunc facere, & vos facite: hoc eſt ſumite panem, benedicite, frangite, & porrigite: ſimiliter & vinum. Et conſeqnenter Apostoli ex ipſo facto Christi instructi, certè diuina Christi inſtitutione dabant Eucharistiam. When Chriſt gaue vnto his Apoſtles power to conſecrate the Euchariſt, he ſaid vnto them: doe this in my commemoration: That is, what you ſee mee now to do, doe you the ſame; that is take bread, bleſſe it, breake, reach: likewiſe alſo wine. And conſequently the Apoſtles armed by that fact of Chriſt, certainely by the diuine inſtitution of Chriſt, did giue the Euchariſt. And in an other place. (Marc. Anton. l. 2. cap. 4. pag. 118.) de Sacroſancta Eucharistia: Ipſius neceſsitatem toties inculcauit: niſi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, & biberetis eius ſanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis. 
                              •…
                           anis quem ego dabo caro mea eſt, pro mundi

vita. (Ioh. 6. Luc. 22.) postea in vltima caena: accepto pane gratias egit, & fregit, & dedit eis, dicens, hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis datur: hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Panis conſecrationem in corpus Chriſti, & vini in ſanguinem, ipſe coram Apostolis fecit: eandem ipſi quoque vt facerent, frangerent, & darent, expreſsè mandauit. Concerninge the holy Euchariſt, Chriſt did very often inculcate the neceſſitie of it: except you ſhall eate the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and drinke his blood, you ſhall not haue life in you. The food which I will giue, is my fleſh for the life of the world. After in his laſte ſupper, when he had taken bread, he gaue thankes, brake, and gaue to them ſaying, this is my body which is giuen for you: doe this in my commemoration. Hee made the conſecration of breade into the body of Chriſt, & of wine into his blood, before the Apoſtles, and expreſſely commaunded, that they alſo ſhould do the ſame conſecration of bread & wine into Chriſts body and blood.
                     10. And in an other place he teacheth, with S. Chriſoſtome, whom he followeth therein, and other holy auncient Fathers.

(Marc. Anto. l. 1. cap. 1. pag. 9. Chriſoſtom. hom. 17. in epiſt. ad Hebr.) That the ſacrifice which the Apoſtles were here commaunded to offer by Chriſts wordes, doe this, and which by that power they did offer, and which all truely conſecrated preiſts did after offer, was the ſame body & blood of Chriſt, which hee himſelfe offered, the ſame, and no other ſacrifice. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Quid ergo nos? ait Chriſostomus, nonne per ſingulos dies offerrimus? offerrimus quidem. Et vna eſt hoſtia, & non multae. Quomodo vna eſt, non multae? quia ſemel oblata eſt in Sancto Sanctorum: hoc autem ſacrificium exemplar est illius: idipſum ſemper offerrimus. Pontifex noster ille, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit: ipſam offerrimus & nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem conſumi non poteſt. And much more to as great effect, or greater, and yet at his pleaſure hee doth maine, and make lame the ſentences of that holy Author. And to auoide the friuolous cauill of ſome about the wordes, in my remembrance, or, commemoration of mee, whereby they would haue it gathered, that this is onely a commemoratiue ſacrifice, or commemoration of that ſacrifice, this man with all

other Proteſtants. (Marc. Ant. l. 1. cap. 12. pag· 146 147. Mumer. 26.27.) and the expreſſe ſcriptures are witnes, that the preiſts and ſacrifice of the lawe of nature and Moiſes, of Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, and his twelue ſonnes, Iob, Melchiſedech, Aaron and all in the lawe were true preiſts, and ſacrificers; yet they were in all Chriſtian learninge, but figures of the truth in the time of the Meſſias.
                     11. Therefore if this were onely a commemoration, it ſhould at leaſte by as great reaſon and authoritie, bee alſo a ſacrifice, and the parſon that celebrateth it, a ſacrificinge preiſt, both beeing farr more excellent then thoſe preiſts, and ſacrifices. And the words, in remembrance, or commemoration, are ſo far from hindering the truth, of theſe preiſts and ſacrifice, that they rather giue a ſecond power, & vertue vnto them, euen by theſe proteſtants themſelues; for they haue told vs before, that by theſe wordes, doe this, Chriſt gaue power to conſecrate the bread and wine into his body and blood, and doe what hee did in that ſacrifice, then addinge after the wordes, in remembrance,

or commemoration, he gaue them a ſecond power, and commaundement different from the other, yet both of them preiſtly and ſacrificall: otherwiſe Chriſt himſelfe ſhould bee ſaid (which cannot be) that hee did conſecrate and offer this remembrance of himſelfe, and his owne action: Therefore the words muſt needs conteine a double virtuall power and commaund to the Apoſtles, the one part and principall beeing, to doe that Chriſt did, expreſſed plainely in the powerfull wordes, doe this, the other in remembrance or commemoration, conteyned in the ſame terms. Which was by a (then) publick proteſtant preachinge miniſter both preached publickly, and with publicke allowance after printed in this maner. Edw. Maie ſerm. of the communion of Saints, printed by Iohn Dauſon an. 1621. pag. 6.
                     12. God hath giuen to preiſts a power ouer his owne naturall bodie, which is himſelfe: for to them onely was it ſaid: doe this in remembrance of mee: by which words they haue commiſsion to diſpoſe of that very body, which was giuen for the life of the world, and of that inualuable blood, which was shed to redeeme ſinfull

ſoules: for which cauſe the Bishops and presbyters haue, as antiquitie can tell, beene honored with an honor, which no Kinge, no Angel had euer giuen him. They are the makers of Chriſts body, they doe a worke which none but the holy Ghoſt beſides them euer did. And in the margine hee thus citeth Iſodor Peluſota, l. 2. epiſt. 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ſuch a power the Kings of the earth haue not. An other ſpeakinge of the conſecratory preiſtly power, by thoſe words of Chriſt, ſpoken in his parſon: This is my body: This is my blood, concludeth. (Couel def. of Hooker pag. 116.117.276.) The omnipotency of God maketh it his body. And of preiſts: To theſe parſons God imparteth power ouer that naturall body, which is himſelfe, a worke which antiquitie calleth the making of Chriſts body. And of preiſtly power: By bleſsing viſible elements it maketh them inuiſible grace, it hath to diſpoſe of that flesh which was giuen for the life of the world, and that blood which was powred out to redeeme ſoules. Others ſay: The ſacrifice of the altare, and vnbloody ſacrifice, were vſed in the primatiue church. The primatiue church did offer ſacrifice at the altare for the deade, ſacrifice

for the deade was a tradition of the Apostles and auncient Fathers. Aerius was iustly condemned of hereſie by the primatiue church, for denying ſacrifice for the dead. Middlet. Papistom pag. 51.91.113.49.137.139.47.48. F
                              •…
                           ild. l. 3. cap. 29. pag. 138.
                     13. And to put vs out of doubt, that this is, or ſhould bee the common doctrine and Religion of all Engliſh Proteſtants, their choſen champion, with greateſt allowance amonge them, as hee affirmeth, writeth plainely. Haec est fides Regis, haec est fides Eccleſiae Anglicanae: this is the faith of the Kinge, this is the faith of the church of England. (Io. Caſaub. reſp. ad Card. Peron. pag. 51.52.) And their publicke ſtatute of al the Proteſtant Princes of England ſaith ſo, and ſo decreeth to be obſerued of all, authentically prouinge in proteſtants Religion, that this moſt holy ſacrifice of the altar, was inſtituted by Chriſt, that it is his body and blood, broken and shed for remiſsion of ſinnes, & by the omnipotent words of Chriſt, This is my body this is my blood, being of eternall infallible and vndoubted truth, ſo conſecrated by truely and duely ordeyned preists vnto the end of the worlde. Therefore moſt

euident it is, by all kinde of Arguments and teſtimonies, that the holy Apoſtle and Euangeliſt S. Matthew, as the reſt alſo, did, and of dutie was bound to offer the moſt holy ſacrifice of Maſſe. And that hee thus did, as the reſt of the Apoſtles alſo did, it is manifeſt by diuers antiquities, which wee haue of this holy Apoſtle.
                     14. Firſt it is commonly agreed vppon, both by Catholicke and Proteſtant writers, that hee preached, and ſuffered Martyrdome in Ethiopia, hauing firſt conuerted the Kinge and many others, and that of all nations the Chriſtians of Ethiopia were euer moſt deuout to the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, the proteſtants themſelues ar witneſſes, and as they haue had that holy ſacrifice from their firſt receauinge the faith of Chriſt, which in all things as tranſſubſtantiation of bread and wine into the bodie and bloody of Chriſt, according to the doctrine of S Matthew, before and offeringe of the ſaid bleſſed body, and blood, with inuocation of Saints, and prayer for the deade, ſo their tradition aſcribeth it, to S. Matthew the Apoſtle, as ordinarily it is referred vnto him. And not onely S.

Abdias which liued in that time, by his workes vſually receaued, Iulius Africanus, and others be witneſſes, that he ſaid Maſſe, and was martyred at the holy altare by Kinge Hirtacus, but that vndoubted hiſtorie of his life and death, which the vniuerſall church of Chriſt followeth, approueth and propoſeth vnto vs, ſo teſtifieth: Origen, in Geneſ. Euſeb. histor. lib. 3. cap. 1. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 15. Doroth. in Synopſ. Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 2. col. 777.776. Edw. Grimſton. in Presbyter. Iohn Pag. 1088.1089. Miſſa Aethiopum ſiue S. Matthaei Apoſtoli Biblioth. SS. Patr. Tom. 6. Iudoc. Cocc. Tom. 2. Sebaſtian. Munster. Coſmograph. l. 6. cap 57. Abdias & Iul, Afr. c. l. de vita Apost. in S. Math. Metaphrast. in S. Matth. Anton. part. 1. Petr. anot. l. 8. cap. 100.
                     15. Rege mortuo, Hirtacus eius ſucceſſor Ephigeniam Regiam filiam, vellet ſibi dari in matrimonium: Matthaeum, cuius opera illa virginitatem Deo vouerat, & in Sancto propoſito perſeuerabat, ad altare myſterium celebrantem, iuſsit occidi vndecimo calendas Octobris. Vita S. Matth. Apostoli in Breuiario die 21. Septembr. Kinge Aeglippus whome S. Matthew had conuerted to the faith being

deade, Hirtacus his ſucceſſor deſiringe to Mary his daughter Ephigenia, ſhe
                           •…
                         by the helpe of S. Matthew, hauinge vowed virginitie to God, and perſeueringe in her holie purpoſe, hee commaunded S. Matthew to bee killed, as hee was celebrating Maſſe at the altare, on the eleuenth of the calends of October. Which hiſtory and relation, muſt needs bee approued by the Proteſtant church of England, keeping his feſtiuitie with the former hiſtories, the church of Rome, the auncient Martyrolodges of Rome, S. Bede, Vſuardus, and others vpon the ſame day. (Engl. Protest. Comm: Booke in fest. S. Matth. Apoſtol. & calend. 21. Septembr. 11. cal. Octobr. Martyr. Rom. Bed. & Vſuard. eod. die & Ado Treuer. 16.) To which the auncient Manuſcript of an author Anonimus, publiſhed in print, all moſt an hundred yeares ſince by Fredericus Nauſea Biſhop of Vienna, writtin as hee ſaith, characteribus pluſquam vetustis, in exceedinge old characters, in a moſt auncient library, giueth this ample teſtimony, hauinge before related the hiſtory of S. Matthewes preachinge there: Cumque omnes reſpondiſſent Amen, & mysteria Domini celebrata fuiſſent,

& Miſſam ſuſcepiſſet omnis Eccleſia, retinuit ſe Sanctus Matthaeus iuxta altare, vbi corpus ab eo fuerat Christi confectum, vt illic Martyrium expectauit: nam expanſis manibus orantem, ſpiculator miſſus ab Hyrtaco, à tergo puncti ictu feriens, Apostolum Dei, Christi Martyrem fecit. And when all had anſwered Amen, and the myſteries of our Lord were celebrated, and all the Chriſtian aſſembly had heard Maſſe, S. Matthew kept himſelfe ſtill by the altare, where the body of Chriſt was conſecrated by him, and expected Martyrdome. For as hee was praying with his hands ſtretched forth, the executioner beeing ſent from Kinge Hyrtacus cominge behinde him, thruſt the Apoſtle of God throughe, and made him a Martyr of Chriſt. Anonymm antiq. l. in vitas, miracula & paſsionis Apostolorum. in paſ. S. Matth. Apoſt. cap. 6.
                     16. And this may fully ſatisfie for S. Matthew the Apoſtle, that he was a ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſt, and did both ſay Maſſe, and ordeyne other holy maſſing and ſacrificinge preiſts, and deliuered a forme of that holy ſacrifice to the Chriſtians of Ethiopia. I haue bene more large

in him, becauſe hee was the firſt amonge the Apoſtles which in his ghoſpell wrote of theſe ſacred myſteries, and beeinge an Apoſtle, and confirmed in grace, neither did, nor could in this, or any article of Chriſtian Religion, beleeue, or practiſe otherwiſe, then Chriſt commaunded, and inſtituted, and the reſt of the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts did alſo beleeue, teache, and exerciſe, as I haue taught in generall of them all. Now in particular of euery of them with ſo much breuitie as I may, the difficultie beeinge already cleared, vntill I come to S. Peter, in whom beeinge beſides his primacy amonge the Apoſtles, and in the whole church of Chriſt, our protoparent Paſtor and Father in Chriſt, I muſt ſpend ſome longer time, in that reſpect to deduce our holy ſacrificinge, and maſſing preiſthood from him.
                     17. The next of the Euangeliſtes, and ſcripture writers, which entreateth of this bleſſed miſtery, is S. Marke, whoſe words in his ghoſpell as our proteſtants tranſlate them, concerninge Chriſts inſtitution of this ſacrifice, are theſe: Ieſus tooke breade, and bleſſed, and brake it, and gaue to them

and ſaid, take, eate: This is my body, and hee tooke the cup, and when he had giuen thanks, hee gaue it to them: and they all dranke of it, and hee ſaid vnto them, this is my blood of the new teſtament, which is shed for many. (Marc. cap. 14 ver. 22.23.) Where wee ſee, as in S. Matthew before, ſo heare S. Marke doth aſſure vs, that the miſteries there celebrated, were Chriſts body and blood, ſhedd for many; and ſo accordinge to that which is already proued in this matter, muſt needes bee an holy ſacrifice in the iudgement of this Euangeliſt: and that by his owne continual vſe and practiſe of ſaying Maſſe, and deliueringe a perfect forme and order thereof, vnto the churches where hee preached and liued, we haue many teſtimonies.
                     18. Firſt the very Maſſe it ſelfe which hee deliuered to the church of Alexandria, and others which hee founded, is yet vſed in thoſe parts, and knowne to all antiquaries. (Miſſa S. Marci, ſeu Eccleſiae Alexandrinae. in Biblioth. patrum.) and it doth agree in all matters of ſubſtance, with the Maſſe of the Latine church. And he himſelfe had ſo reuerent opinion of this moſt holy ſacrifice, that hee thought himſelfe vnworthie

to offer it; and therfore as S. Hierome writeth, cut off his Thombe, but it was miraculouſly reſtored, and hee vſually offered that holy ſacrifice, as wee haue teſtimonies euen of this our owne nation, farr beyond exception: to omit others S. Bede S. Marianus and Florentius Wigornienſis, al which affirme in theſe ſame words: Marcus diſcipulus & interpres Apostoli Petri, mittente Petro porrexit in Aegiptum, & primus Alexandriae Christum annuntians, constituit Eccleſiam, & postquam constitutis & confirmatis Eccleſijs per Lybiam, Marmoricam, Ammonicam, Pentapolim, Alexandriam atque Aegiptum vniuerſam, ad vltimum tentus est à Paganis qui remanſerant Alexandriae, qui videntes eum die ſancto Paſchae Miſsas facientem, miſerunt funem in collo eius. Marke the diſciple, and Interpreter of Peter, beeing ſent by Peter, went into Egipt, and was the firſt that preached Chriſt at Alexandria, and founded that church, and after founding and confirming the churches through Lybia, Marmorica, Ammonica, Pentapolis, Alexandria and all Egipt, at the laſt was apprehended by the Pagans, which remayned at Alexandria, who ſeeinge him

ſaying Maſſe, on the holy feaſt of Eaſter, caſt a rope, about his necke, and ſo put him to death. Beda in Martyrolog. 7. cal. Maij. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. pag. 233. in Nerone. Florent. Wigorn.
                     
                     19. Thus theſe three auncient & learned Engliſh writers, with others. And this forme of Maſſe which he vſed & deliuered to theſe churches, ſeemeth by Antonius Sabellicus, to haue beene written by him at Aquileia in Italy, whether he was firſt ſent by S. Peter before hee went to Alexandria: for hee tellinge with the common opinion how hee wrote his ghoſpell at Rome, by the warrant and approbation of S. Peter, and his coming to Aquileia, ſaith he wrote there alſo ſomethinges, hic quoque aliqua ſcripſiſſe creditur, and moſt likely his Maſſe becauſe wee finde no mention of any other his works, but his ghoſpel writtē at Rome, and that.
                     20. And to make all ſure by our Engliſh Proteſtant antiquaries, and other writers, who aſcribe the greateſt credit in theſe matters to the brittiſh Authors, their Religion and practiſe, before the vniting themſelues with the ſucceſſors of S. Auguſtine,

and the Romane church, there is yet extant a very old manuſcript, written by a Brittiſh Chriſtian, before that vnion allmoſt a thouſand yeares ſince, which our proteſtants intitle, prima inſtitutio eccleſiaſtici ſeruitij, the firſt institution of the eccleſiaſticall ſeruice. (M. S. Britan. antiq. pr. Stores in exordio, prima inſtitutio eccleſiastici ſeruitij.) in which manifeſtly mētion is made that S. Marke the Euangeliſt did write a forme therof, and that very forme of Maſſe vſed and penned by S. Marke, was practiſed here in Britanie, when it was firſt conuerted, in or nere the Apoſtles time: of this I ſhall ſpeake more at large when I come to S. Peter. And this will ſuffice for S. Marke.
                     21. S. Luke the next of this holy company, is moſte plaine of them all for holye ſacrifice, for firſt hee doth plainelie diſtinguiſh the conſecrated cup, from the other which he calleth by proteſtants tranſlation, the fruite of the vine. (Luc. cap. 22. ver. 18.) an exception with vnlearned proteſtants. And then by their owne tranſlation, he thus writeth of Chriſts action herin. (ver. 19.) And hee tooke breade, and gaue thankes, and brake it, and gaue vnto them,

ſaying, this is my body which is giuen for you, doe this in remembrance of mee. (ver. 20.) likevviſe alſo the cup after ſupper, ſaying, this is the nevv teſtament in my blood, vvhich is shed for you. Where as I haue proued before, both by proteſtants and all witneſſes, our holy ſacrifice of Maſſe is plainely inſtituted, which our proteſtants proue by one of the moſt auncient antiquities of our Chriſtian Britans, a ſermon as Maſter Foxe ſaith. (Act. and monum. pag. 1142. ſermon. tranſlat. by Aelfricus.) ſo auncient and of ſo great authoritie in this kingdome, that it was vſually reade in the church here in the yeare of Chriſt 366. aboue two hundred yeares before S. Auguſtines cominge hither, and tranſlated into the Saxon language out of Latine by Kinge Aelfricus in the yeare 996. Which ſpeaketh of Chriſt in theſe words: Hee bleſſed breade before his
ſuffering and diuided it to his diſciples thus ſaying: eate of this, it is my body, and doe this in my remembrance. Alſo hee bleſſed wine, in one cup, and ſaid: drinke yee all of this, this is my blood that is ſhed for manie in forgiuenes of ſinnes. The Apoſtles did as Chriſt commaunded, that is, they

they bleſſed bread and wine to howſell againe afterward in his remembrance: euen ſo alſo their ſucceſſors and all preiſtes by Chriſts commaundement doe bleſſe bread and wine, to howſell in his name with the Apoſtolicke bleſſinge.
                     
                     22.
And againe: In the old lawe faithfull men offered to God diuers ſacrifices that had foreſignification of Chriſts body, which for our ſinnes he himſelfe to his heauenly Father hath ſince offered to ſacrifice, certainly this howſell which wee doe now hallow at Gods altar, is a remembrance of Chriſts body which hee offered for vs: and of his blood which hee ſhed for vs: So hee himſelfe commaunded, doe this in
my remembraunce. And ſhewinge how Chriſt is wholly and truely preſent in euerie parcell of this bleſſed ſacrifice of Maſſe, it addeth:
That innocent Lambe which the old Iſraelites did then kill, had ſignification after ghoſtlye vnderſtandinge of Chriſts ſufferinge, who vnguiltie, ſhed his holy blood for our redemption. Herof ſinge Gods ſeruants at euery Maſſe, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi miſerere nobis: That
is in our ſpeach: Thou Lambe of God that

takeſt away the ſinnes of the world haue mercy vpon vs.
                     25. Where is plainely proued by theſe proteſtants antiquitie, that Chriſt did in thoſe wordes of S. Luke, both inſtitute the moſte holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, for that Euangeliſt, and all preiſts to offer, and that the Lambe of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the world (onely Chriſt Ieſus) is preſent there, and was publickly prayed vnto as preſent, in our firſt Britane primatiue church in this kingdome. Therefore no Chriſtiā of Britanie can make it a queſtion, but S. Luke an holy Euangeliſt, did in this holy miſtery, as Chriſt had inſtituted, by his owne ghoſpell, and the other Euangeliſts and Apoſtles, did preach and practiſe: Which is farther confirmed out of the hiſtory of his life, wherin we finde that hee erected altars, and conſecrated ſacrificing and maſſing preiſts, no others known to Chriſtians in that time. This will more appeare when I come to S. Paul whoſe both companion, and ſcribe and ſecretary in ſome ſort hee was, and ſo could not bee of an other opinion, or practiſe in this point, then that great Apoſtle. Metaphraſt. in vit.

S. Luc. Gul. Eiſengren. cent. 1. part. 5. diſt. 7. Hieron. l. de vir. illuſtriſ. in S. Luca.
                     
                     24. The holy Apoſtle and Euangeliſt S. Iohn bringeth Chriſt ſpeakinge in theſe wordes, as our proteſtants tranſlate them, (Ioh. cap. 6, v. 51.) I am the liuinge breade which came downe from heauen. If any man eate of this breade, hee shall liue for euer: and the breade that I will giue, is my flesh vvhich I vvill giue for the life of the vvorlde. The Ievves therefore ſtroue amonge themſelues, ſaying hovv can this man giue vs his flesh to eate? Then Ieſus ſaid vnto them, verelye I ſay vnto you, except yee eate the flesh of the ſonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no life in you. Who ſo eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternall life, and I vvill raiſe him vp, at the laſt day. For my flesh is meate in deede, and my blood is drinke in deede. Hee that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dvvelleth in mee, and I in him. As the liuinge Father hath ſent mee, and I liue by the Father: ſo hee that eateth me, euen hee shall liue by mee. This is the bread vvhich came dovvne from heauen: not as your Fathers did eate Manna and are deade: hee that eateth of this breade, shall liue for euer.
                     
                     
                        25. Theſe words bee ſo euident, for the reall preſence of Chriſt in the ſacrifice of Maſſe, by all teſtimonies of antiquitie, that as I haue ſhewed before, none but incredulous people, and like Kinge Achis will denie it. And for Britanie the lately cited antiquitie that was publickly reade, in our churches here ſo longe before S. Auguſtines cominge hither, doth with the whole cōſent of our church, in or before the yeare of Chriſt 366. ſo approue it, citing all theſe words of S. Iohn which I haue related, to that purpoſe. (the old Britt. ſerm. ſupr. apud Foxe pag· 1142. & alios.) and no man can better expound S. Iohn, then S. Iohn himſelfe, who as wee are aſſured both by Catholicke and Proteſtant antiquaries, and authorities, did both ſay Maſſe, and conſecrated ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſts, to doe the ſame. So wee are taught by Euſebius Emiſſenus, or Fauſtus Reginenſis, S. Bede, Haymo, the author of the ſcholaſticall hiſtory, Smaragdus, Durantes, Honorius, Vincentius, Nicolaus Methonenſis, and others. Euſeb. Emiſ. ſeu Fauſt. Regin. hom. in fest. S. Ioan. Bed. homil. in id. dixit Ieſus Petro ſequere me. Haymo Homil. 2. in festo S. Ioan & Homil.
                        
1. hiſtor. ſcholastic. cap. 106. Smarag. Abb. in collect. in Euangel. in feſt. S. Ioan. Duran. l. 7. c. 42. de diu. offic. Honor. ſerm. in fest. S. Ioan. Vincent. l. 11. c. 44. Nichol. Methon. l. de corp. Christi. And we haue both Catholick & Proteſtant teſtimony for this, of our own nation, a preiſt of Eaton in his holy trauailes aboue 200. yeares ſince, and a proteſtant miniſter thus approuinge and relatinge from them: Ad occidentalem partem Eccleſiae, quae est in monte Sion, est lapis rubens prae altari, qui quidem lapis portatus erat de monte Sinay per manus Angelorum ad preces S. Thomae reuertentis ab India: ſuper quem celebrabat ſanctus Ioannes Euangelista coram beatiſsima virgine Maria Miſsam, per multos annos, post Aſcenſionem Domini. At the Weſt ende of the church which is in mount Sion, there is a redd ſtone ſtanding in ſteade of an altare, the which ſtone was tranſported thither from the mount Sinay by the hands of Angels, at the prayers of S. Thomas, when he returned from India: vpon this ſtone S. Iohn the Euangeliſt did celebrate and ſay Maſſe, before the bleſſed virgin Mary, many yeares after the Aſcenſion of our Lord. Gulielm. Way Etonenſis

presbyter. l. Itinerar· cap. loca ſancta montis Sinay. an. D. 1420. Hackluyts. booke of trauailes in Gul. Way cap. mount Sinay. And he was ſo daily deuoted to this holy ſacrifice, that as the auncient Anonymus writer of his and the other Apoſtles liues doth witnes, hee celebrated it, the very day he died, and was buried by the altare. Anonimus antiq. in vit. miracula & paſſ. Apostolorum in Ioanne cap. 10.
                     26. S. Paule the laſte of our holy writers of theſe myſteries, ſaith plainely by our proteſtants tranſlation. (1. Corinth. cap. 11.23.24.25.) I haue receaued of the Lord, that which alſo I deliuered vnto you, that the Lord Ieſus the ſame night in which he was betraied, tooke bread, and when hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it, and ſaid; Take, eate, this is my body which is broken for you: This doe in remembrance of mee, and after the ſame maner alſo hee take the cup, when he had ſupped, ſayinge; This cup is the new teſtament in my blood: this doe yee as often as yee drinke it, in remembrance of mee. Where wee ſee a double power & commaundement alſo of Chriſt vnto his Apoſtles, both to conſecrate and cōmunicate, both his body and blood: And

yet there is no commaundement in any Religion Catholick or Proteſtant, for any but preiſts to doe all theſe thinges, and to them onely when they offer the holy ſacrifice of Chriſts body and blood in Maſſe, for if at any other time in ſicknes or otherwiſe they communicate, they doe it only as other Catholick lay parſons doe; And many caſes there bee in the Religion of Proteſtants, in which communicants are not bounde to receaue in both kinds: and it is approued and enacted by the publicke ſtatute of all our Proteſtant Princes that euer were in England, Kinge Edward the ſixt, Queene Eliſabeth, and our preſent ſoueraigne King Iames, that euen in the firſt primatiue and vnſpotted times of Chriſtianitie the Chriſtians did very often communicate in one onely kinde. (Statut. parlament. 1. an. 1. Eduard. 6.1. Eliſabeth. & an. 1. Iacob·) which could not bee tolerable, if the commaundement of Chriſt had beene generall vnto all to communicate in both, as it was to his Apoſtles, and all maſſinge or ſacrificinge preiſts in them.
                     27. And to make it moſt euident in all proceedings, that the powers & commaundements

were communicated and giuen to preiſts onely, no parſons whatſoeuer Kinge or Caeſar but preiſts onely, and with proteſtants their miniſters which in their Religion cypher the places of preiſts, doe or may intermeddle with any of thoſe powers or commaunds of Chriſt, doe this, either in reſpect of his bleſſed body or blood, or howſoeuer wee will terme thoſe myſteries, and yet to them to whome they were committed, they are plaine commaundements imparatiue in all lāguages Greeke, Latine, Engliſh, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , facite, doe this, in the imparatiue and commaundinge moode, and maner of ſpeach: and ſo all men of whatſoeuer Religion doe vnderſtand them, and cannot poſſibly truely vſe them in any other meaninge. And after prouinge how the miſteries there deliuered, are the very body and blood of Chriſt, (1. Corinth. cap. 11. ver. 27.28.29.30.31.) although he had ſaid before, that hee had deliuered vnto them, that which hee receaued of Chriſt, and entreateth of the ſame, diuers verſes before, and in 11. or 12. after euen to the end of that chapter, yet not hauinge therein ſet downe the forme and order fully, how this

ſacrifice was to bee celebrated, he concludeth thus in that chapter: The rest I vvill ſet in order vvhen I come. (1. Corinth. c. 11. v.vlt 34.) reſeruing it to tradition, beeing to longe a worke to bee compriſed in an epiſtle.
                     28. Whereuppon S. Auguſtine expoundinge thoſe very words: caetera cum venero ordinabo. The other thinges I will order when I come, as hee readeth, writeth in theſe words. (Auguſtin. epistol. 118. ad I anuarium cap. 6. Tom. 2. operum eius.) vnde intelligi datur, quia multum erat, vt in epiſtola totum illum agendi ordinem inſinuaret, quem vniuerſa per orbem ſeruat Eccleſia, ab ipſo ordinatum eſſe, quod nulla morum diuerſitate variatur. Whence wee are giuen to vnderſtand, that it was to much for him to inſinuate in an epiſtle, all that whole order of celebration, which the vniuerſall church obſerueth in all the worlde, to bee there ordered of him, which is not varied with any diuerſitie. Where wee ſee plainlie, that by the teſtimony of S. Paul himſelfe warranted with this great authoritie, hee deliuered a forme of Maſſe vnto the church, and the church in S. Auguſtines

time ſtill continued it without any diuerſitie or difference to bee excepted againſt.
                     29. And where S. Paul writeth to S. Timothy according, to our proteſtants tranſlation: I exhort therefore, that first of all, ſupplications, prayers, interceſsions, and giuinge of thankes bee made for all men: for Kings and all that bee in authoritie. (1. Timoth. cap. 2. v. 1.2.) it is the common interpretation of the holy Fathers, and expoſitors of ſcriptures, that hee there alludeth to the order vſed in the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, where theſe things were obſerued, as appeareth in the moſte auncient Maſſes wee haue extant. So S. Remigius, S. Auguſtine, S. Bede, S. Bruno, S. Anſelme, Haymo, Petrus Lombardus and diuers others writinge vppon that place, expound them of the holy Maſſe. S. Remigius ſaith: Apostolus dirigens haec verba Timotheo, & in illo tradidit omnibus Epiſcopis & presbyteris omnique Eccleſiae, quando deberent Miſſarum ſolemnia celebrare, & pro omnibus orare. The Apoſtle directinge theſe wordes to Timothie, and in him deliuered to all Biſhops and preiſts, and to the whole church, when they ſhoulde celebrate the ſolemnities of

Maſſe, and pray for all. Remigius in 1. Timoth. cap. 2. Augustin. epistol. 59. quaest. 5. Beda in 1. Timoth. cap. 2. Bruno, Haimo, Petr. Lombard. & alij in eund. loc.
                     
                     30. And a little after: Quam formam vel exemplum, omnes Eccleſiae modo retinent: nam obſecrationes ſunt quicquid praecedit in Miſſarum ſolemnijs, vbi incipit Sacerdos conſecrare myſteria corporis & ſanguinis Domini. Which forme or example all churches doe ſtill retaine: for obſecrations are all whatſoeuer it ſaid in the ſolemnities of the Maſſe, vntill that place where the preiſt beginneth to cō
                        ſecrate the miſteries of the body, and blood of Chriſt, ſayinge: Te igitur clementiſsime Pater. (Which bee the firſt words of the canon.) Orations or prayers are thoſe which the preiſt vttereth in the conſecratiō of the Eucharist, euen to the fractiō of the body of our Lord: that is, when the preist putteth one part of the host into the chalice. Postulations are the bleſſiings, which the Bishop ſaith ouer the people inuocating vpon them, the name of God. The giuing of thanks are prayers which the preiſt, after the people haue receaued, doth render vnto God the Father, who hath offered vnto them, the miſtery of the body and blood of his

ſonne for theire ſaluation. Which all moſte word by worde and in the ſame ſence is deliuered by S. Auguſtine in his 59. epiſtle. quaeſtione 5. Tom. 5. where he ſetteth downe the whole order, and maner of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, as wee now vſe it, and expoundeth S. Paules wordes to that purpoſe, as the other holy and learned recited Father likewiſe doth.
                     31. And to make all ſure by our proteſtants themſelues, they aſſure vs that S. Trophimus mentioned by S. Paul, was his diſciple, and left by him at Arles in Fraunce, when hee paſſed from Rome to Spaine, althoughe Eiſengrenius proueth from the french Annals and diuers antiquities, that he was diſciple both of S. Peter and S. Paul, B. Petri & Pauli diſcipulus. (Guliel. Eiſeng. centen. 1. part. 1. dist. 3. fol. 53.) And was of ſuch fame and renowne as Pope Zoſimus 1200. yeares ſince the Romane Martyrologe. (Zoſimus To. 1. concil. Martyrol. Roman. in S. Trophimo die 29. Decembris, the Magdeburgian Proteſtants with others teſtifie:) ex eius praedicationis fonte, tota Gallia fidei Rinulos accepit: out of the fountaine of his preaching all Fraunce receauing the channels

of faith. (Magd. centur. 1. l. 1. in Trophimo.) yet the auncient Brittiſh antiquitie ſuppreſſed by our proteſtants (of which before, and more herafter) is a ſufficient warrant and witneſſe, that hee deliuered and obſerued in Fraunce, a certaine forme and order of the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and the ſame was vſed and practiſed, alſo both at Rome and here in Britanie likewiſe at that time. M. S. Britan. antiq. pr. Stores in exordium.
                     
                     32. And the ſame is as euidently proued, from his renowned ſcholler S. Denis the Areopagite; Who in his booke of the eccleſiaſticall Hierarchie. (cap. 5.7. & epiſt. ad Demophil.) ſetteth downe the whole order of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, and how the preiſt behaued himſelfe at the holy altare, both before and after conſecration, how the catechumens, energumens, and publick penitents, were not permitted to bee preſent, but onely to the prayers which were before the oblation of the ſacrifice: He ſetteth down how bread and wine was propoſed on the altare, how bleſſed, conſecrated into the body & blood of Chriſt, and offered in ſacrifice. How greate reuerence

and prayer was alſo vſed vnto Chriſt vnder the externall ſpecies. O tu diuinum ſacratiſsimumque Sacramentum, obducta tibi per ſigna obſcuritatum, quaſi vela & integumenta, patefacta perſpicuè nobis ostende, mentiſque nostrae oculos ſingulari, & quae obtegi non poteſt, luce comple. Hee ſheweth how a memory of Saints is there made, mystica Sanctorum recitatio fit. He teacheth how the preiſt or Biſhop, prayed for the dead, for remiſſion of their ſinnes, and to come to glory. Precatur oratio illa diuinam clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam admiſſa peccata defuncto, eumque inluce ſtatuat, & regione viuorū. Which is as much as the Romā church now vſeth, in that holy ſacrifice of Maſſe. And hee remembreth how in the ende the preiſt acknowledgeth the dignitie of that holy ſacrifice, to bee ſo great, that he was vnworthy to offer it, but that Chriſt did both giue power and commaund to doe it, when hee ſaid to his Apoſtles, doe this in commemoration of mee. Religiosè ſimul, & vt Pontificem decet, poſt ſacras diuinorum operum laudes de ſacrificio, quod ipſius dignitatem ſuperat, ſe purgat, dum primò ad cum clamat, tu dixisti,

hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
                     
                     33. And how carefull, and diligent an obſeruer, and practiſer of this maſſing doctrine hee was, in act and deed, daily in his whole life, we may be aſſured by the worthie writers of his life and death, Hilduinus Abbot of S. Denis in Fraunce where hee was buried, about 800. yeares ſince, Roſwita or Roſwida, not longe after and others, who confidently and from publick teſtimony, write, that neither his ſtrict impriſonment in a dungeon could hinder him from performing this holy dutie, but there both perſuadinge the people preſent, and writinge vnto others abſent, to confirme them more, ſaid Maſſe in that vnfit place: & to proue how acceptable it was, Chriſt Ieſus with a multitude of Angels appeared vnto them all, with ſuch a light from heauen, as had beene ſeene, at the very time when they were to communicate, & comforted his holy Martir. Sed nec carcereis praeſul praeclarus in antris deſinit obſequium Domino perſoluere dignum: ſed docuit plebem studiosè conuenientem, ac celebrat ſacrae ſolitò ſolemnia Miſſae: Est vbi caelestem debebat frangere panem, lux noua tristifico ſubito fulgebat

in antro, in qua ſidereae regnator ſplendidus aulae ſcilicet angelica pariter comitante caterua apparens, charum conſolabatur amicum. Trithem. l. de ſcriptorib. in Hildonio. & Roſwida. Hilduinus Abb. in vita S. Dioniſij Areopag. cap. 29. Roswita l. de vit. S. Dioniſ. Areopag. & alijs.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE X. CHAPTER. How all the rest of the, Apoſtles in particular S. Andrew, Iames the great, Thomas, Iames the leſſe, Philip, Bartholomew, Symon, Thaddaeus, and Matthias, were ſacrificinge Preiſts, and Apostles, and vſually offered the ſacrifice of Maſſe.
                     NOw let vs come to the reſt of the holie Apoſtles which haue not in ſcriptures written of theſe miſteries, and proue of them all, and in order (except S. Peter the firſt, whom I haue promiſed to put in the laſt place) that in their ſacred functions, they offered the moſt holy ſacrifice of Maſſe. And firſt to begin with S. Andrew. It is a receaued opinion. Iodoc. Cocc. Tom. 2. l. 7. artic. 5. de purgator. that this holy Apoſtle

did firſt deliuer that forme of Maſſe, which was auntiently and from the beginninge vſed in the church of Conſtantinople, and after called the Maſſe of S. Iohn Chriſoſtome, the great and learned Patriarke of that place, becauſe it was enlarged by him, and is ſtil, as our proteſtants acknowledge, vſed to this day in the churches of Greece. Edwin. Sands relation of Religion. cap. 53. or 54. And that hee himſelfe did vſually and daily offer this moſte ſacred oblation of Chriſts body and blood, wee haue moſte auncient and vndeniable teſtimonies, whether we will profeſſe our ſelues Catholicks or proteſtants in Religion; for both theſe agree in this, that S. Andrew was martyred by Aegeus Procōſull of Achaia in the citie Patras: and they celebrate his day of feſtiuitie, vppon the laſte of Nouember. And they doe, or ought if they make not fictions of theire owne, deduce the hiſtory of his paſſion from the auncient penners and relators thereof, which bee the preiſts and deacons of Achaia, which were eye witneſſes and preſent at the ſame. S. Cyprian, or whoſoeuer was the auncient Author of the booke amonge his workes, de duplici

Martyrio. The old Anonimus who wrote the booke of the Apoſtles liues, publiſhed by the learned Biſhop of Vienna Fredericus Nauſea, S. Simeon Metaphraſtes himſelf, a learned grecian and auncient of thoſe parts, S. Iuo, S. Bernard, Algerus, the auncient writer of the liues of Saints, the whole latine church in the publicke ſeruice of the feaſt of S. Andrew the Apoſtle, the auncient Breuiary of the church of Salisbury in England, and others are witneſſes, that S. Andrew beeinge perſuaded and threatned by Aegeus the Proconſull, to ſacrifice to the Pagan Gods, anſwered publicklie vnto him in theſe wordes: Ego omnipotenti Deo, qui vnus & verus eſt, immolo quotidie, non taurorum carnes, nec hircorum ſanguinem, ſed immaculatum Agnum in altari: cuius carnem poſteaque omnis multitudo credentium manducauerit, Agnus qui ſacrificatus est, integer perſeuerat & viuus. I doe daily ſacricrifice to God almightie, the onely true God, not the fleſh of bulls, nor blood of goates, but the immaculate Lambe vppon the altar, whoſe fleſh after all the multitude of beleeuers haue eaten, the Lambe that is ſacrificed, remayneth whole and liuinge.

                        Breuiar. & Miſſale Rom. Martyrolog. Rom. Bed. & Vſuard. vlt. Nou. Proteſtant comm: Booke in calendar. Nouem. & infeſt. vlt. Nouem. Cooper v. Andreas Godw. conuerſ. Magdeb. cent. 1. in Andr. Apostolo. Act. S. Andrea per Presb. & Diacon. Achaiae. Ciprian. l. de duplic. Mart. Anonim. in mirac. vit. & Paſſ. Apost. in S. Andrea. Sim. Metaphr. in S. Andr. S. Iuo Carnoten. Epiſc. ſerm. de Sacram. dedicat. ſer. 4. Algerus contra Berengar. S. Bernard. apud Franciſc. Feuarden. annotat. in Frenaeum l. 4. contra haer. cap. 32. pag. 361. Iacob. Genuen. Epiſ in vit S. Andrea vlt. Nouem. Breu. Eccleſiae Salisbur. ibidem.
                     
                     2. Thus it is euident that S. Andrewe the Apoſtle did offer this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and euery day: and that the ſacrifice was Chriſt himſelf the true Lambe of God that taketh away ſinnes Amonge the holy auncient and renowned witneſſes, S. Iuo ſupr. ſer. 4. ſpeakinge of this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe thus wtiteth: In memoriam veniunt verba beati Andreae Apoſtoli, quibus aſſerit & in caelis eſſe corpus Domini, & de altari poſse ſumi corpus Domini. Cuius inquit carnes cum ſint comeſtae in terris à populo, ipſe tamen in caeleſtibus ad dexteram Patris integer perſeuerat

& viuus. The wordes of S. Andrew the Apoſtle doe come to memory, in which hee affirmeth, that the body of our Lord is in heauen, and yet may his body bee receued from the altare. Whoſe fleſh ſaith hee, when it is eaten of the people on earth, yet he perſeuereth whole and aliue in heauen, at the right hand of his Father. And this giueth full ſatisfaction for S. Andrew, that hee was a ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſt.
                     3. The next in order is S. Iames the brother of S. Iohn the Apoſtle, and Euangeliſt, martired by Kinge Herode as we reade in the 12. chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles, where our proteſtants thus reade: About that time, Herod the Kinge stretched forth his hand to vexe certaine of the church. And he killed Iames the brother of Iohn with the sword. (Actor. cap. 12. ver. 1.2.) Which his timely death hath taken from him ſuch ample memory as is deliuered of ſome other Apoſtles that liued longer, in hiſtories. But beeing aſſured before by all kinde of teſtimonies, that he was one of them to whom our bleſſed Sauiour gaue power, and commaundement to offer the holy ſacrifice

of his body and blood, that he there being conſecrated a preiſt, and one of the three Apoſtles which our Sauiour moſt loued, and hee him, it would be more then impietie to thinke, hee either neglected the power, or brake the commaundement of his Maſter, whome he ſo much loued, and loued him againe; for ſo he ſhould not haue beene ſo principall a frend and louer of Chriſt, but his profeſſed enemy, in continually violatinge his lawe, and commaundement. And being both brother to S. Iohn, and conſecrated and ordeyned preiſt at the ſame time, in the ſame maner, and order as hee was, how could S. Iohn be a maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſt, ſo vndeniably as is proued of him, except S. Iames were alſo in the ſame degree?
                     4. Further it is proued that S. Iames liued ſometime before his death & was martired in Hieruſalem, where the publick ſacrifice of the Chriſtian church at that time was the holy Maſſe: for as Hieremias Patriarke of Conſtantinople proueth againſt the Proteſtants in his cenſure, and others. The holy Maſſe is a ſacrifice instituted of Christ. (Hierem. in cenſura. Concil. 6. Conſtantinop.)

in memory and commendation of all his mercy and humilitie ſustained for our ſoules. Saint Iames the Apoſtle, called our Lords brother, firſt reduced into order that liturgie, and ſacrifice, beeinge ſo inſtructed of Chriſt to doe it, in all parts of that holy ſacrifice, nothing els is handled, but an vniuerſall order of thinges, which our Sauiour vndertooke for our redemption. Then this S. Iames alſo a cheife Apoſtle of the ſame Chriſt, conſecrated with the ſame ſolemnitie the other was, and liuinge and dyinge in the ſame place, a great Saint and Martyr as the oother was, could not poſſibly differ from him in this point: nor from the reſt of the Apoſtles, all of them by all conſent before, agreeinge in theſe miſteries. And it is an hiſtoricall approued veritie, by all antiquities, that theſe few diſciples which this S. Iames conuerted in Spaine, and brought with him to Hieruſalem, were directed and ſent thither againe by S. Peter the Apoſtle, that great maſſinge preiſt (as hereafter) and they were ſuch as he that ſent them in that reſpect.
                     5. S. Thomas followeth next in Apoſtolick order, how hee was a ſacrificinge

and maſſinge preiſt I haue ſhewed before in S. Iohn. And this holy Apoſtle preachinge in India, altares and diuers other pregnant arguments of his ſaying Maſſe in thoſe parts are found amonge them there. Christiani qui Indias frequentarunt, quas olim diui Thomae praedicatio peragrauit, altaria Christiana cum reliquijs quibuſdam Imaginis Virginis in ſpeluncis inuenerunt. Florimund. Raem. de origine Haer. l. 8. cap. 12. And Franciſcus Aluares. (de reb. Ind.) that liued longe in thoſe parts, writeth, that their Annals teſtifie, they had a church built in their contry within ten yeares of Chriſts Aſcenſion, which church there ſtill remayneth, and beareth the name, as euer it did, the church of our Lady of Mount Sion, and the reaſon why it is ſo called, is becauſe the ſtone where of the altar was builded, was brought thither from Mount Sion. The ſame is proued by others, and proteſtants themſelues, further declaringe the maner of their ſaying Maſſe, ſtill continued with great reuerence, and deuotion; teachinge how they neuer ſay Maſſe without incenſe, and three cleargie men, a preiſt, deacon, and ſubdeacon, and they deriue their Religion

from S. Thomas the Apoſtle. An other, an Engliſh Proteſtant miniſter from experienced trauailers, and antiquitie writeth: est Capella Indorum: there is a Chappell of theſe Indians conuerted by S. Thomas in Mount Caluary at Hieruſalem, where onely the pilgrims of India, by theire preists ſinge Maſſe, after their order conſecrating and makinge, conficientes, the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, of bread and wine. They behaue themſelues with greateſt attention, reuerence, humilitie, and deuotion. Therfore wee cannot doubt but S. Thomas taught, and practiſed theſe miſteries, both there, and whereſoeuer hee liued and preached. Edw. Grim. booke of eſtates pag. 1088.1089.201.203. Sebast. Munster. l. 6. cap. 57. vide multos apud Gul. Eiſengr. centen. 1. fol. 168. Rich. Hackluits booke of trauailes in mount Sinay. Sir Iohn Mandeuil pag. 36. cap. 14.
                     6. Concerning S. Iames commonly called S. Iames the leſſe, and brother of our Lord, whoſe place is ordinarily numbred next, I haue ſpoken before, how, and by Chriſts appointment, as the greeke writers ſay, hee compoſed a forme of Maſſe, and deliuered it to the churches, where hee liued,

and ſo muſt needs bee a profeſſor and practiſer of that, which he taught to others; and conſequently conſecrated maſſing and ſacrificinge preiſts, to performe the ſame. His Maſſe approued of in the ſixt generall councell held at Conſtantinople, as our proteſtants allow, is ſtil extant, and known to all learned men, in all things of ſubſtance agreeing with the vſuall preſent miſſale of the Roman churche. Cenſura Oriental. Hieremias Patriarch Conſtantinapol. ib. cap. 10. Proclus S. Nichol. Methon. & Beſſarion apud Gul. Eiſengr. cent. 1. fol. 186. Concil. general. 6. can. 52. can. Apost. 3. Miſſa 5. Iacobi in Biblioth. Patr. & al. Morton apol. part. 2. pag. 8.
                     7. Now followeth S. Philip, which followed the ſame opinion, and practiſe of the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe: for wee doe not onlie often reade in generall, that hee founded churches, and conſecrated Biſhops, preiſts, deacons and other inferior cleargie men, which none but they which hold a ſacrificinge preiſthood, and ſacrifice of Chriſts body and blood in holy Maſſe, allowe: But S. Simeon Metaphraſtes liuinge where S. Philip preached, with others teſtifieth

in particular: Sacerdotes & altaria vbique in illis locis statuit & construxit, pro ſacrificijs illis quae fiebant in daemonum altaribus, ſacroſancti fecit in eis peragi ſacram miſterij celebrationem. Hee appointed preiſtes and builded altars, euery where in thoſe places, and for thoſe ſacrifices which were vſed to bee offered vppon the altars of deuils, hee cauſed the holy celebration of the ſacred miſtery to bee perfected. Anonimus. ſupr. l. in Paſſ. Apostol. in S. Philippo Gul. Eiſengr. centur. 1. fol. 157.158. & alibi. Simeon Metaph. in S. Philippo Apostolo Sur. die 1. Maij. And the proteſtant Sebaſtian Munſter with others teacheth, how the Abiſſines teſtifie from their Apoſtolick antiquities, and conſtitutions of the Apoſtles themſelues, preſerued by continuall tradition with them, that amonge other miſteries of Chriſtian Religion deliuered by them, this of the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and Chriſts ſacred body and blood offered therin, was one, and that S. Philip the Apoſtle was principally theire Apoſtle, and preached theſe things to them. Aſſerunt imprimis Philippum Apoſtolum apud eos praedicaſſe Euangelium. Sebaſtian. Munst. Coſmograph.

l. 6. cap. 56.
                     8. Touchinge S. Bartholomew, we read that hee preached in India, where that knowne maſſinge Apoſtle taught, and left that holy ſacrifice, ſo that two Apoſtles if they had not beene confirmed in grace, & free from error (as all agree they were) no Chriſtian will thinke they could preache and practiſe contrary doctrines, in ſo great miſteries, to, and in one people, place, and time, and wee further reade, that S. Bartholomew cōſecrated many preiſts, which (as before) muſt needs be ſacrificing maſſing preiſts. And he made Kinge Polimius a maſſinge Biſhop, and maker of maſſinge preiſts, continuinge ſo 20. yeares, beſides others. Breuiar. Rom. in fest. S. Bartholom. Abd. cert. Apoſtol. l. 8. Antonin. part. 1. titul. 6. Petr. de natal. l. 7. cap. 103. Martyr
                              •
                           
                           log. Rom. die 24. Aug. Dion. Areopag. l. miſtic. Theolog. Euſeb. l. 5. hist. c. 10. Origen. in Gen. Hieron. l. de ſcript: in pauten.
                     
                     9. S. Simon and Iude could not bee of any other profeſſion opinion or practiſe in this point, beeing both with the reſt of the Apoſtles conſecrated ſacrificinge preiſts, and S. Simon ſo zelous a louer of Chriſt,

as our proteſtants write, that hee thereby was named Zelotes, by a kinde of excellency, and S, Iude as he himſelfe is witnes, in his epiſtle, was frater Iacobi, brother to S. Iames, that notorious maſſinge preiſt, and Apoſtle as is before declared: and S. Simon is generally taught, to haue conuerſed moſt in thoſe contries, where S. Marke that maſſinge Euangeliſt practiſed, and plāted that doctrine. And S. Iude firſt preached in Iury diuers yeares, where his maſſing Brother S. Iames was ſo renowned for writinge the forme of this holy ſacrifice, and both practiſing it himſelfe, and deliueringe it to others. And they conſecrated Abdias Biſhop of Babilon, who by his owne, and all teſtimonies, was a maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſt, and Biſhop, who could make and conſecrate no others but ſuch as hee was, and had authoritie to doe. Socrat. l. 1. cap. 15. Niceph. hist. l. 4. c. 32. Fortunat. Godwin. Conuerſ. of Britanie. Iud. Epiſc. c. 1. v. 1. Martyrolog. Rom. die 28. Octob. Bed. & Vſuard. ib. Stowe histor. Godwin. Conu. of Brit. Nicephor. l. 2. cap. 4. Ado Treuer. & Bed. 5. cal. Nouemb. Nicephor. lib. 2. cap. 40. Guliel. Eiſengr. centen. 1. part. 5. diſt.
                        
7. fol. 168. Abd. certam. Apost. l. 4. Antonin. part. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 9. cap. 115. Abdias l. de certam. Apost. l. 6. Iul. African, praefat. histor. Apostol. Anonym. in S. Bartholom.
                     
                     10. S. Matthias beeing choſen into the place of Iudas the traitor, by the other Apoſtles, could bee of no other iudgement, and Religion herein, then they were. And the places hee preached in, giue teſtimony vnto this: for whether wee will ſay with Sophronius, Dorothus, and Nicephorus, that hee preached in Aethiopia, wee haue heard that maſſinge Apoſtles and preiſts preached there: or with our auncient Martyrologes, that hee was martired in Iury, S. Iames and the other Apoſtles before haue proued hee muſt needs hee a maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſt, and execute that holy function, liuing and dying there. Sophron. apud Hier. l. de ſcrip. Eccleſ. Doroth. in Synopſ. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 40. Martyrolog. Rom. 24. Febr. Bed. Ado. & Vſuard. ib. Iſidor. l. de vit. & obit. Sanct. cap. 81.
                     11. To conclude with S. Barnabas, extraordinarily called to bee an Apoſtle, as S. Paul, hee is commonly taken to bee the firſt compoſer of the Maſſe of Milane, in

Italy, named S. Ambroſe his Maſſe, in reſpect of certaine additions of his vnto it, & vſed with great priuiledge in that church, to this day, not differinge in any materiall point from the preſent order of ſaying Maſſe vſed in the reſt of the Romane Latine, or Greeke church at this time, or wherſoeuer. Traditio Eccl. Mediolanen. in Ital. Iodoc. Cocc. l. 6. To. 2. articul. 9. lib. 7. artic. 5. And this Maſſe was, as our proteſtants themſelues acknowledge, in ſuch vſe and credit in the Latine church, that it was more vſuall then that called S. Gregories Maſſe, vntill the time of Pope Adrian the firſt about the yeare of Chriſt 780. Their words bee theſe. (Io. Balaeus in act. Roman. Pont. lib. 3 in Hadrian. 1.) Miſſarum ritus à magno Gregorio editus, occidentalibus Eccleſijs imperauit. Pope Adrian commaūded the order of the Maſſe publiſhed by Gregory the greate, to bee vſed of the weſt churches, till which time S. Barnabas and S. Ambroſe Maſſe ſtill vſed at Millane were more vſuall, as an other thus writeth. (Foxe Tom. 1. act. and Monum. pag. 130) Pope Adrian the first ratified and confirmed the order of Saint Gregories Maſse, aboue the order of S. Ambroſe Maſſe,

for vnto this time, which was about the yeare of our Lord 780. the Liturgie of S. Ambroſe was more vſed in the Italian churches. Therefore there is no difficultie but S. Barnabas as the reſt of the Apoſtles, was alſo a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE XI. CHAPTER. How S. Peter the cheife Apostle, and firſt founder of the church of Christ in this our kingedome, was a ſacrificinge, maſsinge preiſt, deliuered a forme of Maſſe to the church, conſecrated many maſsinge preiſts in this part of the world nere vnto vs, and ſome of this kingdome.
                     NOw laſtely to come to S. Peter, the prime and cheife of the Apoſtles, hee could not bee at difference with the reſt in this, but muſt needs bee a maſſinge preiſt as they were, and ſo for this purpoſe is it little, materiall whether this contry receaued the faith from him, or any other of the Apoſtles. But becauſe both Catholicks, and proteſtants agree. (Gul. Cambden in Britan. Theatr. of great Brit. l. 6. controuerſ. hiſtor.

To. 1. in S. Petro.) that both Greeke and Latine antiquities giue that vnto him, as is lately proued at large, hee muſt alſo bee the firſt inſtitutor of our eccleſiaſticall Hierarchie, in conſecratinge vnto vs, diuers holy Biſhops, and preiſts, which that is deliuered already, proueth to haue beene maſſing Biſhops, and preiſts, and by thoſe ſacrificinge Biſhops, and his ſacrificinge ſucceſſors, our preiſts and Biſhops were euer ſacred maſſinge Biſhops, and preiſts vnto theſe daies, of innouation, as will manifeſtlie appeare in all ages, herafter by this treatiſe. For, beſides that, which is ſaid before, how all the Apoſtles were maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, and all the other Apoſtles and Euangeliſts beſides S. Peter, wee haue of him in particular, more and moſte credible witneſſes, then are needfull to be alleadged. S. Iſidor ſaith. Ordo Miſſae vel orationum, quibus oblata Deo ſacrificia conſecrantur, primum à S. Petro eſt inſtitutus, cuius celebrationem vno eodemque modo vniuerſus peragit orbis. The order of Maſſe; or of the praiers by which the ſacrifices offered vnto God are conſecrated, was firſt inſtituted by S. Peter, whoſe celebration the whole world

obſerueth in one, and the ſame maner. Iſodor. l. 1. de officijs cap. 15. de Miſſa & orationibus.
                     
                     2. Our holy auncient learned contriman, S. Albinus, or Alcuinus by others, purpoſely entreatinge of this moſt bleſſed ſacrifice, and the ceremonies thereof, thus writeth: Celebratio Miſsae in commemorationem Paſsionis Christi peragitur, ſic enim ipſe praecepit Apostolis, tradens eis corpus & ſanguinem ſuum, dicens hoc facite in meam commemorationem, hoc eſt in memorian Paſsiones mea. Tanquam diceret, quod pro veſtro ſalute paſſus ſum, ad memoriam reuocate. Hanc Petrus Apostolus primus omnium Antiochiae dicitur celebraſſe. The celebration of Maſſe is done in commemoration of the Paſſion of Chriſt, for ſo hee gaue commaundement vnto his Apoſtles, when he deliuered vnto them his body and blood, ſaying doe this in commemoration, which is in memory of my paſſion: as though hee had ſaid, recall vnto memory that I ſuffered for your ſaluation. This Maſſe S. Peter the Apoſtle is ſaid firſt to haue celebrated at Antioche. Albinus alij Alcuinus l. diuin. offic. cap. de celebrat. Miſſae.
                     
                     
                        3. Egbertus writinge how the court of the Kinge, Regalis aula, at Antioch was in the time of S. Peters beeinge there made a Chriſtian church, amonge other holy functions S. Peter exerciſed in it, hee ſaith hee ordinarily ſaid Maſſe, in qua communiter populum docuit, & Miſsas celebrauit. (Egbert. Abb. ſerm. de incremento & manifestat. Cathol. fide.) And againe. (ſerm. 10.) Sacerdotalem ordinem nos accepimus à Romana Eccleſia, Romana autem Eccleſia, ab Apoſtolo Petro, Petrus à Chriſto, Chriſtus à Deo Patre, qui vnxit eum oleo laetitiae, hoc eſt Spiritu Sancto prae participibus ſuii, & iurauit dicens ad cum, tu es Sacerdos in aeternum, ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedeih. Verus Sacerdos erat Dominus noſter Ieſus Chriſtus. Ipſe inuiſibiliter dedit corpus & ſanguinem ſuum, quando coram diſcipulis panem & vinum in cana benedixit benedictione calesti; & fecit ſua admirabili potestate vt ſub ſpecie eiuſdem panis, & vini ſumerent de manibus ipſius corpus & ſanguinem eius. Ipſe quoque ſicut pollicitus est, cum Eccleſia ſua est, vſque ad conſummationem ſaeculi, & quotidie inuiſibiliter offers per manus Eccleſiae Deo Patri pro ſalute mundi, corpus & ſanguinem ſuum ſub ſpecie panis &

vini. Propterea dictus est Sacerdos ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech, qui erat Rex Salem, & Sacerdos Dei ſummi, & oblationem fecit Deo ex pane & vino. Dominus Ieſus Christus diſcipulos ſuos fecit veros Sacerdotes. Dedit eis poteſtatem conficiendi corpus & ſanguinem ſuum ſub ſpecie panis & vini, quando dixit ad eos. (Luc. 22.) hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis tradetur; Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Omnem denique potestatem quae ad Sacerdotij officium, & ad epiſcopalem dignitatem ſpectat, ab illo acceperunt. Eandem autem poteſtatem ſinguli ſucceſſoribus relinquerunt, in illis terris, & in illis Eccleſijs, quas eis Dominus conuertendas, & gubernandas delegauit. Et vt nunc de reliquis taceam, Beatus Petrus princeps Apostolorum in Romana vrbe, presbyteros, & Epiſcopos ordinauit, & omnem poteſtatem quae ad officia eorum pertinebat, eis dedit, ſicut ipſe à Domino Ieſu Christo acceperat.
                     
                     4. We haue receued preiſtly order from the church of Rome, and the church of Rome receaued it from the Apoſtle Peter, Peter receaued it from Chriſt, Chriſt receaued it from God his Father, who anointed him with oyle of gladnes, that is with

the holy ghoſt aboue his partakers, and ſwore, ſaying vnto him. (pſal. 10.) thou art a preiſt for euer, after the order of Melchiſedech. Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was a true preiſt. Hee did inuiſibly giue his body and blood, when before his diſciples at his ſupper hee bleſſed breade and wine, and made by his admirable power that vnder the ſpecies of the ſame bread & wine, they ſhould receaue from his hands, his body and blood. Hee alſo, as hee hath promiſed, is with his church vnto the ende of the world, and doth daily inuiſibly offer by the hands of the church, to Go
                           •…
                         
                        
                           •…
                        he Father for the ſaluation of the worlde, his body and blood vnder the forme of bread and wine. Therfore hee is called a preiſt after the order of Melchiſedech, who was Kinge of Salem, and preiſt of the high God, and made offeringe vnto God of breade and wine. Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt made his diſciples preiſtes. Hee gaue them power to make his bodie and blood vnder the forme of breade, and wine, when hee ſaid vnto them. (Luc. 22.) this is my body, which ſhall bee giuen for you: doe this in my commemoration. Finally they receaued from him all power,

which belōgeth to the office of preiſthood, and epiſcopall dignitie. And euery one of them, left the ſame power to their ſucceſſors, in thoſe contries, and in thoſe churches, which our Lord commended to them to conuert and gouerne. And at this time to bee ſilent of the reſt, S. Peter cheife of the Apoſtles in the city of Rome ordeyned preiſts, and deacons, and gaue them all power which apperteined to their offices, as hee himſelfe had receaued from our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                     5. And thus from S. Peter deduceth a continuall ſucceſſion of ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops in all this Weſt part of the world; And amonge others teacheth how particularly this our kingdome of England had our maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops by that deduction from S. Peter, and his ſucceſſors in the Apoſtolicke ſee of Rome. Stephanus Edueriſts. (l. de Sacramento Altaris.) a learned Biſhop many hundred yeares ſince, ſaith: ſicut Magiſter docuerat, Apostoli ſe & alios communicando conſecrationem corporis & ſanguinis Domini facere caeperunt, & fieri per vniuerſas Eccleſias praedicando instituerunt. As Chriſt theire

maiſter had taught, ſo the Apoſtles communicatinge themſelues, and others, began to make the conſecration of the body and blood of Chriſt, and by preachinge inſtituted it to bee done through all churches: and ſheweth how the canon of the Maſſe was vſed by S. Peter, & the reſt from the beginninge. Primo ficbat canonis mysterium. Before any thinge was added by the Popes of Rome. And Paſchaſius Rathertus plainely ſaith, it was the common opinion in his time, that S. Peter was the Author of the canon of Maſſe: reſpice in Sacramentorum celebratione, instituente beato Petro, vt credimus, quid orat Sacerdos in canone. And then hee addeth particularly, that by S. Peters inſtitution, the preiſt praieth, v
                              •…
                            fiat corpus & ſanguis dilectiſsimi filij tui Domini noſtri Ieſu Christi: That it may bee made the body, and blood of thy moſte beloued ſonne, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Paſchaſius Ratbert. l. de corpore & ſanguine Christi.
                     
                     6. I reade in an auncient Anonymus Manuſcript hiſtory of this kingdome. (M. S. hist. incipit in principio creauit Deus. cap nomina ſummorum Pontificum.) post Paſsionem Chriſti anno ſequenti beatus Petrus Apostolus

tenuit cathedram ſacerdotalem in partibus orientis annis quatuor, vbi primam Miſſam celebrauit. Deinde venit Antiochiam, vbi cathedram adeptus, ſedit annis ſeptem, inde venit Roneam. The next yeare after the Paſſion of Chriſt, S. Peter the Apoſtle held his preiſtly chaire in the parts of the eaſt foure yeares, where hee firſt celebrated Maſſe. From thence hee came to Antioch, where obteyning the chaire, hee ſat ſeuen yeares, from thence hee came to Rome. The auncient Engliſh hiſtory, commonly called Caxtons hiſtory, becauſe printed by him, thus teſtifieth: Peter the first Pope was ableſſed man, and glorious Apostle of Chriſt, hee was head of the church (after S. Hierome) 37. yeares, and he held his Bishoprick in the easte fiue yeares, and hee ſaid Maſſe. hee made our Lords body, then after hee came to Antioch. old English hiſtor. published by Caxton. part. 4. an. D. 34.
                     7. Martianus Polonus hath the ſame words, with our Manuſcript hiſtory before cited. Walfridus Strabo 800. yeares ſince writeth, how the Romans receaued the vſe and obſeruations of their Maſse (common to the weſtern world) from S. Peter the cheifest

of the Apoſtles. Martin. Polon. in ſupputat. tempor. col. 27. in S. Petro. Walafrid. Strab. l. de obſeruat. cap. 22. The like hath S Clement ſcholler and ſucceſſor to S. Peter, Comeſtor, Ioannes Belethus, Pope Innocentius the third, Polychronicon, Ioannes Cantabrigienſis, Petrus de natalibus, Heſichius, Nicholaus Cabaſilla, Germanus S. Beda, S. Hierome, Theonas, Caſſianus. S. Anacletus, who was made preiſt by S. Peter, as hee himſelfe witneſſeth, S. Epiphanius, Ionas Aurelienſis, our learned cō
                        tryman, with diuers others, cited by Eiſengrenius and others. And to take the warrant of Proteſtants with vs, for this veritie: firſt wee haue the teſtimony of the Magdeburgians from Martinus Polonus, and others, in quibuſdam chronicis vt Martini & aliorum, not onely that S. Peter ſaid Maſſe, but in ſome ſort the order thereof. Our firſt Engliſh Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury expreſſely acknowledgeth, that S. Peter ſaid Maſſe both in the easte, Miſſam dictā à Petro in orientalibus regionibus, and after hee came into the weſt alſo, and that, illius traditio à Christi primo instituto ducentis amplius annis in prima Eccleſia durauit. The order

of Maſſe which S. Peter vſed & taught, continued in the primatiue church aboue 200. yeares from the inſtitution of Chriſt vntill the time of Pope Zepherine. Clem. Rom. l. 10. Recognit. histor. ſcholaſt. cap. 7. in act. Apostol. Io. Belethus l. de offic. diuin. cap. 124. Innocent. 3. Praefat. l. 1. Polychronic. l. 4. cap. 6. Ioannis Cantabrigien. in pupill. oculi. c. 8. Petrus de natalib. l. 4. cap. 108. Heſichius Hieroſol. in act. cap. 20. & cap. 23. Leuit. l. 6. Nichol. Cabaſs. c. 28. de Miſſ. Germ. Conſtantinp. in can. Miſſ. Anaclet. epiſt. 2. & al. apud Eiſengren. centen. 1. fol. 116.117. Magdeburg. 
                              •…
                           ent. 1. l. 2. cap. 6. col. 500. Math. Parker. antiquit. Britannie. pag. 47. cap. 17.
                     8. And this Pope by this great proteſtants confeſſion, was ſo far from chaunginge any eſſentiall thinge therin, to make it worſe, that to inſiſt in his wordes: donec eam Zepherinus 16. Romanus Pontifex quorundam ſuaſionibus ad pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare voluit: vntill Zepherine the ſixteenth Pope of Rome by the perſuaſions of ſome would chaunge that Maſſe to a more excellent matter and forme. And to put vs out of doubt that Pope and S. Zepherine did make no chaunge or alteration

of this S. Peters Maſſe, now after two hundred yeares, in proteſtants iudgement, but that which rather honored, then in any reſpect diſgraced this holy ſacrifice, all the chaunge which this Proteſtant Archbiſhop findeth made herin by this holy Pope, is this, by his owne teſtimony, that where before woddē challices were vſed in ſome places, in thoſe times of perſecution and neceſſitie, this Pope (to vſe this proteſtants words the 16. Pope of Rome) constituted that Maſſes should bee celebrated with patens of glaſſe. Zepherinus 16. Romanus Epiſcopus, patents vitreis Miſſas celebrari constituit. (Matth. Parker ſupr. cap. 18. pag. 47.) Which an other Engliſh Proteſtant purpoſely entreating of ſuch thinges, thus expreſſeth: ſanguinis Christi conſecrationem in vit
                              •…
                           eo calice, non ligneo, vt antea, fieri debere statuit. Pope Zepherine conſtituted, that the conſecration of the blood of Chriſt ſhould bee made in a chalice of glaſſe, & not of wood, as before was vſed. Robertus Barns in vita Pontific. Roman. in Seuer. alij Zepherin. And further: Cum Epiſcopus celebraret Miſſae ſacra, iuſsit omnes presbyteros adeſſe. Hee commaunded that all the preiſts ſhould be preſent,

when the Biſhop celebrated the ſacrifice of Maſſe.
                     9. This is all S. Zepherine altered in this Maſſe of S. Peter, by theſe proteſtants own graunt: Therefore it is ſufficiently agreed vpon both by Catholicks and the beſt learned proteſtants, that according to the common opinion in that reſpect, S. Peter did not onely and vſually ſay Maſſe, beeinge a maſſing and ſacrificing preiſt, by his preiſtlie conſecration, but as the great Apoſtle of Chriſt compoſed an order, or forme of ſaying Maſſe, and deliuered it to the church to practiſe, and it was ſo accordingly receaued, and practiſed with the beſt learned & moſt holy men, the glorious lights of Gods houſe, in that primatiue and freely confeſſed vnſpotted dayes of Chriſtianitie. What this holy order was, and how it did not differ in any ſubſtantiall or eſſentiall matter from that Maſſe which the preſent Roman church now vſeth, I ſhall ſufficiently proue, with the good leaue, and likinge, both of Catholicke, & learned proteſtant authors, hereafter.
                     10. In the meane time, to make that which is already ſaid vnqueſtionable, S.

Peter euer left in the renowned places where hee liued, this holy doctrine, and practiſe of ſaying Maſſe. And whether ſoeuer he ſent any Apoſtolick men to preach the ghoſpell, this was a principall charge, & power bequeathed vnto them. For Hieruſalem where S. Peter firſt preached I haue ſpoken ſufficiently in S. Iames before, ſo for S. Marke at Alexandria, & the African parts. For Antioch alſo I haue written what might ſuffice, yet will I add ſomewhat of the glorious ſucceſſor of S. Peter there, S. Ignatius, whome S. Chriſoſtome the great ornament of that very church S. Felix, and Theodoret doe allowe mee to call, the immediate ſubſtitute or ſucceſſor of S. Peter there, and that by S. Peter hee was conſecrated Bishop, dextera beati Petri fuiſſe ordinatum Epiſcopum Eccleſiae Antiochenae, and, per magni Petri dexteram Pontificatum ſuſcepit. Though I doe not deny, but as S. Clement did to S. Linus, and Cletus at Rome, ſo S. Ignatius might and did giue place to Saint Euodius at Antioche. Whome great Authors therefore name S. Peters firſt ſucceſſor there. (S. Io. Chriſoſtom. orat. de tranſlat. corp. S. Ignatij Antioch. Felix. Rom. Pont.

epist. ad Zenon. Imper. in S. Synod. Conſt. act. 1. Theodoret. dialog. 1. Immutab. Euſeb. chr. & hist. l. 3. c. 16. Hieron. l. de ſcriptor. in Ignat. Ignat. epiſt. ad Antioch.
                     
                     11. This holy Saint and learned Father conſecrated by S. Peter, was ſo farr a maſſing preiſt, and earneſt practiſer and patron of this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, wherein Chriſts ſacred body and blood ar offered, that as not onely Theodoret and al Catholicks with him teach, but as the grand proteſtants Beza, Peter Martyr, Scultetus, Whitaker, and others as enforced doe graunt, that S. Ignatius did condemne Simon and Menander for hereticks, becauſe according to theire knowne hereſie againſt Chriſts true humanitie, they did reiect the ſacrifice of his body and blood in the ſacrifice of Maſſe: (Theodoret. Dial. 3. Beza Dial. Cyclops. Peter Mart. loc. 12. Miſſae. Scutlet. part. 1. Medull. patr, l. 1. Whitaker contra Camp. & al.) They doe not receaue (ſaith S. Ignatius) Euchariſt and ſacrifice, becauſe they doe not confeſse the Eucharist to bee the body of our Sauiour Ieſus Christ, which ſuffered for our ſinnes, which his Father by his bountie raiſed againe. (apud Theoderet. ſupr.) 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
                     12. The proteſtants of Magdeburg. (cent. 2. col. 113. cap. 6.) acknowledge (which no man can deny) in epistolis Ignatij vt hodie extant vtrimque legitur & ſacrificium immolare, & Miſſas facere. Wee reade both to offer ſacrifice, and ſay Maſſes in the epiſtles of Ignatius, as they are extant at this day. And our Engliſh Proteſtants confeſſe in theſe termes. (Sutcliſſe ſubu. pag. 32.) Wee reade in Ignatius this phraſe, offerre, and, ſacrificium 
                              〈◊〉
                           , to offer, and, immolate ſacrifice. And not to inſiſt vpon the words of S. Ignatius (Ignatius epiſtol. ad Smirnenſ.) 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which the olde tranſlation turneth, 
                           
                              •…
                           ſſam facere, to ſay Maſſe, the other Greeke wordes of this holy Saint which the Magdeburgian proteſtants doe allowe for his (Magdeburg ſupr.) 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         do in all lexicons and Greeke Authors, properly ſignifie ſacrificinge, or offering ſacrifice; and yet as that holy Father witneſſeth, this was in his time the act and office of Chriſtian preiſts. And

ſaith: this preiſthood, is the toppe or cheife of all good things amonge men, and hee that rageth againſt it, doth not reproach mā, but God and Christ his onely begotten Sonne, who by nature is the highest preist of God his Father, and hee teacheth how an externall ſacrifice offered vppon an externall materiall altar, is a proper act of this holy preiſthood. (Ignat. epiſtol. ad Hieron. epiſtol. ad Epheſ.) And that this ſacrifice in particular is, a medicine of immortality, a preſeruatiue againſt death, and procuringe life in God. The bread of God, heauenly food, which is the flesh of Chriſt, and blood of Chriſt. Ignat. epiſt. ad Trallian. ad Epheſ. & ad Roman.
                     
                     13. And if wee attend S. Peter in his iorney from the eaſt to theſe weſtern parts, as Rome, & from thence to this kingdome of Britanie, wee ſhall ſtill finde antiquities, and monuments, though ſo many ar loſte, that hee ſtill continued his holy function in ſayinge Maſſe, and neither there, nor here did or could conſecrate any but ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts. This holy Apoſtle cominge in his iorney to Rome to Piſa a famous citie of Hetruria in Italy, vppon the Sea coaſte, with his diſciples, we finde

auncient euidence, that he there ſaid Maſſe, & in honor & memory of him a church was there builded, and after his death dedicated vnto him, yearely frequented with great reſorte of pilgrims. (Martin. Pereſ l. de diuinis & Apost. traditionib. part. 3. fol. 70.) and part of the very altar whereon hee ſaid Maſſe is there ſtill kept in the ſacrarie of that church, with an antiquitie in authenticall old characters, testifying the truth herof. Certa parte altaris vbi celebrauit in ſacrario templi maioris venerabiliter recondita, vna cum teſtimonio literis valde authenticis & vetustis, hinc rei fidem minimè ſuſpectam facientibus. Alſo there is at Naples, as both Catholicks and proteſtants witnes, an old church, where S. Peter ſaid Maſſe, and the church thereuppon called: Ad diui Petri aram: At the altar of S. Peter. (Benedict. Fulco l. de locis antiq. Neopolitan. Lindan. Apolog. Iacob. Gualter. tabula chronographic. ſecult. 1. pag. 44.) at the entrance of the dore whereof, this inſcription ſtill remayneth to keepe it in remembrance.
                     
                        Siſte fidelis.
                        Et priuſquam templum ingrediaris,
                        Petrum ſacrificantem venerare,
                        
                           O faithfull man ſtay, and before thou enter into the church, worship Peter ſacrificinge.
                     
                     14. For Rome wee haue ſtill the portable and remoueable altare whereon S. Peter and many of his ſucceſſors there in perſecution ſaid Maſſe. (Antiquitat. Eccl. Lateran. Romae. Breuiar. Rom. die 9. Nouembr. in dedica. Baſilic. Saluatoris.) wee haue all his ſucceſſors holy Saints and Martyrs allmoſt 300. yeares by proteſtants confeſſion, all of them ſacrificinge, and maſſing preiſtes, as ſhall bee manifeſt in their times and places, and the foure firſt of them S. Linus Cletus, Clement, and Anacletus, conſecrated and ordered maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, by their holy Maſter and predeceſſor S. Peter himſelfe, as both they themſelues and other auncient authors teſtifie. We are warranted by our proteſtants with others before, that the forme and order of the ſacrifice of Maſſe which S. Peter compoſed, vſed, and deliuered to the church, was without any chaunge or alteration, continued in that church of Rome & theſe weſtern nations aboue 200. yeares: from whence it appeareth conſequently & plainlie by theſe proteſtante writers, that this

kingdome of Britanie receauing the faith from Rome in the Apoſtles times, and generally in the times of Pope Eleuthenus & Victor, who both were before S. Zepherine, in whoſe dayes they ſuppoſe ſome addition to haue beene vſed in that Maſſe, inuincibly prou
                           •…
                        th, that this kingdome with others did not onely admit Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſts in the firſt conuerſion thereof, but the very vnchaunged and vnaltered Maſſe of S. Peter himſelfe. We haue the Catalogues and hiſtories of the ſucceſſions of Biſhops in all renowned churches in this part of the world, which receaued theire firſt Apoſtles and Biſhops from S. Peter, that are preſerued, teſtifyinge that theſe their firſt Apoſtles, Preiſts, and Biſhops ſent vnto them from S Peter, were maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and Biſhops. If I could exemply but in halfe the number of them which were ſo ordered, and ſent by S. Peter into Italy, Spaine, Germanie, and Fraunce, I ſhould make to longe a digreſſion from the queſtion of Britanie, which I cheifly handle, write a forreine hiſtorie, and entertaine my reader ouer much in ſuch affaires: therefore I will only

inſiſt in ſome few of the cheifeſt, thoſe that came neareſt vnto vs, and with whom our Britans in al probable iudgement had moſt intercourſe, commerce, or acquaintance.
                     15. I begin with S. Maximinus, and S. Lazarus whom Chriſt raiſed to life, ſeeing to the firſt one of the 72. diſciples of Chriſt S. Peter commended S. Mary Magdalen, becauſe ſome proteſtants thinke S. Ioſeph of Aramathia that buried Chriſt, and liued, died, and was buried with vs in Britanie, came into Fraunce with them. (Guliel. Eiſengren. centenar. 1. part. 5. diſt. 3. fol. 148. Theater. of great Britanie l. 6. That the firſt ſaid Maſſe we are taught, becauſe we read, that hee did miniſter the holy Euchariſt, to S. Mary Magdalē after Maſſe was ended. Quod morienti S. Magdalenae poſt Miſſarum ſolemnia Sacroſanctam Euchariſtiam adminiſtraſſe legimus. Anton. Democh. l. 2. de Maſſ. contra Caluin. Petrus de natal. l. 5. Antonin. part. 1. Volater. l. 7. Guliel. Eiſengr. cent. 1. fol. 148. pag. 2. This for Aqueus where he was Biſhop. For S. Lazarus his beeing a maſſinge preiſt, and his ſaying of Maſſe, at Marſſiles in Fraunce, where hee was Biſhop, the holie vestiments in which hee ſaid Maſse beeing

to this day preſerued and to be ſeene in the cathedrall church there, ar ſufficient witnes. In Cathedrali Eccleſia, vestes in quibus Miſſam celebrabat, adhuc hodie conſcruantur & monstrantur. Demochar. l. 2. contr. Caluin. c. 32. Petr. de natal. l. 1. c. 72. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 19. Guliel. Eiſeng. centen. 1. fol. 149.
                     16. How famous S. Martial diſciple of S. Peter, and ſent into Fraunce by him, was in many parts of that nation ſo wel known to our Britiſh Druides in thoſe dayes, it is not vnknowne to any antiquarie of theſe contries: And as little ignorance can any man pretend, that hee was a maſſinge ſacrificinge preiſt, for ſo renowned hee was for this, that the infidels themſelues then knew it, amonge whome the cheife idolatrous preiſt or Druid of Limogen, as the french Annales tel vs, forſooke the towne by reaſon of an Hebrue called Martiall, who being come into Gaule, vſeth not wine, nor flesh, but when he offereth ſacrifice to God: ſi non que au ſacrifice de Dieu. Who buildinge a chappel there, celebrated Maſſe in it. Celebré le Sainct ſacrifice de la Meſſe. S. Aurelian. in vet. S. Martialis. Doctor. Puel. D. Tigeon. Cl. March. Ro. Seigneur de Faux Augenin hiſtor.

Gallic. in S. Martial. Vincent. in ſpecul. hiſt. cap. 41. Io. Gualt. Chronolog. eccleſiaſticopol. an. Do. 56. And in that citie ſtill remayneth the holy altar, on which hee vſed to ſay Maſſe whereof hee himſelfe maketh mention in his epiſtle, ad Burde galenſes, & for that cauſe ſo honored, that it is by publick edict of parlament examining and approuing the truth of that hiſtory, from auncient time, decreed, that ſeuen candels should continually bee kept burninge before it, the body of that their Apostle beeing buried neare vnto it. Florimund. Remund. de Origen. haereſ. l. 8. cap. 12. edict. inter log. parlam. Galliae de hac re. Annon videtis S. Martialem ad Burdegalenſes nostros ſcripſiſſe, ſe aram Deo Iſraelis & martyri ipſius Stephano dedicaſse? ea ara in ciuitate Lemogicum, vbi Apostolus ipſe Aquitaniae quieſcit, conſpicitur, aedificata à Principe Stephano, quem ad Chriſtianiſmum ipſe conuerteret: ante eam noctes dieſque ardent ſeptem candelae, iuxta antiquam istam fundationem, in parlamento nostro, & diſceptatam, & confirmatam.
                     
                     17. And this holy Saint, and Apoſtle of Aquitaine, himſelfe teacheth, what great honor and reuerence is due to Chriſtian ſacrificing

preiſts, and what an excellent ſacrifice they offer of Chriſts ſacred body & blood in holy Maſſe: thus he writeth to his late conuerted Chriſtians. (S. Martial. Epiſc. ad Burdegaleſ. cap. 3.) honorabatis Sacerdotes qui decipiebant vos ſacrificijs ſuis, qui mutis & ſurdis ſtatuis offerebant, qui nec ſe nec vos iuuare poterant: nunc autem multò magis Sacerdotes Die omnipotentis, qui vitam vobis tribuunt, in calice & pane vino, honorare debetis. Before you were conuerted to Chriſt, you did honour your preiſts, which deceaued you with their ſacrifices, which did ſacrifice to dumbe and deafe ſtatues, who could neither helpe themſelues, nor you. But now much more you ought to honour the preiſts of God almighty, which giue vnto you life in the chalice, and liuelie breade. And a little after, ſpeaking more plainely of this holy ſacrifice, offered vnto God, vppon the altar, hee ſaith: Sacrificium Deo Creatori offertur, in ara Chriſti corpus & ſinguinem in vitam aeternam offerrimus. Quod Iudaei per inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes ſo nomen cius à terra abolere: nos cauſa ſalutis noſtrae, in ara ſanctificata proponimus, ſcientes hoc ſolo remedio nobis vitam praeſtandam, &

mortem effugandam: hoc enim Dominus noſter miſit nos agere in ſui commemorationem. Sacrifice is offered to God, our Creator, vppon the altar. We offer the body and blood of Chriſt for euerlaſting life. That which the Iewes did offer through enuy, thinking to aboliſh his name from the earth; wee offer this vppon an hallowed altare, knowinge that by this onely remedy, life is to be giuen vnto vs, and death to bee auoided. For this our Lord Ieſus commaunded vs to doe in his commemoration.
                     18. Thus this holy Saint, that ſtilleth himſelfe. The Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, who as hee ſaith was preſent with Chriſt in his life, when hee was buried, and ſee him after his reſurrection. (Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. epestol. ad Tholoſanos.) was one of his 72. diſciples, & was by ſpeciall commaund of Chriſt vnto S. Peter, whoſe diſciple hee after was, ſent by him to bee the happy Apoſtle of that contrie. And I haue rather amonge many others in the like condition, cited this hiſtory of S. Martial, becauſe morally to ſpeake, the beſt learned Druids & others of this our Britanie, where the cheifeſt and commaunders in that ſect remayned,

could not bee ignorant of theſe thinges; for both S. Aurelianus ſucceſſor immediate to S. Martial at Limogen, and S. Martial alſo himſelfe are moſt worthy witneſſes, that Sigebertus the ſummus Sacerdos, high preiſt, Arch-flamen, and cheifeſt of the Druids ſect, in thoſe partes, was by S. Martial conuerted, to this his holy, ſacrificinge and maſſing Chriſtian Religion. (S. Aurelian. in vit. S. Martial. & Martial. epiſtol. ad Burdegal. cap 3.) And S. Aurelianus doth make this his holy conuerſion ſo famous, that it could not be concealed, from the rulers of the Druids Religion in Britanie, whom it ſo much concerned. (Aurelian. ſupr. & annotat. in S. Martial.) for preſently after, Benedicta, wife of the Prince of that Prouince, was conuerted by S. Martial, this high preiſte of the Druids: Sigebert being alſo conuerted, did breake in peeces all their Idols, destroyed their Temples, except the Temple dedicated to the vnknowne God, and shiuered the altars of the diuils into duſt. Ipſemet Sigebertus Pontifex Idola omnia confregit minutim, & Templa euertit, excepto Templo ignoti Dei, & altaria daemonum in puluerem. Which S. Martial himſelfe doth ſufficiently

inſinuate, when hee ſaith: dum altaria daemonum, in puluerem redigerentur, aram ignoti Dei ad conſecrationem reſeruari iuſsimus. Quia dedicata in nomine Dei Iſrael, & teſtis ipſius Stephani, qui pro eo à Iudaeis paſſus est. (S. Martial ſup. cap. 3) when the altars of the deuils were beaten into duſt, wee commaunded the altare of the vnknowne God to bee reſerued for conſecration. Which was dedicated in the name of the God of Iſrael, and Martir Stephen, who ſuffered for him by the Iewes.
                     19. And if wee come to the nearer parts of Fraunce, Paris, Rouen, Britany, Normandy, Picardy, and all the ſea coaſte, we ſhall euidently ſee, that no other doctrine or practiſe of this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, could poſſibly haue entrāce into this kingdome: for in thoſe parts wee finde S. Denis the Areopagite, that glorious maſſinge, and Maſſe teachinge Father, S. Pauls ſcholler, ſent thither by the maſſinge Pope, S. Clement, with his maſſinge companions, S. Ruſticus, and Eleutherius, and S. Nicaſius ſent a maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop, by the ſame maſſinge Pope. (Gregor. Turonen. l. 1. hist. Sur. in vit. Genouefuae. Metaphr. 3. Octob.

Bed. & Vſuard. 7. id. Octob. Volater. l. 15. Breu. Rom. in S. Dioniſ. Arnold. Merman. l. Britones, Normandos, Rothomagenſes, Picardos, omnemque maris Oceani tractum instruxit, formauitque fide S. Nicaſius à S. Clemente illue Apoſtolus delegatus imperante Nerone. Conuerſ. gent. tabul. Eccleſ. Rothomagen. And ſome thinke he preached and practiſed this doctrine alſo, in this our Britanie. Harris. Theatr. l. 1.
                     20. If we circuite further, and come to Gallia, Belgica, Collen, Mentz, Treuers, Lothoringia, Alſaſia, Heluetia and thoſe parts, wee ſhall finde in theſe daies of the Apoſtles ſent thither by S. Peter, S. Clement vncle to S. Clement the Pope, his glorious companions S. Manſuetus our contriman, Celeſtius, Felix, and Patiens: wee ſee ſent thither alſo by the ſame Apoſtle & his authoritie, S. Maternus, one of the 72. diſciples of Chriſt, with S. Eucharius, Valerius, our noble Britan, S. Beatus, and others. Arnold. Mohu. ſupr. Io. Scomer. Gul. Eiſengren. cent. 1. Antonin. part. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 10. cap. 113. Ant. Democh. lib. 2. de Miſſ. Sebast. Munſter. in Coſmograph. Bed. 18. cal. Octobr. Wolfg. Bawr. in vit. praeſul.

Memetocern. Annal. Colonien. & Treueren. And that theſe were maſſinge, and ſacrificinge preiſts, wee haue many authorities: onely I will exemplify in the two cheifeſt, to which the others were ſubordinate in ſuch affaires, and taught and practiſed as thoſe two their ſuperiors, S. Clement and S. Maternus did.
                     21, Of theſe it is euident, not onely becauſe they were both conſecrated preiſts, and directed by that great maſſinge preiſt, and Apoſtle S. Peter, whoſe commaund & order, and their owne inſtitution beeing
                           •…
                         holy Saints they neither did nor could violate, but alſo that they vſually ſaid Maſſe, as firſt of S. Clement it is teſtified, of his publicke, and ſolemne ſayinge of Maſſe, Miſsarum ſolemnijs celebratis, wherewith he armed himſelfe before hee wrought that great miracle, in deſtroyinge the horrible dragon which had killed at Metz, ſo many men, & other creatures; by which publick miraculous deede many were conuerted to the faith of Chriſt. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 26. Anton. Demochar. l. 2. de Miſſa. c. 42. Gulielm. Eiſengren. centen. 1. fol. 147.) And to performe this holy ſolemnitie and ſacrifice

of Maſſe, hee ordered cleargie men, in diuers degrees, and orders, in diuerſis gradibus, which no Chriſtians but ſuch as allow the ſacrifice of Maſſe, admit, and builded churches there. (Antonin. ſupr. Petr. de natal. l. 10. c. 113. Vincent. l. 9. cap. 42.) S. Maternus alſo the diſciple of the ſame maſſing Apoſtle, S. Peter, and ſent into Germany by him, who preached in many prouinces thereof, buildinge diuers churches to holy Saints, as S. Iohn Baptiſt, his Maſter, S. Peter, and others, was ſo renowned a maſſing preiſt, that among other his wonderful miracles. (Petrus Merſſaeus Cratepol. Catalog. de Archiepiſcop. Treuern.) it is commonly deliuered, and written of him, that he ſaid three Maſſes in one day, in far distant places. Diuerſis ac longe distantibus locis. So renowned were theſe men for that moſt holy function, and office, ſo zelous and deuoute in the performance thereof, and God ſo well pleaſed, and ſerued in that ſo ſacred an exerciſe, that he did ſo miraculouſly concurre vnto it.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE XII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proued euen by protestants, that whatſoeuer Apoſtle or other, first preached Christ in Britanie, brought ſacrificinge preisthood hither: and S. Peter firſt founded here our eccleſiasticall Hierarchie, of ſacrificinge maſsinge preists and Bishops.
                     NOw we may hope that no man being by name a Chriſtian, will bee ſo oppoſite an Antichriſtian, to thinke, that Chriſt which could not teache errors, or contrary doctrines, and deliuered but one, and the ſame true, and infallible Religion to the whole world, for all places, people, and ages, had one Religion for the reſt of the world, in Europe, Aſia, and Africke, all of them as before, embracing in the Apoſtles time the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and ſacrificinge preiſthood: and an other for Britanie, quite different, and neuer heard of in any antiquitie, neuer practiſed in any other forme, or order, neuer regiſtred in any monument. And ſeeing all the Euangeliſts, and Apoſtles of Chriſt, together with their

diſciples, were maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and there were no other to preach, and propagate true Religion, in this, or any other nation, vnder heauen, but they, how could any Caluiniſtical communion, or other new deuiſe bee imagined to haue had beeinge here? For whoſoeuer it was, which any proteſtant doth, or will affirme, to haue beene the firſt preacher of Chriſtianitie in this kingdome, S. Peter, S. Paul, or S. Simon Zelotes, who onely among the Apoſtles are reported in hiſtories to haue beene in this kingdome, as our beſt learned proteſtant antiquaries with others truely acknowledge, or S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, for which many contend, or whoſoeuer, if they were preiſts (as preiſts they muſt needes bee in all opinion Catholicke or Proteſtant, that ſhould found our church) they muſt needes alſo be maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, no other Chriſtian preiſts beeinge in the whole worlde at that time, as before is euident. Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. Camb. in Britan. Godw. conuerſ. of Brit. Stowe hist. Holinsh. hiſt. of Engl.
                     
                     2. And for thoſe three Apoſtles, I haue particularly proued in euery of them, that

they all, as alſo all the reſt of that holy order of the Apoſtles which diuided the world among them to conuert it to Chriſt, were without any exception, maſſing preiſtes. And if any man will perſiſt in S. Ioſeph and his holy company, ſeeing none of theſe were Apoſtles, but directed by them, as all other diſciples either of the 72. or others were at thoſe daies, whoſoeuer among them were preiſts, muſt needs alſo be maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, no others being either to conſecrate, or direct them in their holy labours, but thoſe which are manifeſtly proued ſuch. And ſeeing wee do not finde in any antiquary Catholicke or Proteſtant, but S. Ioſephs both conuerſation and direction was either with, or by S. Peter, S. Iohn, S. Iames, or S. Philip, Apoſtles, all theſe beeing acknowledged to bee maſſinge preiſts, whoſoeuer in S. Ioſephs company were conſecrated, or directed by any of them, could not receaue any other conſecration, or direction.
                     3. But to do ſome honor vnto this kingdome, of great Britanie more expreſſely in this kind, though the generally complained of, and lamented amonge antiquaries loſſe

of our auncient records, and hiſtories of theſe matters, will forbid mee to write ſo fully as I could wiſhe, of this ſubiect, I will ſet downe ſome of the cheifeſt, and firſt maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and Biſhops in this nation, and ſhew plainly, how wee had and euer continued, an holy and hierarchicall ſucceſſion of ſuch ſacred parſons from S. Peter, that greateſt Apoſtle of Chriſt in all ages, offeringe the bleſſed bodie, and blood of Chriſt in the ſacrifice of Maſſe, vnto theſe times. So that it ſhall euidently appeare, although this kingedome hath for ſituation beene called an other world, yet it did neuer from the beginning of Chriſtianitie here, differ frō the known Catholick Chriſtian world, in theſe holy miſteries, vntill theſe times.
                     4. For the truth and veritie of this firſt plantinge the ſacrificinge Chriſtian preiſthood, and ſacrifice of Maſſe in this kingdome, it is little or nothing materiall whether it was S. Peter, S. Paul, or S. Simon Zelotes, or S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, or any others, diſciples to any of thoſe, or any others of the Apoſtles, becauſe as before is proued, they all agreed in theſe holy thinges;

yet to know who was our firſt founder and Father in Chriſt, to whome wee owe for that the greateſt reuerence, dutiful children ſhould, and ought to performe, to deriue from him, our happy Hierarchicall ſucceſſion in holy things, and to know the truth which ſome haue veiled and obſcured to much, it is a thing moſt worthy our knowledge, and our ſhame if wee ſhoulde dwell in ignorance thereof. Therefore to be breife, becauſe it is lately and largely proued, that S. Peter was this our firſt parent in Chriſt, by all teſtimonies, for this place it will ſuffice, to ſhew how the beſt learned Engliſh Proteſtant antiquaries moſt backward in this buſines, by certaine Maximes or vndoubted grounds in antiquitie, doe conſequently and by an euident neceſſitie, binde themſelues and al others to be of this opinion. Stowe and Howes hiſtor.
                     
                     5. Firſt they ſay the twelue Apoſtles diuided the world amongſt them, to conuert it. Secondly, which followeth from the former, that this kingdome fell in diuiſion to one of theſe Apoſtles· Thirdly, that there is a ſilence in hiſtories, that any Apoſtle, but S. Peter, S. Paul (this none of the twelue)

and S. Simon Zelotes were here. Fourthly, that this kingdome receaued the faith (if not ſooner) in the beginninge of the Empire of Claudius. Fiftly, that in his time many Chriſtians came hither from Rome, and diuers here were in that time conuerted to the faith of Chriſt. Sixtly, that S. Paul came not to Rome, nor any of theſe weſtern parts, while longe after the death of Claudius, in the dayes of Nero, as the ſcripture it ſelfe with all hiſtories is witneſſe therof. Seuenthly, none of them doth affirme, that S. Simon Zelotes was here at all, but if hee were here, they incline to thinke hee came not hither vntill the cominge of S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, in the 63. yeare of Chriſt, when in all opinions diuers of this kingedome were Chriſtians allmoſt 20. yeares, and ſome preiſts of this nation very longe before that time.
                     6. From hence an halfe blind man muſt needs make this vndoubted, and infallible concluſion, that S. Peter was our firſt Apoſtle and Father in Chriſt. Theſe proteſtant antiquaries of Englād giue vs further warrant both from themſelues and antiquitie, that S. Peter did in euery Prouince appoint

one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the ſame Prouince should obey. Peter preached in no place, but hee there ordeyned Bishops and teachers, and founded churches. And that it is confirmed almoſt 800. yeares ſince by Simeon Metaphraſtes (a learned Saint of the Greeke church) out of the Greeke Antiquities, and diuers others that S. Peter preachinge the word of life in this Iland, hee here founded churches and ordeyned preiſtes and deacons. And except S. Peter himſelfe, S. Iohn, S. Iames, S. Marke and S. Timothie with whom they Paralel S. Ariſtobulus our firſt Archbiſhop, were not Archbiſhops, this great Saint was by theire allowance our Archbiſhop in Britanie, and as before ſo conſtituted by S. Peter, no other being then to ordeine him to that dignitie in this nation, all which our proteſtants thus write with publick warrant and priuiledge. Iohn Whitguift answere to the admonition pag. 65. ſect. 1. and def of the answ. pag. 318. Clem. Rom. apud eund. & Polydor. Virg. l. 4. de inuent. c. 12.13. Sutcliff. Subuerſ. pag. 3. Theater of great Britanie l. 6. cap. 9. Sim. Metaphraſt. die 29. Ian. Eiſengren. centen. 1. Thom. Rogers in artic. Relig. of Engl.

articul. 36.
                     7. Therefore except this great maſſing preiſt and Apoſtle S. Peter ſhould bee of an other opinion and practiſe in theſe thinges in this our Britanie, then hee and all the other Apoſtles had beene in all other times and places before (which no Chriſtian can once imagine) he alſo conſecrated maſſing and ſacrificing preiſts, and Biſhops in, and for this kingdome. And although our loſſes of ſuch ſacred monuments haue beene great, yet wee haue not altogether loſte the memory of al their names: one and the firſt which I finde in hiſtories, was S. Manſuetus natione Scotus, borne in this kingdome of great Britanie, and by the antiquities of the church of Toul in Lorraine claimed to bee the firſt Biſhop of that citie, ſo likewiſe of the church of Treuers, except the identitie of the name deceaueth mee, to be afterwarde liuinge very longe Archbiſhop there, becauſe hee made much ſtay or reſidence in thoſe places, yet both our learned contriman S. Marianus, and Methodus, nere the Apoſtles times affirme, that hee as others which they there name, S. Clement, Felix, Ruſticus, Moſes, Martinus &c. preached

both, in propria prouincia & exterius, both in their owne and other nations. Annal. Tollens. Arnold. Mirman. in Theatr. conuerſ. gent. Belliforest Coſmograph. Petr. Merſſaeus Catalog. Archiep. Treuerenſ. in S. Manſueto. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 254. Method. apud eundem ſupr.
                     
                     8. This holy contriman of ours beeinge conſecrated preiſt by S. Peter, that greate maſſinge preiſt, and Apoſtle, muſt needes himſelfe alſo by that, if wee had no other argument, bee a maſſinge preiſt. But wee ar not ſo ſtreightned of proofes in this matter, for wee haue warrant by the French & German hiſtories, that hee was one of the companions of S. Clement vncle to S. Clement the Pope, that great maſſinge Archbiſhop of Metz, ſent thither as Arnoldus Mirmannius thinketh in the time of Caius Caligula: ſo auncient a maſſinge preiſt he maketh this our glorious contrimā. Arnold Mirm. ſupr. Annal. Tullen. Bellifor. ſupr. Gul. Eiſengren. centur. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 11. Demochar. l. 2. de Miſſ. contra Caluin. Caio Caligula Imperante, Tullenſes habuere Apostolum, ſuaeque in Chriſtum fidei primum Antiſtitem S. Petri Apostoli diſcipulum S. Clementis

Collegam origine Scotum. The inhabitants of Toul had for their Apoſtle & firſt Biſhop of their faith in Chriſt, S. Manſuetus diſciple of S. Peter the Apoſtle, companion of S. Clement, hee beeinge a Scot by natiuitie. Eiſengrenius, and the Authors hee followeth, hath the ſame, onely ſaying he was made Biſhop of Toul Anno Chriſti 49. in the 49. yeare of Chriſt in the Empire of Claudius. Guliel. Eiſengr. centur. 1. fol. 56. cit. Petr. de natal. l. 11. & Demochar. l. 2.) ſo that if this Britanie had a maſſinge preiſt made by S. Peter, whoſe diſciple he was, in the 40. yeare of Chriſt, and the ſame a maſſinge Biſhop within 9. yeares after, the ſacrifice of Maſſe, beeing of continuance here aboue 1580 yeares, it maketh a ſufficient time of preſcription to claime title of continuance. And hee was one of the oldeſt maſſing preiſts and Biſhops, that I finde of this nation, onely S. Kentigern equall perhaps vnto him therin, for the annals of Treuers ſay that this S. Manſuetus (I finde no other in that time) was ſucceſſor to the greate maſſinge Archbiſhop of that city S. Maternus, of whome I haue ſpoken before, Anno Domini 160. in the 160. yeare

of Chriſt: at which time by many authors Kinge Lucius and this kingdome was conuerted; and beſides many ſuch preiſts had 28. maſſing Biſhops, as I ſhall demonſtrate in the next age. Petrus Merſſeus Catalog. Archiep. Treuer. an. 160.
                     9. And very probable it is, euen by our Engliſh Proteſtants. The Proteſtant Theater of great Britanie l. 6. teaching that about this time betweene the 40. and 50. yeare of Chriſt, many in Britany became Chriſtiās, as namely Pomponia Graecina, the wife of the Romans Lieutenant, Aulus Plautius, and about the ſame time S. Beatus, and his holie companion Anonymus, but that a German writer calleth him Achates, made maſſing preiſts by S. Peter, & directed by him, this holy maſſinge preiſt S. Manſuetus had ſome cooperatiō in that happy buſines. And that theſe our two renowned contrimen S. Beatus and his companion, were ſacrificing maſſing preiſts, it is euident: firſt becauſe they were here firſt inſtructed in the faith of Chriſt by thē, which of neceſſitie (no others being here, or els where at that time) were maſſinge preiſts: ſecondly becauſe as theſe proteſtāts both Germā & Engliſh tell

vs they were further inſtructed & directed by S. Peter a maſſing preiſt and Apoſtle, & if perhaps (which theſe men doe not inſinuate, S. Peter was martired before they were conſecrated preiſts, yet beeing conſecrated at Rome, without all queſtion, where none but maſſinge Biſhops and conſecrators were, S. Linus, Cletus or Clemens, they muſt needs bee conſecrated maſſinge preiſts, which is further proued by the places of their moſte aboade after, S. Beatus liuinge in and beeinge the Apoſtle of Heluetia, where abouts many maſſinge preiſts before remembred conſecrated by S. Peter, as S. Eucharius, Valerius, Clemens, Manſuetus, his contryman, with others were. The other came into his owne contry of Britanie here, where (as before) as he could finde none but maſſinge preiſts, ſo hee left behinde him no others, as I ſhall proue herafter.
                     10. And manifeſt it is, that our Chriſtian Britans which were conuerſinge at Rome, when and where they were conſecrated, and with whome they alſo at their beeing there conuerſed, were for their qualities, ſayers, or hearers of Maſſe. Which is

clearely proued by the Chriſtian family of our noble contriwoman Claudia, or Sabinella, wife to Aulus Pudēs; whoſe houſe by the Romane antiquities, as it was the firſt lodginge of S. Peter the Apoſtle, that great maſſinge preiſt, ſo it was their cheifeſt place of ſaying, and hearinge Maſſe: Maiorum traditione praeſcriptum est, domum Pudentis Romae fuiſſe primum hoſpitium Sancti Petri, illicque primum Christianos conueniſſe ad Synaxim coactam Eccleſiam. Martyrolog. Rom. in S. Pudente, Praxede, Pudentiana, Donato & Timotheo. Baron. ib. annotat. die 19. Maij. Where wee ſee, it the firſt and principall maſſinge church in Rome, both for the Britans & Romans alſo, that were Chriſtians, and the beſt reſidency S. Peter or his ſucceſſors which were the conſecrators of preiſts there had at that time. And hee had ſuch care of this houſe and family, that not onlie the parents, Pudens, and Claudia, but all their children S. Nouatus, S. Timotheus, Pudentiana, and Praxedes were by him inſtructed in the faith, and S. Timothie was made maſſinge preiſt, as the auncient Roman Martyrologe and others witnes. Romae depoſitio S. Nouati, filij beati Pudentis Senatoris,

& fratris S. Timothei presbyteri, & ſanctarum Chriſti virginum Pudentianae, & Praxedis, qui ab Apostolis eruditi ſunt in fide. Martyrolog. Rom. die 20. Iunij. Vſuard. eod. die. Baron. annotat. in 20. diem Iun. act. S. Nouati & S. Iustine. Therefore this S. Timotheus our holy cōtriman by his bleſſed Mother S. Claudia, beeinge inſtructed by S. Peter a maſſinge preiſt, and conſecrated by a maſſinge preiſt and Pope, and reſigninge his houſe to be a maſſinge church, as will euidentlye appeare in the beginninge of the next age, when I come to that notorious maſſinge preiſt and Pope S. Pius by our proteſtants confeſſions, who dedicated that houſe for a maſſing church, muſt himſelfe alſo by theſe proteſtants bee a maſſing preiſt, and his holy parents brother and and ſiſters ſacred Virgins, with the reſt of our Chriſtian contrimen there, bee reuerencers and frequenters of holy Maſſe.
                     11. The like I might without reprofe write of others, whoſe names I haue els where remēbred, that probably they preached in Britanie, in this age, and out of queſtion were maſſinge preiſts, but hauing ſo many certaine and euident examples without exception, I neede not the aſſiſtance

of probabilities, onely becauſe wee are aſſured by great Engliſh Proteſtants Biſhops and others, that as the truth is, there is a mutuall relation and dependance, betweene an altare and ſacrifice, and that an altar doth as naturally, and as neceſſarily infer a ſacrifice, as a shrine doth a Saint, a Father a ſonne. (Morton. Apolog. part. 2. pag. 82. Morton appeale l. 2. ſect. 1. pag. 162.) theſe proteſtants confeſſe vnto vs againe, which they cannot deny, that longe before they imagine any alteration of Religion in the church of Rome, this kingdome had Chriſtian altars, (Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Gildas l. de excid.) and amonge others they iuſtifie vnto vs the antiquities of Glaſtenbury, which aſſure vs, there was an altare in the olde church there builded by S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, and his holy company; and this altar and holy place was of ſuch reuerence, that the holy Saint Patrick with others, deſired to bee buried by that holy altar, and an Angel from heauen did aſſigne him that place of buriall. Sepulturam Angelo monstrante, flamamque ingente de eodem loco cunctis videntibus erumpente in vetusta Eccleſia in dextera parte altaris promeruit. Where we

ſee an Angel from heauen, and with a great ſigne, and miracle, openly before all people preſent, cunctis vidētibus, to giue teſtimony to the worthines of the holy altar, & place in reſpect therof. Io. Leland in aſſert. Arthur. Math. Park. antiquit. Britan. Stow hiſt. Godw. conuerſ. of Brit. antiquit. Glastō apud Capgrau. in S. Patric. Gul. Malm. l. antiq. caenob. Glast.
                     
                     12. And not without iuſt cauſe & deſeruing by theſe our proteſtāts who in Gildas as they allowe him, & who wrote as they cōmonly teach, when the Britans ſtill held the Religion deliuered vnto them in the Apoſtles time, without alteration, doe teſtifie, that the altars here from the beginning were, ſacra altaria, Sacroſancta altaria, ſacrificij caelestis ſedes, holy altars, ſacred altars, the ſeate of the celeſtiall ſacrifice, altars at which preists did ſacrifice and ſay Maſſe, Sacerdotes ſacrificantes inter altaria stantes. Altars ſanctuaries and priuiledges, refuge for ſuch as fled vnto them, teſtified by our proteſtants themſelues. Gildas epistol. de excid. & conqueſt. Britan. edit. per protestant. who further witneſſing that the firſt general councell of Nice was receaued here in Britanie in the da i
                           •…
                         of Conſtantine, and now by

our proteſtant ſtatute is of high authoritie, and vndeniable in England, witneſſe alſo: The Ni
                              •…
                           en councell in that canon which Caluine and all other receaue, ſaith plainely, that the Lambe of God offered vnbloodely, is layed vpon the holy table. Stowe and howes hiſtor. an. 542. theater of great Britanie l. 6. statut. an. 1. Eliz. Regin. & 1. Iacob. Regis. Fraunc. Maſ
                              •…
                           n with direct of the proteſt. Archb. Abbots booke of conſecrat. pag. 243. and the ſacrifice of Chriſtians beeing as is inuincibly proued, the moſte holy body and blood of Chriſt, and the altar the place whereon it is offered, by that connexion in Greeke, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , mutuall correlatiues, and inſeparable, & nomine & re, it cannot poſſibly bee otherwiſe. So that if any teſtimonie of heauen or earth, men or Angels, Catholicks or Proteſtants will ſatisfy in this matter, it is manifeſtly conuinced, that S. Peter preached and eſtabliſhed a ſacrificing preiſthood, and the doctrine and practiſe of holy Maſſe in this our nation.
                     13. And yet if any man is deſirous to heare S. Peter himſelfe confirme that from heauen, which hee ſo approued on earthe, wee may add ſuch his teſtimony alſo to the

holy Angels before, and bringe other Apoſtles from heauen alſo, that were maſſinge preiſts when they liued here, to iuſtifye the ſame, in, and to this kingedome. Wee reade in the aunciently written life of S. Sampſon Archbiſhop of yorke, when our proteſtants ſay the Britans ſtill kept their Apoſtolick firſt receaued Religion, a man ſo holy and miraculous that S. Iltutus propheſied of him beeing but a boy of ſeuen yeares old, that he ſhould be a light to this nation, the cheife of all, and Archbiſhop very profitable to the church of God. Cum ſeptem eſset annorum ad S. Iltutum Abbat em diſcendi gratia adducitur: qui videns puerum oſculatus est eum, dicens: gratias Deo agimus qui lumen hoc nobis indignae de gente noſtra accendere dignatus eſt in terra. En caput omnium nostrum: en Pontifex ſummus multam Eccleſiae Dei profuturus. Manuſcript. antiq. & Capgrau. in Catalog. in vita S. Sampſonis Ep. & Confeſſ. he was made a deacon, and after a maſſing preiſt by the great maſſing preiſt and Biſhop S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, conſecrated by the maſſinge Biſhop S. Germanus, who was ſent hither from S. and Pope Celeſtine, to ſettle the

church of Britanie; both whē he was made deacon and preiſt, a doue deſcended vppon him and ſtaied immouably vntill the office was ended. Beeing made a preist, hee was ſo glorious and renowned a maſsinge preiſt, that alwaies in his life he had Angels aſsiſting and miniſtring vnto him whenſoeuer he ſaid Maſſe. Omni tempore vitae ſuae Angelos dum celebraret, ſibi aſsiſtere & in ſacrificio ministrare videre meruit. Yet this man aboue all of this nation, was in ſuch fauour with God, S. Peter, S. Iames called the brother of our Lord, S. Iohn the Euangeliſt and the court of heauen, that theſe three great Apoſtles, with a great company of celeſtiall citizens, denſiſsimis candidatorum turmis, appeared vnto him, and S. Peter told him, that our Lord Ieſus Christ had choſen him to bee a Bishop: and ſoone after an Angell appeared to S. Dubritius, and commaunded him to conſecrate S. Sampſon a Bishop: in whoſe conſecration they, that were preſent did ſee a Doue ſent from heauen to ſtand immouably vppon him. Nec multo poſt Angelus Domini beato Dubritio apparens, Sampſonem ordinari Epiſcopum praecepit, in cuius conſecratione qui aderant columbam caelitus emiſſam

immobiliter ſuper eum stare videbant.
                     
                     14. And in the time of S. Manſuetus, the firſt Biſhop of London in the Saxons time, when S. Peter did miraculouſly appeare about the dedicatinge of the church of weſtminſter, as many both holy and auncient Catholicke writers, and proteſtants antiquaries aſſure vs, and the circumſtances of the hiſtorie demonſtrate it to bee true, hee ſent this charge and commaund to S. Mellitus Biſhop of London, who had determined to dedicate it the next day followinge: I haue dedicated the church, and by authoritie of my ſanctification preuented the epiſcopall benediction. Therefore tell the Bishop what thou haſt heard and ſeene, and the ſignes remayninge will iuſtifie thy wordes to bee true. Therfore let him abſteine from dedication, and ſupply that which wanteth, to offer there the holy ſacrifice of our Lords body and blood. Ego ſum Petrus qui cum meis ciuibus conſtructam in meo nomine baſilicam dedicaui, epiſcopalemque benedictionem meae ſanctificationis authoritate praeueni. Dic ergo Pontifici quae vidiſti & audiſti, tuoque ſermoni ſigna parietibus impreſsa testimonium perhibebunt. Superſedeat igitur dedicatione, ſuppleat quod omiſimus Dominici

corporis & ſanguinis Sacroſancta myſteria. S. Alured. Riuall. M. S. in vita S. Eduardi Regis & confeſſ. Iacob. Gen. Epiſc. in eius vit. & M. S. antiq. Sur. in vit. eius & Capgrau. in eius vit. Franc. Maſon l. of conſecrat. here wee ſee, that S. Peter now in glory, both allowed and commaunded the ſacrifice of Maſſe, which when hee liued and conuerſed on earth, hee had practiſed, frequented, and inſtituted with ſo great diligence and deuotion.
                     15. So likewiſe when in the time of the Daniſh fury here, hee appeared to comfort this afflicted contry, where hee had preached and taught this holy doctrine, hee did not chuſe any man to reueale his glad tidings vnto, and the deliuery of this kingdome, but S. Brithwold, that great and famous maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop of Wincheſter, or Wilton, and in the moſt known maſſinge place of England, the Abbey of Glaſtenbury, and did fortell, how S. Edward Kinge and confeſſor, that moſt great reuerencer of holy Maſſe, perhaps yet vnborne, and borne in exile in Normandy, ſhould bee Kinge in England, and deliuer it from thoſe floods of miſeries, wherewith

it was then ſurrounded, and longe time had beene. And to aſſure vs this was a true viſion, and propheſie of S. Peter, and hee an approuer of all louers of holy Maſſe, as God alſo is, this hee addeth: Erit cum dormieris cum patribus tuis, viſitabit Dominus populum ſuum, & faciet Dominus redemptionem plebis ſuae. Eliget enim ſibi virum ſecundum cor ſuum qui faciat omnes voluntates ſuas, qui me opitulante regnum adeptus Anglorum Danico furori finem imponet. Erit enim acceptus Deo, gratus hominibus, terribilis hostibus, amabilis ciuibus, vtilis Eccleſiae, laudabilemque vitam ſancto fine concludet. It ſhall come to paſſe, when thou ſhalt ſleepe with thy Fathers, our Lord will viſit his people, and our Lord will cauſe a redemption of his people. For hee will chuſe vnto himſelfe a man, accordinge to his owne hart, which ſhall doe all his deſires, who by my helpe obteyninge the crowne of England, ſhall make an end of the Daniſh fury. For hee ſhall bee acceptable to God, gratefull to men, terrible to his enemies, amiable to his citiſens, profitable to the church, and hee ſhall conclude his laudable life, with an holy end. And the holy and learned writers of his life thus

immediatly add: all which things the euent of the thinge proued to bee fulfilled in S. Edward. Quae omnia in beato Eduardo completa rei exitus comprobauit. Therefore this muſt needs bee a true viſion, and propheſie of S. Peter. Alured Riuall. l. de vit. S. Eduardi Iacob. Epiſc. Gen. in vit. eius M. S. antiq. ibid. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Eduardo Rege & Confeſſore Sur. in vit eius & Lippom. Godwin Catal. of Biſhops in B. Brithwild.
                     
                     16. This is that holy Kinge that left the hereditary miraculous power of curing the diſeaſe called the Kings euill obteyned by his piety, to his ſucceſſors. This is that great reuerencer of maſſinge preiſts, this is hee who at the time of eleuation at holy Maſſe in England, vpon Whitſunday did ſee by reuelation the Kinge of Denmarke drowned in the ſea by the coaſte of Denmarke, as hee was takinge ſhip to come to inuade England, and his nauy diſperſed, which, peractis Miſſarum ſolemnijs, as ſoone as Maſse was ended, hee confidently related. This holie Kinge, to ſpeake in proteſtants and their authors words. (Stowe hiſtor. in Edward Cō
                           feſsor.) before the day of his natiuitie was elected of God, who perſeuering in chaſtitie, ledd

all his life dedicated to God in true marriage, wherefore as wee haue knowne proued by good and ſufficient men being witneſſes, God greatlie glorified him in his life with wonderful ſignes. Therefore it is euident that S. Peter, and God himſelfe, with the whole court of heauen, did, and doe allowe of maſſinge preiſts, and the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, not only as it was celebrated in the beginning, but after all additions which proteſtantes write, or imagine, were put vnto it; for after all theſe added and longe after, as wee ſee, both S. Peter and God himſelfe did thus approue, and honor the both reuerent ſayers, and hearers of that bleſſed ſacrifice.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE XIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proued, how after the death of S. Peter, in the time followinge commonly aſcribed to S. Linus and Cletus in the ſee of Rome, and to Marius Kinge in Britanie, the Britans both at home and abroade vſed the ſacrificing preiſthood, preiſts and Maſſe.
                     HItherto wee haue ſpoken of S. Peter, who being martired by Nero the Emperor,

it is a queſtion whether S. Linus, whom (and S. Cletus) he had conſecrated Biſhops at his beeinge at Rome before he
                           •…
                         came into theſe Weſt parts, or S. Clement did immediatly ſucced him; S. Leo the ſecond with our renowned contrimen, S. Marianus, Florentus Wigornienſis, and to ſpeake in Martinus Polonus wordes. (Leo Papa 2. epistol. decretal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. in Nerone. Florent. Wigorn. an 50. al. 72. Martin. Pol. ſupputat. col. 33. in Lino.) They which ſearched more diligently concerning the chaire of the Romane church, doe ſay, that Linus and Cletus did not ſitt as Popes, but as coadiutors of the Pope, to whome S. Peter in his life onely committed the diſpenſation of eccleſiasticall things: for which beeing endowed with ſo great authoritie, they deſerued to bee placed in the catalogue of the Popes, but S. Peter appointed S. Clement his ſucceſſor. Dicunt qui de cathedra Romanae Eccleſiae diligentius perſerutati ſunt, quod Linus & Cletus non ſederunt vt Pontifices, ſed vt ſummi Pontificis coadiutores, quibus in vita ſua beatus Petrus vnam tradidit eccleſiasticarum rerum diſpenſationem: propter quod tanta authoritate dotati, meruerunt in catalogo Pontificum

poni. Clementem vero ipſe beatus Petrus ſucceſſorem constituit. Which S. Clement himſelfe as he is commonly receaued, doth alſo likewiſe affirme of himſelfe, and S. Leo ſaith: Linum & Cletum nihil vnquam legibus ſuis ex pontificali ministerio, poteſtatiuè egiſſe, ſed quantum eis àbeato Petro praecipiebatur, tantum ſolumodo agebant. Linus and Cletus did nothinge at any time by theire lawes by papall miniſtery or power, but how much was commaunded them by S. Peter, ſo much onely they did. Clem. Roman. epiſtol. 1. Leo Papa 2. epiſt. decretali ſupr. apud Marian. Wigorn. & alios. which wee finde in their liues that the firſt, ex praecepto Petri Apostoli constituit, vt mulier in Eccleſiam velato capite intret: conſtituted by the commaundement of S. Peter, that a woman ſhould haue her head couered, when ſhee entred the church. The other by the precept of S. Peter ordeyned 21. preists in the citie of Rome. Cletus, hic ex praecepto Petri, viginti & vnum presbyteros ordinauit in vrbe Roma. Martin. Polon. ſupputat. in Lino & Cleto & alij.
                     
                     2. But becauſe many others, and great authors incline to thinke they were Popes,

I meddle not to diſcuſſe this matter, little pertinent to my preſent purpoſe, becauſe very little is written of them: But this moſt certaine it is, that whether they were Popes, or no, being conſecrated by S. Peter that knowne maſſing preiſt, and Pope, and hauinge S. Clement their ſucceſſor, that knowne, maſſinge Pope, they muſt needs bee alſo maſſinge preiſts, and Popes, if they were Popes. And for S. Linus who as both Catholicks & Proteſtants teſtifie, did write the acts of S. Peter in the ſame ſort as they are publiſhed, giueth plaine teſtimony, to the daily ſaying of Maſſe, & offering therin the bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt, and ſheweth how the ſigne of the Croſſe was vſed in the celebration thereof euerie day: ô crux quae quotidiè car
                              •…
                           s immaculati Agni fidelibus diuid
                              •…
                            populis. Linus in hiſtor. paſſ. S. Petri. And it is proued not onely by hiſtories, but S. Paul himſelfe doth ſufficiently incline vs to knowe, that his cheife lodginge was in the then cheife maſſinge houſe of our Chriſtian Britans, at Rome, and not onely of him, and other the Popes, but ſuch holy diſciples as came to Rome vnto them: for writing vnto S. Timothie.

2. Timoth. 4.) hee remembreh onely to ſalute him, but fower parſons, Eubulus, Linus, Pudens, and Claudia, which ſeeme to haue had all, or the moſte of their permanency in that houſe, where S, Timothy alſo had beene entertayned when hee was at Rome: and therefore they alone ſalute him, beeing as S. Chriſoſtome and Theodoret wel note vppon this place, the moſt eminent Chriſtians then in Rome. S. Chriſostom. & Theodoret. in 2. Tim. 4. for S. Linus was a Biſhop there ordeyned by S. Peter, and the other three renowned for their harbouring of the Chriſtians, there at that time, as moſt certaine it is of Pudens and Claudia, and not vnprobable as I haue ſhewed in other places that Eubulus was our noble contriman and Father to Claudia, and ſo for his hoſpitalitie to the Saints of God, firſt remembred in this ſalutation, all hiſtories beeinge ſilent of him and no other nation claiming him to bee from them.
                     3. Therefore this beeing then ſo renowned a receptacle, and maſſinge houſe, although S. Linus did not intermeddle in ſendinge preiſts, or preachers into this, or any other countrie, yet the Chriſtian Britans

which liued at home, could not bee ignorant what was done in ſuch things, in this holy houſe of our ſo eminent Chriſtians at Rome, ſeeing there was continuall traffick and intercourſe betweene Rome and Britanie at that time, and ſo much euen in ſpirituall things by our beſt proteſtant antiquaries of this kingdom. (Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Matth. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. pag. 2.3. Godwin. conuerſ. of Britanie pag. 17.18. Cambd. in Britan. Stowe histor.) that they aſſcribe a great part of the labours and meanes of plantinge the faith of Chriſt in Britanie, to our holy Brittiſh Lady Claudia, and thoſe of that houſe in Rome. All of them beeing Chriſtians, as both Catholicks and Proteſtants write, totamque ſuam familiam Christi fidem amplexos, and that number ſo greate, that there were in it in the beginning of the next age an hundred men, wantinge foure, nonaginta ſex homines, that were Chriſtians, and not fewer in this time by probable opinion, the owners of the houſe beeing both ſo honorable and religious, all of them hearers at the leaſte, and frequenters of this moſt holy ſacrifice. vit. S. Pudentianae in Breuiar. Rom. die 19.

                        Maij.
                     
                     4. And to ſpeake in a Proteſtant Archbiſhops, & great ātiquaries words: (Matth. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. pag. 3.) Nec veriſimil. ſolum ſed verum iudicandum est, in tam nobil
                              •…
                            familia faiſſe cum Claudia gentiles ſuos 
                              •…
                           tannos qui vna baptiſati fuerunt, à quibus Euangelij ignicula per totam gentem Britannicam diſperſa, viritim ad multos peruenerunt. Neither is it onely to bee iudged likely, but true, that in ſo noble a family with Claudia, there were Britans her countrimen, which were baptiſed with her, by whome the ſmale fiers of the ghoſpell diſperſed throughout the whole nation of Britanie from man to man, did come to many. And not onely thoſe reuerencers of holy Maſſe which were of the family of Lady Claudia, but many others in Rome, at that time, both Romane and Brittiſh Chriſtians, in theire owne parſons cominge from thence into Britanie, parſonally performed theſe holy offices, as our Theater proteſtantes, thus aſſure vs. Theater of great Britanie l. 6. cap. 9. it hath alſo paſsed with allowance among the learned Senate of our antiquaries, that when Nero began (a little before this time) to

banish and perſecute the Christians in Rome, many Romans and Britans beeing conuerted to the faith, fled thence into theſe remote parts of the earth, where they might, and did more freely enioy the libertie of their profeſsions. Which an other Proteſtant Biſhop and antiquary ſpeakinge of theſe dayes of Claudia, thus cōfirmeth. (Godwin conuerſ. of Britanie pag. 18. cap. 3.) Of theſe times wee ſpeake of, I doubt not wee may vſe the words of Caſſiodorus, it was not counted vnlawful for thoſe to bee Chriſtians, that dwelt beyond Italy and Fraunce, as in Britanie. Whereby vndoubtedly it came to paſſe, that many profeſsing Chriſt, not daringe to abide nere vnto the hart of the Empire, made choice of our Britanie, vvhere to leade their liues in ſuch ſort, as they might enioy libertie of conſcience. And hee noteth in the mergine: Britanie a refuge for Christians.
                     
                     5. Therefore although wee ſhould follow their opinion, that ſay S. Linus and Cletus executed the papall function, excluding S. Clement vntill after their death, though wee finde no preiſts purpoſely, ſent by them vnto this kingdome, or other nation, yet the proteſtants themſelues do freelie

graunt. The English Protestant Margin. annot. in Matth. Westm. an. 59. Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontif. in Lino Damaſ. ſeu Anaſtaſ. in S. Lino & Cleto. Breu. Rom. die. 26. April. & 23. Septemb. Martin. Pol. in S. Lino & Cleto. that they were both made preiſts by the great maſſinge preiſt and Apoſtle S. Peter, Petrus Apoſtolus Linum & Cletum preſbyteros ordinauit, and both of them did alſo make preiſts, S Linus 18. as both Catholicks and proteſtants teach, and diuers Biſhops: and S. Cletus by S Peters commaund conſecrated in the citie of Rome 25. preiſts, which beeing commaunded by a maſſinge Apoſtle, and performed by a maſſinge Biſhop, muſt needs bee maſſinge preiſts, and all thoſe ſo many Chriſtians of theſe times by our proteſtants before either Britans or Romans, which either by their concurrēce at Rome ſtill ſtaying there, or by perſonall preſence beinge come, and ſtayinge here, gaue aſſiſtance and helpe towardes the inſtruction and conuerſion of this our Britanie, muſt needes bee either ſayers, or hearers of Maſſe, and practiſers and approuers of that holy ſacrifice, and ſo ioyned themſelues with thoſe maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops

in this kingdome, which I named before and liued longe after this time, as I ſhall ſhewe hereafter. Or if wee will rather incline to them that ſay, theſe two were onely coadiutors and not Popes, but giue the papacy in this time to S. Clement as ſome Proteſtants with many Catholicks before, and others hold, to ſpeake in a proteſtants words (Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romanor. in Petro. Petrus ordinauit Clementem, ſui officij vices ei committens:) Peter ordeyned Clement, committinge the place of his office vnto him: It muſt needs euen by that title bee, that as hee was ſacred and receaued this charge and power from that great maſſing preiſt, and Biſhop S. Peter, ſo hee alſo receaued from him that holy ſacrificinge preiſthood, and power, and ſucceeded him in that, as other ſacred papall functions, of whome I am to ſpeake in the chapter followinge.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE XIV. CHAPTER. How duringe the time of S. Clement his papacy, and all this firſt hundred yeares of Christ, our Christian Britans, together with all others continued theſe holy doctrines and offices of ſacrificing preisthood, preistes, and the ſacrifice of the bleſſed body and blood of Christ in Maſſe.
                     THis holy and learned Pope, and ſucceſſor to S. Peter, S. Clement, whether hee preſently executed that higheſt paſtorall function, or of humilitie gaue place to S. Linus, and Cletus more aunciently conſecrated Biſhops, at and for Rome by S. Peter, beeing himſelfe conſecrated as before a maſſinge preiſt, and moſt deuoutly and religiouſly as I ſhall demonſtrate, continually executinge that holy maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſtly power, and duty, did not onely in generall impart it to this nation, as hee had care and charge of the whole church committed vnto him, nor in particular becauſe hee had reſidence and much continuance with our Chriſtian Britans

at Rome as S. Cletus, Linus and Peter before had, but becauſe in all probable iudgement, hee was longe time here in Britanie with S. Peter, and after by the ſame greate Apoſtle charged in one of his laſte admonitions vnto him, to haue an eſpecial care of this kingdome of Britanie in particular, both which are eaſely proued by the words of S. Peter vnto S. Clement, as hee himſelfe thus relateth them, and produceth them, as one amonge other reaſons, why aboue all others ſo manie worthie men, hee made choiſe of S. Clement to bee his ſucceſſor. Clemens Rom. epiſtol. 1. ex verb. S. Petri. mihi ab initio vſque ad finem comes itineris & actuum fueris, quaeque per ſingulas ciuitates, me diſputante ſolicitus Auditor exceperis. Thou haſt beene a companion of my trauailes, and deedes from the beginninge vnto the end. Thou as a carefull Auditor haſt obſerued what I haue preached in euerie citie.
                     2. And to him againe: If I had any other better then thou, or any had beene ſo diligent helper of mee, or any had ſo fully receaued my doctrine, and learned my eccleſiasticall diſpoſitions, if I had any ſuch other, I woulde not

compell the vnwillinge to vndertake this good vvorke. Si eſset alius melior, ſi quis mihi alius adiutor tam ſedulus adstitiſſet, ſi quis tam plenè doctrinae meae rationem caepiſſet, ſed & eccleſiaſticas diſpoſitiones à me tam plenè didiciſſet, habens alium talem, non te cogerem opus bonum ſuſcipere nolentem. And to the Chriſtians at Rome in this maner. When hee was to die. Audite me fratres & conſerui mei, quoniam vt edoctus ſum ab eo qui me miſit, Domino & Magistro meo Ieſu Christo, dies mortis meae inſtat, Clementem hunc Epiſcopum vobis ordino, cui ſoli meae praedicationis & doctrinae cathedram trado: Qui mihi ab initio vſque in finem comes in omnibus fuit, & per hoc veritatem totius meae praedicationis agnouit: Qui in omnibus tentationibus meis ſocius extitit, fideliter perſeuerans. Heare mee ô my brethren and fellow ſeruants, becauſe as I am taught by him that ſent mee, my Lord and Maſter Ieſus Chriſt, the day of my death is at hand, I ordeine this Clement to bee your Biſhop, to whome alone I commit the chaire of my preachinge and doctrine, who hath beene a companion vnto mee in all thinges, or places from the begining to the end, and thereby knoweth

the truth of all my preachinge. Who hath beene my fellow in al my tentations, faithfully perſeueringe. Clem. ſupr. epiſt. 1. Marian. Scot. in S. Petro. Flor. Wigorn. in chron. in S. Petro. Leo Pap. 2. epistol. decretal. Alexander 1. epiſt. 1. ad omnes orthodox. To. 1. Concil.
                     
                     3. Therefore ſeing S. Peter was in Britanie as I haue ſhewed before, and our proteſtant antiquaries allowe of thoſe auncient recordes, which almoſt 800. yeares ſince were alleaged for reuerende antiquities, and ſay, that S. Peter stayed longe time in this our Britanie, conuerted many, founded churches, and ordeyned Bishops, preists, and deacons; quo in loco cum longo tempore fuiſset moratus, & verbo gratiae multos illuminaſſet, & Eccleſias conſtituiſſet, Epiſcopoſque, & preſbyteros, & diaconos ordinaſſet. Proteſtant Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. cap. 9 antiquitat. graec. apud Sim. Metaphraſten die 29. Iunij. Laurent. Sur. 29. Iunij: and was ſuch a maſſinge preiſt and Apoſtle, as I haue ſhewed before, S. Clement this his vnſeparable companion, in all times, and places, from the beginning to the end, and the beſt learner, follower, and obſeruer of his doctrine,

and practiſe in holy Religion, muſt needs bee here in Britanie, with him ſtaying here longe time, longo tempore, and bee as his Maſter S. Peter was, a maſſing preiſt. And S. Peter hauinge conſecrated for the Romans two Biſhops, S. Linus, and Cletus before, S. Clement could not bee onely for that place. And the commiſſionall wordes of S. Peter to S. Clement, are generall for all Chriſtians, without limitation of place, or parſons, to ſupply the place, and parſon of S. Peter, who was cheife of all. So this muſt needs include our Britans, beinge ſo many of them then Chriſtians at Rome, and his bretheren and fellowe ſeruants in Chriſt, as the wordes bee, equally as the Romans, or any others were: and our noble contriwoman S. Claudia her houſe hauinge many more Chriſtians in it, then any other in Rome, and the principall place of S. Peters reſidence, when hee conuerſed there, it cannot ſeeme vnprobable, that this great charge was committed to S. Clemēt by S. Peter in that houſe, where the ordinarie aſſemblies of Chriſtians were kept. And ſo of all nations, this our Britanie could not bee left out, in that charge, and

commiſſion: which S. Clement himſelfe doth ſufficiētly proue, in that epiſtle, wherwith others thus hee writeth of S. Peters charge vnto him. S. Clem. Rom. epiſt. 1. Leo 2. epistol. decretal. Marian. Scot. in S. Clemente. Florent. Wigorn. in eod.
                     
                     4. Epiſcopos per ſingulas ciuitates, quibus ille non miſerat, perdoctos & prudentes, ſicut ſerpentes, ſimpliceſque ſicut columbas, iuxta Domini praeceptionem, nobis mittere praecepit. Quod etiam facere inchoauimus, & Domino opem ferente, facturi ſumus, vos autem per veſtras dioceſes Epiſcopos ſacrate & mittite, quia nos ad altas partes, quod idem iuſset, agere curabimus. Aliquos vero ad Gallias, Hiſpaniaſque mittemus, & quoſdam ad Germaniam, & Italiam, atque ad reliquas gentes dirigere cupimus. Vbi autem ferociores & rebelliores gentes eſſe cognouerimus, illic dirigere ſapientiores, & auſteriores neceſſe habemus. S. Peter commaunded vs, to ſend Biſhops very learned, and wiſe as ſerpents, and ſimple as doues according vnto the commaū
                        dement of our Lord, to all cities, to which hee had not ſent. Which wee haue begun to doe, and by the helpe of our Lord will doe hereafter and conſecrate you (writinge

to the Bishop of Hieruſalem) and ſend Biſhops, throughout your dioceſſes, becauſe wee will haue care to doe it to other parts, as hee commaunded. Wee will ſend ſome to Fraunce, and Spaine, and ſome to Germany, and Italy, as wee deſire to the other nations: and where the people ar more feirce and rebellious, thither we haue need to ſend more wiſe and auſtere men.
                     5. Where wee euidently ſee, by S. Clements owne teſtimonie, & conſent of manie auncient learned men embracinge it, that he was charged by S. Peter to ſend Biſhops, not onely into Italy, Spaine, Fraunce, and Germany, but into all theſe other nations, atque ad reliquas gentes, in which Britanie muſt needs bee comprehended: & conſideringe in what ſtate of barbarouſnes this kingdome was in reſpect of Italy, Spaine, Fraunce, and Germany alſo, before it became more ciuill by the Romans rulinge and abidinge here, and receauing the faith of Chriſt, there was no nation in this part of the world, knowne then to the Romans, that might bee ſo truely termed, ferociores & rebelliores gentes, more feirce and rebellious nations, then theſe of Britanie, as not

onely the Roman hiſtorians of thoſe times but S. Gildas himſelfe, a Britan, moſte lamentably bewaylinge it, their owne Brittiſh hiſtory, and others ar ſufficient witneſſes. Iul. Caeſar. l. de bell. Gallic. Cornel. Tacit. Sueton. Diod. Sicul. Gild. l. de excid. & conqueſt. Britan. Galfrid. Monum. l. 3.4. and yet S. Clement plainely ſaith, that hee then already had, or would by the grace of God, ſend Biſhops into al thoſe contries, and that it was S. Peters commaunde vnto him to ſend to all cities, where hee himſelfe had not ordeyned Biſhops. Therefore wee cannot doubt, but S. Clement did performe this commaundement of S. Peter, and his owne promiſe in ſending ſome learned Biſhops, and preiſts into this kingdome. S. Antoninus, Philippus Bergomenſis, diuers in the opinion of Harriſon a proteſtant, and Maſter Harris a late Catholicke writer thinke hee ſent S. Taurinus hither. S. Antomn. Florent. Archiep. histor. part. 1. Philipp. Bergom. hiſtor. in S. Taurino. Will. Harriſon deſcrip. of Britanie, Harris theatr. l. 1. and this laſte affirmeth the ſame of S. Nicaſius citing alſo Arnoldus Mirmannius, who plainely, ſaith that amonge other people, S.

Nicaſius instructed the Britans in the faith, beeinge ſent thither Apoſtle by S. Clement: Britones, formauit fide S. Nicaſius à S. Clemente illuc Apostolus delegauit. Arnold. Mirmann. theatr. conuerſ. gent. at which time there were no Britans, but of this Britanie.
                     6. The ſame I may and not vnprobably ſay, of S. Martine, to whome a church was dedicated at Canterbury in the time of Kinge Lucius, and S. Marcellus, or by ſome Marcellinus, a Brittiſh Biſhop of this Land, or the nere enſuinge time. And if any man obiecteth, three of theſe S. Taurinus, Nicaſius and Martine by diuers writers preached in Fraunce, this hindereth nothinge, but rather proueth, ſeeing others affirme it, that they preached here alſo, S. Marcellus, or Marcellinus which was certainly a Britan, both preached, and was Biſhop in a forreine contry, ſo was S. Manſuetus, and S. Beatus in the ſame caſe before, and it is euident by Methodius, and Marianus already cited, that this was vſuall in thoſe daies, for the ſame men to preach not onely in their owne but forreine and ſtraunge contries. And our Engliſh Proteſtant publiſhers of Matthew of Weſtminſter, incline to

thinke ſo of diuers ſent into Fraunce by S. Clement. (Matth. Weſtm an. 94.) amonge whome there are numbred S. Nicaſius, and Taurinus; for where the Monke of Weſtminſter ſaith, they were ſent by S. Clement, ad locandum in Gallijs nouae fidei fundamentum, to place the foundation of the faith in Gallia: theſe proteſtants giue a larger circuite, and ſay plainely, doctores mittuntur verſus occidentem, that S. Clement ſent thoſe doctors, S. Denis, Nicaſius, Taurinus, Trophinus, Paulus, Saturninus, Aſtremonius, Martialis, Gratianus, Iulianus, Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus into the West, where Britanie is. Proteſtant Marg. annotat. in Matth. Weſtm. ſupr. an. 94. and very ſtraung it ſhould be if S. Clement as before hauing ſo great charge giuen vnto him by S. Peter as well of Britanie, as Gallia, and by his owne words and promiſe was to ſend Biſhops into this our Britanie, ſhould bee ſo mindfull of Fraunce ſo nere vnto vs, to ſend ſo many as we ſee, thither, and forget S. Peter, himſelfe, and Britanie ſo much, as to ſend none vnto it at all.
                     7. That S. Clement, and conſequently thoſe holy preiſts and Biſhops which were

conſecrated, and ſent by him into theſe parts, were ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſtes, is manifeſt before, & his owne works ar ſo euident in this behalfe, that if S. Clement was not a maſſing preiſt, and Biſhop, and conſecrated ſuch, there neither is, or euer was any maſſinge preiſt in the world. For hee ſetteth downe at large the whole order of that holy ſacrifice, as it is now offered, and celebrated by Roman Catholicks, prouinge that vnbloody ſacrifice to bee the moſte holie bodie, and blood of Chriſt, ſo naming it, as alſo holy Oblation, Maſſe, and other ſuch titles as the preſent Roman church doth. (Clem. l. 6. constitut. cap. 23. l. 2. cap. 6.20. epiſtol. 2. l. 7. constitut. Apostol. cap. 43. l. 8. cap. 35. l. 10. Recognit. epiſt. 2. can. Apoſt. 3.4.5.72.) hee remembreth alſo the conſecrated Altars, whereon it was offered, altare cloathes, and veales, for the altare, lights thereuppon, church veſſels of gold, and ſiluer chalices, cruets, pales, incenſinge, holy veſtures by the Biſhops, and preiſts at that time, the ſigninge with the Croſſe, naminge of holy martyrs, and their memories, the preface to the Maſſe, and canon thereof, wherein was offered

the ſame ſacrifice, Chriſt himſelfe inſtituted. Prayers and ſacrifice for the deade, the ghoſpell and epiſtle reade at Maſſe, the pax or holy ſalutation, and with other ceremonies the preiſts benediction at the ende of the holy ſacrifice, how the Catech
                           •…
                        ens not baptiſed were not permitted to be preſent at the ſacrifice, but diſmiſſed before, and in no materiall thinge differeth from the preſent miſſale vſed in the church of Rome. epiſt. 2. l. 8. constit. cap. 16.17. l. 2. constit. cap. 23.61.63. l. 8. cap. 17. l. 6. cap. 30. l. 8. cap. 18.47.48. l. 2. cap. 63. l. 8. cap. 15. l. 2. cap. 61.62.
                     8. And it would bee a very vnlearned obiection, in this caſe for any man to ſay, that S. Clements workes haue beene corrupted: for euident it is before, that all his predeceſſors in the ſee of Rome, all the Apoſtles, Euangeliſts, and their diſciples in all places, taught, and practiſed this holy doctrine, and ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſo that except S. Clement ſhould be ſingular againſt them all, in this point, which is manifeſtlie vntrue before, his bookes could not bee corrupted, or corrected in this reſpect; and if they had beene altered therin, they had

beene corrected to the common receaued truth, and not corrupted with errors. Secondly no man that ſaith S. Clements workes to haue beene corrupted, as Ruffinus and others, doe ſay they were corrupted in any ſuch matter, but by the Eunomian hereticks, thruſtinge in ſome things, ſauouringe of their hereſie, into his books. (Ruffin. Apolog. pro Origene.) and Ruffinus and all thoſe men were teachers, practiſers and defenders of holy Maſſe. (Ruffin. histor. eccl. l. 1. cap. 22.) Thirdly our proteſtants which graunt the church to haue beene free from error longe after the firſt 400. yeares of Chriſt, before which Ruffinus liued, and theſe bookes were corrupted as hee with others teſtifieth, may not bee allowed by their owne Religion, to ſay theſe ſacrificinge and maſſinge doctrines were errors, but truthes of thoſe vnſpotted times. And ſo it is not poſſible that exceptinge ſome thinge tendings to the Eunomians hereſie foiſted into his works by them, any thinge els about theſe matters ſhould be thruſt in; for Ruffinus who, as before was a patron, and practiſer of Maſſe, and ſo teacheth it to haue beene the vniuerſall doctrine, and

practiſe of the church of God, witneſſeth, that whatſoeuer was corrupted in S. Clements works, hee himſelfe beeing, Apostolicus vir, immo pene Apostolus, an Apostolick man, and almoſt an Apostle. Were ſuch things as the eccleſiaſticall rule doth not receaue; quae eccleſiastica regula omnino non recipit. Ruffin. Apolog. ſupr. therefore the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſthood, beeing ſo authentically allowed by the eccleſiaſtical rule, both then, before, and after, could be none of thoſe things, which were corrupted, or inſerted into S. Clements works.
                     9. And to make this matter more ſure, wee haue many and renowned Authors of that, and following times, ſaying clearely, that S. Clement did compoſe, and publiſh to the world, a forme of Maſſe, which continued in ſucceedinge ages, and ſuch without any materiall chaunge, or difference, as the whole church of Chriſt now vſeth. Amonge theſe is S. Proclus Patriarch of Conſtantinople, ſucceſſor to S. Chriſoſtom that great maſſing prelate, who in his book of the ſacred Maſſe, de traditione diuinae Liturgiae, writeth in this maner. (Proclus Patriarch. Constantinopol. tract. de traditione

diuinae Liturgiae.) multi diuini Paſtores, qui Apoſtolis ſucceſſerunt, ac Eccleſiae Doctores, ſacrorum diuinae Liturgiae mysteriorum rationem explicantes, ſcriptis mandatam Eccleſiae tradiderunt, in quibus primi & clariſsimi ſunt S. Clemens, ſummi illius Apostolorum diſcipulus & ſucceſsor, qui ſacroſancta illa myſteria, à Sanctis Apoſtolis ſibi reuelata, in lucem edidit. Many diuine Paſtors, which ſucceeded the Apostles, and Doctors of the church, expoundinge the order of the holy misteries, of the diuine Liturgie Maſſe, committed it to writing, and deliuered it to the church, among whome the principall and most renowned were S. Clement, the diſciple and ſucceſſor of that cheifest of the Apoſtles, which did publish to light, thoſe holy miſteries reuealed vnto him by the Apoſtles. Where wee ſee, that S. Clement did not onely write the order of Maſſe, but is recompted in the firſt place, as one of the cheifeſt, that performed this holie worke.
                     10. The others which he there nameth ar S. Iames the Apoſtle, firſt Biſhop of Hieruſalem, S. Baſile the great, and S. Iohn Chriſoſtome, this mans ſpirituall Father, Pater noster Ioannes, cui aure a lingua cognomen

dedit. Who as hee ſaith did ſhorten the Apoſtles Maſſe, takinge ſome things from it, becauſe for the length it did not ſo well pleaſe ſome men, declined from that great zeale of the Apoſtles, and their time: for as he writeth in the ſame place, the holy Apoſtles were exceedingly deuoted to this moſt holy ſacrifice, as a thinge moſt neceſſary, and principall in their function: postquam Seruator noster in caelum aſſumptus est, Apoſtoli priuſquam per omnem terram diſpergerentur, conſpirantibus animis cum multam conſolationem in mystico illo Dominici corporis ſacrificio poſitam inueniſſent, fuſiſsmè, & longa oratione Liturgiam decantabant. Haec enim diuina ſacra vna cum dicendi ratione coniuncta, caeteris rebus anteponenda cenſebant, atque maiori & alacriori rerum diuinarum, & ſacrificij ſacroſancti studio & deſiderio flagrabant, & illud obnixe amplectebantur. After our Sauiour was aſſumpted vnto heauen, the Apostles before they were diſperſed through all the earth, aſſemblinge together, with agreeinge mindes, applied themſelues to pray all the day: and when they had found much conſolation placed in that myſticall ſacrifice of our Lords body, they did ſinge Liturgie (Maſſe moſt largely

with longe prayer. For they did thinke theſe diuine ſacrifices ioyned with preachinge to bee preferred before all other thinges, and were incenſed with a greater and more chearfull affection and deſire of diuine things, and the holy ſacrifice, and did embrace it, with all their power. Hitherto this auncient Saint, and Patriarch.
                     11. Of Ruffinus I haue ſpoken before, onely I add here, that he beeing commonlie takē to be the interpreter of many theſe works of S. Clement, where the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſthood ar ſo euidently approued, and acknowledging S. Clements works had bene in ſome things corrupted, euer taketh theſe for the true writings, and doctrine of S. Clement, and far from being corruptions, or inſertions by others. The holy learned and auncient Biſhop Nicholaus Methonenſis. Epiſc. l. de vero Christi corpore in Eucharistia. hauinge ſhewed, how S. Iames ſaid Maſſe at Hieruſalem, S. Peter and S. Paule at Antioch, S. Marke at Alexandria, S. Iohn and S Andrew in Aſia, and Europe, concludeth with an eminency for S. Clements Maſſe. Omneſque vniuerſae Eccleſiae vbicumque

ſint, per eam quam Sanctus Clemens conſcripſit Liturgiā tradiderunt. And all the Biſhops haue deliuered to the whole church, wherſoeuer diſperſed, the Liturgie or Maſſe accordinge to that order which S. Clement wrote. And to put vs out of al doubt, hee meaneth this of the holy ſacrifice of Chriſts body and blood in the Maſſe, that that his booke is inſtituted, de vero Christi corpore in Euchariſtia, of the true body of Chriſt in the Euchariſt, Marcus Epheſius and Beſſarion write the very ſame, of S. Clements Maſſe, citinge diuers teſtimonies, from thence for the reall preſence, of Chriſt in that moſt holy ſacrifice, and diuers others deliuer the like. Marcus Epheſ. l. de corpore & ſanguine Christi Beſsarion l. de Sacramento Eucharist. M. S. Gallic. antiq. pr. or que nous ſommes. an Dom. 81. in S. Clement.
                     
                     12. Whereby is euidently proued that S. Clement did not only write a forme of the Maſſe, & practiſe, as a ſacrificing preiſt that holy ſacrifice but this was ſo renowned, that it was publiſhed by the Biſhops, & receaued in all churches. And amonge theſe in this our Britanie, except the Brittiſh ātiquities

themſelues written before the vnion of the Chriſtian Britans with the diſciples of S. Gregory, and the conuerted Saxons in this contrie do deceaue vs, which our Engliſh Proteſtāts generally extolling the credit of thoſe monuments, and the Chriſtian Britans Religion, may not affirme. This antiquitie ſo auncient as I haue related, and purpoſely entreatinge of the firſt order of ſaying Maſſe, eſpecially in Fraunce, and this kingdome of Britanie, comprehending England and Scotland, is in that reſpect though with a later hand writinge thus intituled: prima institutio & varietas eccleſiaſtici ſeruity, praecipue in Britannia & Gallia: The firſt inſtitution and varietie of the eccleſiaſticall ſeruice eſpecially in Britanie & Fraunce. And it termeth it, curſum, the courſe or order of the publick Liturgie, or Maſſe thereby expreſſed. Bed. in Martyrolog. 4. cal. Ianuar. Beatus Trophinus Epiſcopus Arelatenſis, & Sanctus Phetinus Martyr, & Epiſcopus Lugdunenſis, diſcipulus Sancti Petri Apoſtoli, curſum Romanum in Gallijs tradiderunt. Inde postea relatione beati Photini Martyris cum quadraginta & octo Martyribus retruſi in ergaſtalum, ad beatum Clementem

quartum loci ſucceſſorem beati Petri Apostoli deportauerunt. Trophinus Biſhop of Arles, and S. Photin Martyr and Biſhop of Lions, diſciple of S. Peter Apoſtle, deliuered the Roman order in Fraunce. Then afterward the relation of S. Photin Martyr impriſoned together with 48. Martyrs, it was carryed to S. Clement, the fourth in ſucceſſion to S. Peter, the Apoſtle. Where wee plainely ſee, that the church of Rome had then a publick order & forme of Maſſe and this was publiſhed throughout France by S. Trophinus, from whoſe fountaine as I haue ſhewed before, both from Catholicks, and Proteſtants, all the churches of Fraunce did receaue inſtruction. Zoſimus Pap. epist. To. 1. Concil. Petr. Cluniacenſ. Magdeb. centur. 2. pag. 2. col. 6. Martyrolog. Rom. die 29. Decemb.
                     
                     13. And this Maſſe after the death of S. Peter, Linus, and Cletus, was approued by S. Clement, and as it ſeemeth by an auncient Manuſcript french hiſtory, hee added the epiſtle and ghoſpell which all were not written in S. Peters time. For thus it teſtifieth with others. S. Clement Pope ordeyneth that in the ſolemnitie of the Maſse, the epistle

and ghoſpell should bee reade. (M. S. French historie an. Do. 81. cap. 2.) and immediatlie addeth, how then hee ſent many preachers and holy Biſhops into Fraunce, and theſe parts, which could bringe with them no other Liturgie, or Maſſe, then that which their Maſter S. Clement had ſo publiſhed, and approued, both by his authoritie, and practiſe before. And if the Maſſe of S. Marke was not the ſame with Saint Peters, as ſome thinke, yet ſure wee are, ſeeing hee was an Euangeliſt, S. Peters ſcholler and wrote his ghoſpell, ex ore Petri, from S. Peters mouth, as S. Hierome witneſſeth, and by his approbation. (Hieron. in Catal. ſcript. in S. Marco.) that his Maſſe could not bee different from his Maſters, in any materiall thinge, and ſeeinge S. Peter approued his ghoſpell, hee did not, and would not diſproue or diſallowe his Maſſe: And yet this old Brittiſh antiquitie is witnes, that the Maſſe which the old Chriſtian Scots, did vſe in his time, and was accompted very holy, was practiſed by S. Marke, and from him continued to the time of this Author, by continuall tradition, from one to an other.
                     
                        14. Ipſum curſum qui dicitur preſenti tempore Scottorum, Beatus Marcus decantauit & post ipſum Gregorius Nazianzenus, quem Hieronymus ſuum Magistrum eſſe affirmat, & beatus Baſilius frater ipſius S. Gregorij, Antonius, Paulus, Macharius vel Ioannes, & Malchus ſecundum ordinem Patrum decantauerunt. Inde poſtea beatiſsimus Caſsianus, & post ipſum beatus Honoratus, & Sanctus Caeſarius Epiſcopus qui fuit in Arelata, & beatus Porcarius Abbas qui in ipſo monasterio fuit, ipſum curſum decantauerunt, qui beatum Lupum, & beatum Germanum Monachos in eorum monasterio habuerunt, & ipſi ſub norma regulae ipſum curſum ibidem decantauerunt. Et poſtea Epiſcopatus cathedram adepti in Britannijs & Scottijs praedicauerunt. Quae vita beati Germani Epiſcopi Antiſiodorenſis, & vita beat Lupi affirmat. Qui beatum Patricium literas ſacras docuerunt, atque enutrierunt. Et ipſum Epiſcopum in Scottijs ac Britannijs poſuerunt, qui vixit annos centum quinquaginta & tres, & ipſum curſum ibidem decantauit: & poſt ipſum beatus Vuandilocus ſenex, & beatus Gomogillus, qui habuerunt in eorum monasterio Monachos circiter tria millia. Inde beatus Vuandilocus in predicationis ministerium à

beato Gomogillo miſſus eſt, & beatus Columbanus partibus Galliarum, & ibidem ipſum curſum decantauerunt. That order which at this time is called the order of Scots, S. Marke did ſinge, and after him Gregory Nazianzen, whome Hierome affirmeth to haue beene his Maſter, and S Baſil brother of the ſaid S Gregory, Antonius, Paulus, Macharius or Iohn, and Malchus, accordinge to the order of the Fathers did ſinge it. And after that moſt bleſſed Caſſian, and after him S. Honoratus, and S. Caeſarius Biſhop, that was in Arles, and S. Porcarius Abbot, which was in the ſame monaſterie, did ſinge that order, who had monkes in their monaſtery S. Lupus and S Germanus, and they three vnder rule did ſinge the ſame order: and after made Biſhops preached in Britanie, and Scotlande, which thinges the life of S. German Biſhop of Antiſiodor, and the life of S. Lupus doth affirme, who taught S. Patricke holy learning, & brought him vp, and placed him Biſhop in Scotland, and Britanie, who liued an hundred fifty and three yeares, and ſonge there the ſame order. And after him Vuandilocus an old man, and S. Gomogillus, who had in

their monaſtery about three thouſand monkes. After S. Vuandilocus was ſent to preach by S. Gomogillus, as alſo S. Columbanus to the parts of Fraunce, and there they did ſinge the ſame order.
                     15. Hitherto the wordes of this ſo auncient, and approued Manuſcript Brittiſh antiquitie. So that whether ſoeuer, or to whomſoeuer we turne our ſelues to enquire of theſe thinges, whether Hebrues, Grecians, or Latines, Apoſtles, Euangeliſts, or their Diſciples, & with vs at home, Britons, or Saxons, Catholicks or Proteſtants, it is clearely and plainely confeſſed, that generally in this firſt Apoſtolicke age, and hundred yeares of Chriſt, which muſt needes bee allowed for a rule, ſquare, and direction to all ſucceedinge times, and poſterities. The holy ſacrificing preiſthood of the preſent Greeke and Latine church, and all Chriſtian nations, whether theſe late nouelties, haue not entered, ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and the moſte holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, were our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus his ſacred ordinances and inſtitutions, and ſo vſed, practiſed, and with all honor performed by the whole number of the

Apoſtles, without exception, their diſciples, and ſucceſſors in all places, & among the reſt, to the great glory thereof, in this our nation of great Britanie. And all this without any materiall chaunge, or alteration in that ſacrifice, the principall act, and office of truely cōſecrated preiſts, & preiſthood, as is before related, and our cheife proteſtantes haue before confeſſed of the moſte contradicted and queſtionable thinges, a ſacrifice inſtituted by Chriſt himſelfe, conteyning an oblation of his moſte bleſſed body, and blood, both for the liuing and faithfull departed, propitiatory for ſinnes, with a memory of the holy Saints in heauen, of which leſſer inſtance hath bene giuen, becauſe few Saints of the new teſtament were then at the firſt deceaſed this life, and entered into glory, yet the churches then dedicated to diuers of them, and inuocation & praier then made vnto them, as before appeareth, maketh it an vndoubted truth.
                     16. To which I only add for this kingdome of our Britanie from thoſe antiquities, both printed, and Manuſcripts, which our proteſtants moſt allowe, and approue,

that S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, and his holy company, beſides their buildinge a church, in honor of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, did expreſſely ſerue her, and pray vnto her: duod cim praedicti in eodem loco, Deo & beatae Virgini deuota exhibentes obſequia, vigilijs, ieiunijs, & orationibus vacantes, eiuſdem Virginis Dei, genitricis auxilio in neceſsitatibus ſuis refocillobantur. The twelue holy men ſpoken of before, S. Ioſeph and his companions, yeeldinge deuout ſeruices to God, and the bleſſed Virgin, attendinge to watchings, faſtings, and prayers, were in their neceſſities releiued by the helpe of the ſame Virgin, Mother of God. (Antiquitat. Glaſt. apud Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Ioſeph ab Aramath. & S. Patricio. antiq. M. S. tabulis affixae in ead Eccleſ. Glaston. and others.) So that whomſoeuer S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Ioſeph, or any other man will truly and ſeriouſlie allowe, or in his owne ſingular conceipt or phantaſie imagin, to haue beene the firſt preacher, & teacher of the Chriſtian faith, and Religion, in Britanie, or what or whoſe order and forme of Maſſe, and Liturgie, they will ſay was then here vſed and practiſed, they muſt needs by all authorities, &

warranted iudgements acknowledge, that the holy preiſts here in that time were ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, their externall Liturgie and ſacrifice, the ſacrifice of Maſſe, wherein Chriſts holy body and blood were conſecrated, and offered both for the liuinge, and faithfull departed, the Saints were remembred, and prayed vnto, and no materiall difference betweene that, and the preſent Maſſe, of either the Greeke or Latine church. And ſo I end this firſt age and hundred yeares of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  THE SECOND AGE OR HVNDRED YEARES OF CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        THE XV. CHAPTER. Wherein demonstration is made, both by proteſtants and other antiquaries, that ſacrificinge maſſinge preists, and Bishops, and ſacrifice of Maſse, continued and were honored in this kingdome of Britanie from the beginninge of this hundred yeares, vntill Kinge Lucius time, when it was wholly conuerted to that faith.
                     WE are now come to the beginninge of the ſecond age, or century

of yeares of Chriſt, when by all accompts in hiſtorie, Kinge Coillus, that was bred vp at Rome, was Kinge in Britanie, and S. Anacletus Pope of Rome. When many of our before remembred maſſinge and ſacrificinge Brittiſh preiſts, as namely S. Manſuetus, S. Beatus, his holy companion before by ſome named Achates, and S. Timotheus were liuinge. And though I doe not find any particularly named, whome S. Anacletus ſent hither, of the holy preiſtly maſſinge order, yet to followe euen the opinion, and direction of Engliſh Proteſtant antiquaries, in this buſines, wee muſt needs graunt, that hee had a care of this contry as wel as others in this kind, for they teſtifie of this Pope; Ab 
                              •…
                           pſo Domino primatum Romanae Eccleſiae ſuper omnes Eccleſias, vniuerſumque Christiani nomine populum conceſſum eſse aſſeruit. (Robert. Barns l. de vit. Pontific. Roman. in Anaclet. Ormerod. pict. Pap. pag. 78.) Pope Anacletus affirmed, that ſupremacy was graunted from our Lord himſelfe, to the church of Rome, ouer all churches, and all Christian people. Becauſe, ſaith hee, Christ ſaid to S. Peter, who liued and died at Rome, thou art Peter, or a rocke,

and vppon this rocke I will builde my church. Quia, inquit, Petro agenti & morienti Romae dixit, tu es Petrus & ſuper hanc petram aedificabo Eccleſiam meam. By which reaſon amonge others, diuers other learned Engliſh Proteſtant writers, with publicke priuilege and allowance, doe proue vnto vs firſt confeſſinge with this holy Pope, that Chriſt made S. Peter the ſupreame and cheife gouernour of his church: ſecondly that this ſupreamacy was neceſſary and to continue foreuer in his church: and thirdly becauſe S. Peter dyinge Biſhop of Rome, and at Rome, and there onely poſſibly to haue his laſte and immediate ſucceſſor, and ſo conſtituted by himſelfe as is euident in S. Clement before, it euidently followeth by the reaſon of this holy Pope, and proteſtants, that euen by Chriſt himſelfe this ſupreamacy ouer all churches and Chriſtians, was graunted to the church of Rome. Whereuppon theſe proteſtants teſtifie in his life, that hee ordeyned diuers lawes bindinge the whole church, and ſtill obſerued. Rob. Barnes in Anacleto.
                     
                     2. And if we may beleeue the firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and in

the whole world alſo, Matthew Parker, hee telleth vs how in particular his iuriſdiction extended into this kingdome of Britanie, and that the diuiſion and conſtitution of Archbiſhops ſees with vs, was by Pope Anacletus his ordination: Ex Anacle to huius inſulae diuiſionem. (Matth. Parker antiquitat. Brit. pag 24.) And that he was a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt, it muſt needs be graunted, both by his owne, and our proteſtant teſtimonies alſo of him; for hee himſelfe is witneſſe, that hee was made preiſt by the great ſacrificinge and maſſinge Apoſtle S. Peter: à Sancto Petro Apostolorum Principe, presbyter ordinatus. (Anacletus epiſt. 3. To. 1. concil.) and our proteſtants do plainely confeſſe of this holie Pope: Sacerdotem ſacrificaturum, miniſtros veſtibus ſacris indutos, ſeu teſtes & custodes ſibi adhibere ordinauit. Epiſcopos vero, & plures miniſtros ſibi in ſacris faciendis adiungat: & quod Sacerdote maior ac dignior ſit. (Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif Roman in Anacleto.) Pope Anacletus ordeined, that when a preiſt was to offer ſacrifice, hee ſhould take vnto him as witneſſes and keepers, miniſters in holy veſtiments. And that a

Biſhop ſhould ioyne vnto him more miniſters, when he ſaid Maſſe: And that hee is greater, and more worthie then a preiſt. The authoritie from whence they cite this, is much more plaine, where the very order wee ſtill vſe in ſolemne Maſſes is expreſſed. But the proteſtant words manifeſtly proue that the ſacrifice of Maſſe and ſacrificinge veſtures, were vſed frō the daies of the Apoſtles. Therfore this holy Pope exerciſing ſupreamacy, and enactinge lawes for the whole church in Britanie or whereſoeuer, as theſe proteſtāts there doe teſtifie, it muſt needs bee confeſſed, that the preiſts which in his time either for Britanie, or any other nation, were conſecrated immediatlie by himſelfe, or mediatly by his authority, were as himſelfe was, ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſtes, and the deacons alſo for which hee made decrees, by the teſtimony of theſe men. (Robert. Barnes Sup. in Anaclet. Matth. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. pag. 24.) were alſo as they teach, ſuch as ſerued at the altare and ſacrifice of Maſſe, as Maſter Foxe ſpeakinge of the very deacons ordeined by Pope Anacletus proueth in theſe termes. therefore ſerued the office of the deacons, as

wee reade, to lay the offerings of the people vppon the altare, to bee hallowed, and when the miſteries, be conſecrated, to distribute the cupp of the ſacred blood of the Lord, to the faithfull people. (Foxe Tom. 2. in Q. Mary. Ambroſ. l. de omnib. diuin. offic.)
                     
                     3. And much part of the aboade and reſidency of this holy Pope, as alſo of his predeceſſors and ſucceſſors as appeareth before, and will bee more manifeſt hereafter, was in that knowne maſſinge and ſacrificinge houſe, of our noble contriwoman S. Claudia, or her children. And the order of Maſſe which hee vſed, was the ſame which was practiſed by S. Peter the Apoſtle, and by him deliuered to the church, as theſe proteſtants haue before with other Authors confeſſed. (Matth. Parker antiquitat. Brit. pag. 47. cap. 17.) and ſuch was the condition of his next ſucceſſor S. Euaristus, vſing the ſame order of ſaying Maſſe, with S. Peter, and both claiminge, and exerciſinge ſupreamacie ouer all churches, as theſe proteſtants aſſure vs. (Parker ſupr. Barn. in vit. Pontif. in Euariſto. Io. Funoc. commentar. l. 5. an. 105. Ed. Grimston.) and Nennius the auncient Brittiſh writer, who as theſe proteſtants

ſay, wrote a thouſand yeares ſince, doth expreſſely affirme, in his Manuſcript hiſtory, that hee delt with the Kinge himſelfe of this our Britanie about the conuerſion thereof, probably before Kinge Lucius was borne: Miſſa legatione à Papa Romano Euaristo. And many were conuerted by this h
                           •…
                        s meanes. (booke of estates pag. 435. Bal. l. de ſcriptor. cent. 1. in Nennio Banchor. Nennius hiſtor. M.S.) therefore this Pope being knowne to bee a maſſinge Pope, the preiſts which were (by Nēnius) ſēt hither by him, muſt needs bee maſſing preiſts, as all others here, at, and before that miſſion were.
                     4. Next is Pope Alexander, a man, by our proteſtants allowance, ſtudio euangelizandi & miraculis celebris, interfectus martyr obijt: renowned for his zeale in preachinge the ghoſpell, and miracle, and dyinge a martyr. (Whitguiſt. answ. to the admonit. pag. 97.98. Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontific. Rom. in Alexandro 1. Bal. act. Rom. Pontific. in eodem.) this Pope as Albertus Krantzius writeth, ſent preachers, and preiſts into this our Britanie. (Albert. Krantz. Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) therefore to know of our proteſtāts whether they were maſſing preiſtes,

we muſt enquire, and learne of them, what he was in this reſpect that ſent them, becauſe hee would not, not could ſend others then hee himſelfe was, for ſuch a buſines. That hee was a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt, and Pope theſe proteſtants thus aſſure vs, by the lawes and decrees which as they thus teſtifie, hee made and publiſhed for the church. (Robert. Barn. in vit. Pont. in Aleaandro 1. Io. Funccius l. 5. commentar. in Alexand. 1. an. 111.) In Eucharistiae ſacrificio aquam vino admiſceri voluit. Ad Eucharistiae oblationem azimum panem non fermentatum, ſumendum eſse praecepit. Vno die vnam tantum Miſſam à ſingulis ſacrificijs fieri debere, decreto ſanciuit. Peccata ſacrificio (de Eucharistia loquens) deleri ait: Ideo paſſionem in Miſſa recitandam instituit. Rationem effectus huius ſacrificij, hoc est, quod peccata expiet, adiecit, dicens: Quia corpore & ſanguine Christi in ſacrificijs nihil maius eſt. Hee tooke order that in the ſacrifice of Euchariſt, water ſhoulde bee mingled with wine. He commaunded, that vnleuened and not leuened breade ſhould bee vſed for the ſacrifice of the Euchariſt. Hee made a decree, that no ſacrificing preiſt ſhould ſay more then one

Maſſe in one day. Speakinge of the Euchariſt he ſaith, that ſinnes ar blotted out with ſacrifice: therefore hee ordeyned that the paſſion ſhould bee recited at Maſſe. He added the reaſon of this effecte of this ſacrifice to purge ſinnes, ſayinge: becauſe in ſacrifice nothinge is greater, then the body and blood of Chriſt.
                     5 Theſe proteſtants add further of this maſſinge Pope, in this buſines (Rob. Barns ſupr. in Alex. 1.) In Maſſa pridiè quam pateretur, vſque ad haec verba. Hoc est corpus meum addidit, ad memoriam paſsionis Christi in
                              •…
                           ul
                              •…
                           andam He added in the Maſſe, the day before hee ſuffered, vnto theſe words, this is my body, to impreſſe in our memories the paſſion of Chriſt. Where we ſee it euidently confeſſed by theſe proteſtants themſelues, that this primatiue holy Pope Alexander that liued (to ſpeake in a Proteſtant Archbiſhops words, anno 111. in the yeare of Christ one hundred and eleuen) and was a godly Bishop. (Ioh. Whitguift answ. to the admonit. ſect. 1.2. pag 97.98. and dif. of the answ pag. 594.) and by the German hiſtorian before ſent preiſts into this kingdome, was as farr engaged in the miſteries of holie

Maſſe, as any Roman maſſinge preiſt is at this preſent, acknowledging it to be the greateſt of al ſacrifices, the body and blood of Chriſt, a ſacrifice expiatinge and propitiatory for ſinnes. And what matter was to bee vſed and conſecrated, and how preiſts were to behaue themſelues in this moſt holie ſacrifice. And it appeareth euen by theſe mens teſtimonies, that the preiſts of that time are ſo far from not ſayinge Maſſe, that they did not onely daily offer this moſt holie ſacrifice of Chriſts body and blood for ſinnes, but they ſaid Maſſe more often then once a day, diuers Maſſes in one day, vntill it was forbidden as before by this holy Pope, That one preiſt, should ſay but one Maſſe a day. Vno die vnam tantam Miſſam à ſingulis ſacrificijs fieri debere, decreto ſanciuit.
                     
                     6. This Pope was as all Chriſtians then, far from beinge a parlamentary proteſtant of England to puniſh ſayinge or hearinge of Maſſe daily with a yearely penaltie of foure and twenty thouſands, three hundreds & twenty pounds & twenty markes, an hūdred markes for euery Maſſe, or make holy ſacrificing maſſinge preiſts to be traitors, and their entertayners fellons, when

by theſe proteſtants (Rob. Barnes ſup. in Alexandro 1.) this holy Pope excommunicated thoſe that reſiſted the Popes Legats, and forbad preists and cleargie men to bee conuented before a lay tribunall. Legatis Apostolicis obſistentes, decreto excommunicauit. Clericum ad plebeium tribunal pertrah
                              •…
                           re prohibuit. And yet hee was ſo holy and renowned a man, as beſides that which proteſtāts haue teſtified of him before, an other writeth. (Edw. Grimston. in the eſtate of the church of Rome. pag. 435. in Alex. 1.) Alexander a Roman, a man of ſo holy a life, as many Roman Senators receaued the Chriſtian Religion by reaſon of his great pietie. So wee may be aſſured that all Chriſtiās thē were of his opiniō in theſe things, as they before him were: for none of theſe things which theſe proteſtāts here ſay, hee decreed, were new, or inuented or added by him, but confirmed in their firſt inſtitution and integritie, as I haue proued from theſe proteſtants and others before, that the mixture of water with wine was an apoſtolicall tradition. Couel againſt Burg. pag. 122.) which S. Alexander himſelfe confirmeth, when hee ſaith of it. (Cyprian. epistol. 63. Alexand. 1. epiſtol. 1.) a patribus

accepimus, & ipſa ratio docet. We haue ſo receaued it from our predeceſſors, and reaſon it ſelfe ſo teacheth, and therefore commaundeth, vt pauis tantum, & vinum aqua permixtum in ſacrificio offerantur, that onely breade and wine mixed with water, bee offered in the ſacrifice, and S. Cyprian plainely ſaith it was, Dominica traditio, a tradition of Chriſt himſelfe, by his owne order and example. And hee with others ſo expoundeth Salomon in the Prouerbs to propheſie therof, as I haue declared at large before. Prouerb. c. 9. Ciprian. epiſt. 63. ad Cecilium.
                     
                     7. The eminency of this ſacrifice, aboue all others, how it conteyneth the body and blood of Chriſt, and is ſatisfactory for ſinnes, as S. Alexander by theſe proteſtants teacheth, they haue often told vs before, that it was ſoe eſteemed from the firſt inſtitution thereof by Chriſt. That which hee ſaith, how it ought to bee ſolemnized with vnleuened breade, was alſo, as the proteſtants, beſides the generall practiſe of the Latine church, aſſure vs, the ordinance of Chriſt himſelfe, and the lawe it ſelfe, as a Proteſtant Archbiſhop with others thus

expoūdeth this confirmatory decree of this holy Pope. (Ioh. Whitguife answ. to the admonit. ſect. 1.2. pag. 98. and def. of the answ. pag 594.) Alexander was a good and godly Bishop, it is reported in ſome writers, that hee appointed vnleuened breade to bee vſed in the Eucharist, becauſe that Christ himſelfe vſed the ſame accordinge to the lawe written Exod. 12. Deuteron. 16. The wordes: pridie quàm pateretur, the day before Chriſt ſuffered, vnto the words, hoc eſt corpus meum, this is my body; were not newly added by Pope Alexander, but declared by him to bee the inſtitution of Chriſt himſelfe, and ſo of neceſſitie to bee vſed. For theſe hee teſtifieth thereof. (Alexand. 1. epist. 1. ad omnes Orthodox. Tom. 2. concil. de conſe. diſt. 2. nihil in Sac.) Ipſa veritas nos inſtruxit &c. Christ Ieſus truth it ſelfe hath inſtructed vs to offer the chalice and breade in the Sacrament, when hee ſaith: Ieſus tooke breade, and bleſsed it, and gaue to his diſciples, ſayinge: Take and eate for this is my body, which shall bee giuen for you, likewiſe after hee had ſupped, hee tooke the chalice, and gaue to his diſciples, ſayinge: Take and drinke you all of it, for this is the chalice of my blood, which shall

bee shed for you, for remiſsion of ſinnes. For offences and ſinnes are blotted out with theſe ſacrifices offered vnto our Lord. And therfore his paſsion is to bee remembred in theſe, by the which wee are redeemed, and often to bee recited, and theſe to bee offered vnto our Lord. With ſuch ſacrifices our Lord will bee delighted and pacified, and forgiue great ſinnes. For in ſacrifices nothinge can bee greater then the body, and blood of Christ. Nor any oblation better then this, but this excelleth all. Which is to be offered to our Lord with a pure conſcience, and to bee receaued with a pure minde, and to bee reuerenced of all men. And as it is better then all others, ſo it ought more to bee worshipped and reuerenced. Quae pura conſcientia Domino offerenda eſt, & Pura mente ſumenda, atque ab omnibus veneranda. Et ſicut potior est cateris, ita potius excoli & venerari debet.
                     
                     8. This was the opinion of this holy Pope, and all good Chriſtians vnder his charge, in that prime age of Chriſtianitie, and hereby wee perfectly knowe, that S. Alexander did not add any new thinge to the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, but only propoſed the ordinance and inſtitution of Chriſt

himſelfe, to bee followed and obſerued, as is euident in that I haue cited from him, wherby it appeareth, that what he wrote in that matter, ipſa veritas nos instruxit, that Chriſt the infallible truth, did teache and ſo inſtruct and inſtitute as euidently is proued by comparinge thoſe wordes, which theſe proteſtants ſay S. Alexander added in the Maſſe, to the inſtitution of Chriſt, as it is deliuered in holy ſcriptures by the Euangeliſts and S. Paule. The words ſuppoſed to bee added bee theſe: Qui pridie quàm pateretur: who (Chriſt) the day before his paſſion tooke breade into his holy and venerable hands, and lifting vp his eyes towards heauen to thee, God his Father omnipotent, giuinge thanks vnto thee, bleſſed it, brake and gaue to his diſciples, ſaying, take and eate you all of this. For this is my body. All vnto the laſt wordes, for this is my body. They ſay were S. Alexanders addition. But S. Paul, as hee is tranſlated by our proteſtants, hath the ſame from Chriſts inſtitution, in this maner. (1. Corinth. cap. 11. verſ. 23.24.25.26.) I haue receaued of the Lord that which alſo I deliuered vnto you, that the Lord Ieſus the ſame night in which he was betraied tooke

bread, and when hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it, and ſaide, take, eate, this is my body, which is broken for you: doe this in remembrance of mee. After the ſame maner alſo hee tooke the cup, when hee had ſupped, ſayinge, this cup is the new testament in my blood, this doe yee as oft as yee drinke it, in remembrance of mee. For as often as yee eate this bread, and drinke this cup, yee doe shew the Lords death till hee come. Wherfore vvhoſoeuer shall eate this bread, and drinke this cup of the Lord vnvvorthily, shall be guilty of the bodie, and blood of the Lord. The like haue the Euangeliſts, S. Matthew, Marke, and Luke from the wordes and inſtitution of Chriſt himſelfe. Matth. cap. 26. Marc. cap. 14. Luc. cap. 22.
                     9. And it plainely appeareth by that is ſaid, that without theſe wordes, or their equiualent, it is vnpoſſible to obſerue the inſtitution and commaundement of Chriſt in this behalfe. And therfore our moſt learned, holy, and auncient contriman S. Albinus, or Alcuinus, Remigius Antiſiodorenſis, and others after them, confidently and truely ſay. (Albin. Flac. Alcuin. l. de diuin. officijs cap. de celebratione Miſſa. Remigius

Antiſsiodor. in expoſit. Miſſae. Hoc quod ſequitur, qui pridie quam pateretur, vſque in memoriam facietis: Apostoli &c. This which followeth, who the day before hee ſuffered, vnto thoſe wordes, you ſhall doe it in my commemoration, the Apoſtles had in vſe after the aſcenſion of our Lord. Therefore, that the church might celebrate a continuall memory of her redeemer, our Lord deliuered it to his Apoſtles, and the Apoſtles generally to the whole church in theſe words, without which, no tonge, no Region, no citie, that is, no part of the church can conſecrate this Sacrament. Which the Apoſtle doth make manifeſt, ſayinge: for I haue receaued of our Lord, which I haue alſo deliuered vnto you, that our Lord Ieſus the night when he was betrayed, tooke breade, and the reſt. Therfore by the power and wordes of Chriſt, this breade and this chalice was conſecrated from the beginninge, is euer conſecrated and ſhall be conſecrated. For he ſpeakinge his words by his preiſts, doth by his heauenly bleſſing make his holy body and blood.
                     10. S. Ambroſe relateth this in the ſame maner in theſe wordes. Ambroſ. l. 4. de Sacramentis

cap. 5. vis ſcire quia verbis caelestibus conſecratur &c. Wilt thou knowe that conſecration is done by heauenly wordes? receaue what the wordes bee. The preiſt doth ſay: make vnto vs, ſaith he, this oblation ratified, reaſonable, acceptable: which is the figure of the body, and blood, of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Who the day before hee ſuffered did take breade in his holy hands, and looked to heauen, to thee ô holy Father, omnipotent euerlaſtinge God giuing thanks: bleſſed it, brake it, and beeinge broken gaue to his diſciples, ſayinge, take and eate you all of this: for this is my bodie, which ſhal be broken for many. Likewiſe alſo hee tooke the cup after hee had ſupped, the day before hee ſuffered, looked to heauen to thee ô holy Father eternall God, giuinge thankes: bleſſed it, gaue it to his Apoſtles, and diſciples, ſayinge take you, and drinke you all of it: for this is my blood. Behold all thoſe wordes are the Euangeliſts, vntill thoſe, take and drinke, either body or blood. After they bee the words of Chriſt: take drinke you all of it: For this is my blood. Conſider euery thing, who the day before ſaith hee that hee ſuffered,

hee tooke breade in his holy hands, before it is conſecrated it is breade, but after the words of Chriſt come vnto it, it is the bodie of Chriſt.
                     11. The like hee hath in other places, ſo haue other auncient and holy Fathers, and ſo plainely that our proteſtants themſelues doe freely graunt (Foxe Tom 2. act. and Monum. in Queene Mary.) that it was ſo practiſed, and deliuered by the Apoſtles themſelues, and that it was further the expreſſe commaundement of Chriſt to vſe thoſe or their equiualents words: verba institutionis caenae r
                              •…
                           citata omnino videntur. Nam Paulus ea non fruſtra 1. Cor. 11. repetit. & quidem annexum mandatum hoc facite in mei commemorationem, postulat vt historia illa de institutione & paſsione Chriſti recolatur, vt Paulus 1. Cor. 10. The words of the inſtitution of the ſupper doubtles, were recited in the Apoſtles time, for Paul doth not in vaine repeate them, in his firſt Epiſtle, and eleuenth chapter, to the Corinthiens, and certes the commaundement of Chriſt, do this in commemoration of mee, doth require, that the hiſtory of the inſtitution, and paſſion of Chriſt, bee related, as

Paul witneſſeth 1. Cor. 10. (Magdeburgen. centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 6. col. 500. c. Ritus circa caenam Domini.) Therefore by all conſents, this holy Pope exerciſinge ſupreame ſpirituall iuriſdiction in all places, and beeinge ſo famous a maſſinge Pope, and ſtill retayninge the Maſſe of the Apoſtles, and by ſome (as before) ſendinge preiſts into this our Britanie, neither theſe which he is ſuppoſed to haue ſent hither, or thoſe others which ſtil after this ſuruiued of this natiō, were or could bee any others then ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts: neither our Chriſtian Brittans at Rome ſo neare vnto him, bee others then hearers or ſayers of holie Maſſe.
                     12. Succeſſor to S. Alexander was S. Sixtus the firſt of that name, who as theſe proteſtants tell vs, was Pope ten yeares, three moneths and 21. dayes, ſucceedinge his bleſſed predeceſſor as well in this opinion, and practiſe of ſacrificinge preiſthood, and holy Maſſe, as in the papall dignitie, for as theſe men ſay. (Robert, Barnes in vit. Pontific. Rom. in Sixton. Io. Func. l. 5. commentar. in Sixto 1. an 121.) ſacra vaſa ne quis praeter ſacros ministros attingerent, praecepit.

Quod corporale appellant, ex lineo panno fieri iuſsit. Miſsam non niſi in altari celebrandam eſſe, constituit. Hee commaunded that none but ſacred miniſters ſhould handle the ſacred veſſels, that which they call the corporall hee commaunded to be made of linnen cloath. He ordeyned that Maſſe ſhould not be celebrated, but vpon an altare. And ſo wee are aſſured by theſe enemies to holy Maſſe, and ſacrificinge preiſthood, that he in all places maintained both, for hee was ſo abſolute for the Popes ſupreamacy euen by theſe witneſſes, that, hee gaue power to all eccleſiaſticall ministers to appeale from their Bishop to the Pope of Rome. Ab Epiſcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi ius dedit eccleſiaſticis ministris.
                     
                     13. Succeſſor to S. Sixtus was Teleſphorus, both in dignitie and doctrine alſo by the warrant of theſe proteſtāts, for by them hee was ſo deuoted a defendor, and teacher of ſacrificinge preiſthood, and holy Maſſe that, hee decreed euery preist should ſay three Maſſes vpon Chriſt-Maſſe day, and an other dayes they shoulde not ſay Maſſe before the third hower of the day. Hee commaunded that the ſonge of the Angels glory to God on high,

should bee ſunge at Maſſe. Yet ſay two Proteſtant Biſhops, and one theire primate: there is nothing conteyned in gloria in excelſis, but the ſame is taken out of the ſcriptures, and to bee vſed of all true Christians. Teleſphorus who added it, was a good Bishop, a man notable for learninge, and pietie; eruditione ac pietate vir inſigius, and the church of Rome as yet pure in doctrine. Rob. Barn. ſupr. in Teleſphor. Func. l. 5. comment. an. 129. Stowe and Howes hiſtor. in Helius Adrian. Cartwright adm. Whitguift answ. to. admonit. pag. 101. & def. pag. 602. Bal. l. 1. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Teleſphor.
                     
                     14. S. Higinius ſucceedinge, ſucceeded alſo by theſe proteſtants, as well in exerciſing ſpirituall ſupreamacy ouer all Biſhops, decreeinge, that no Metropolitane shoulde condemne any Bishop of his Prouince, without the aduiſe of the other Bishops. And for ſacrificinge preiſthood, and Maſſe, hee honored them ſo much, that liuinge in the time of the Emperor Antonius Pius, a fauourer of Chriſtians, he decreed that Chriſtian churches ſhould be dedicated, with ſolemne rite of ſacrifice of Maſſe. Cum ſolemni ceremoniarum & ſacrificiorum ritu dedicanda

eſſe. (Io. Funcc. l. 5. commentar. an. 141. Rob. Barn. in Higin. ſupr.) and by an other proteſtant: Templa dedicare cum ſolemni ceremonia & ſacrificio iuſsit. In this Popes time, as many of our proteſtant antiquaries with others from antiquities tell vs, we had manie godlie Chriſtian preachers, and preiſts in Britanie, which by ſo many teſtimonies before without any exception muſt needes be ſacrificing maſſing preiſts, and by many authorities conuerted many to that holy faith, and ſacrificinge maſſinge Religion of Chriſt in this kingdome, (Annal. Burton. an. 140. or 141. Harriſon deſcript. of Britanie Io. Caius l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Harris Theat. Tom. 2.) and no meruaile whē ſo many Authors write, that in one towne of Cambridge there were thē nyne ſuch learned Chriſtiās of that only place; a ſchole of learninge, at, and diuers hundreds of yeares before that time, as the antiquities and antiquaries of that vniuerſitie informe vs. And no man can doubt of many ſuch preiſts being here then, if he duely conſider the difficulties of a generall conuerſion of ſo large, and Idolatrous ſauage nation, as this at that time

was, and how all agree, it was wholly conuerted long before the death of Kinge Lucius, who by Matthew of Weſtminſter, commended by our proteſtants for an exact calculator of times, and others, beeinge borne in the 115. yeare of Chriſt, was at the death of this Pope, holdinge the papacie but 4. yeares, 3. moneths, and a very fewe dayes, 35. yeares of age, and had bene Kinge 25. yeares, his Father Coillus dying, when hee was but 10. yeares olde, and yet by all antiquities, in all his life euen before his owne conuerſion, a great frend and fauourer of Chriſtians, and this his kingedome a refuge, and receptacle of them, that were in thoſe times perſecuted for Chriſtian Religion. Matthew of Weſt. Anno gratiae 115. Ioh. Bal. l. de ſcript. in Matth. Weſtm. Rob. Bar. ſup. in Higinio. Matth. Westm. an. 150. Matth. Westm. an. gratiae 124.
                     15. And to omit forreine examples beyonde number in this caſe, when the Saxons of this nation, were conuerted by the diſciples of Gregory, though S. Auguſtine was a very miraculous man, and his companions many and holy learned men, and induſtrious in that ſacred worke, & found

many worthie and renowned Biſhops here with their cleargies that aſſiſted them with al their power in the conuerſion of this nation, as thoſe glorious Biſhops S. Molocus that ioyned with, S. Bonifacius, ſent from Italy with many good mē, cum piorum caetu, S. Iue, S. Kentegern, S. Aſaph, S. Lethardus ſtiled the precurſor, and vvay maker to S. Auguſtine, praecurſor & ianitor venturi Auguſtini, with others, and had all the furtherance the holy Queene S. Bertha, and her husband Kinge Ethelbert the moſt potent in this Iland reigninge from the vttermoſt coaſts of kent vnto Humber, and by the vertues of S. Bertha and S. Lethardus by many arguments, a Chriſtian in iudgement and affection before S. Auguſtines cominge hither. Hect. Boeth. hiſt. l. 9. fol. 178. Holish. hiſt. of Engl. l. 5. c. 29. pag. 112. Capgrau. in S. Iuone M. S. in vit. eius & in S. Aſaph. & Kentegern. Godvvin. Catal. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcript. Capgrau. in S. Lethard. Matth. Parker. antiq. in S. Augustin Stowe histor. in Kinge Ethelb Holinsh. hiſtor. of Engl. Theater of great Brit. in K. Ethelbert. Bed. l. 1. histor. & l 2.
                     16. Yett S. Auguſtine and fine other

Archbiſhops of Canterbury after him S. Laurence, S. Mellitus, S, Iuſtus, S. Honorius, and S. Adeodatus, were deade, and aboue foure ſcore yeares paſſed, after the cominge of S. Auguſtine into England, before this kingdome wholly ſubmitted it ſelf to the true diſcipline of holy church, in the time, and by the labours of that our moſte learned Archbiſhop, S. Theodor. Godvvin. Catal. in Theodor. Matth. Parker in eodem Capgrau. & M. S. in vit. S. Theodori. Therfore ſeeing wee haue ſo ample warrant in antiquities, as the olde chronicle of Landaffe, aſcribed to S. Telian, S. Bede, the old Engliſh Chronicle, named Beatus, Cocelin, and others that the faith of Chriſt was preached in Britanie in the time of Kinge Lucius in the 156. yeare of Chriſt, and very many conuerted by preiſts ſent from the Pope of Rome, which was not aboue three yeares after the death of this Pope S. Higinius, & in the papacy of Pope Pius the firſt, we may not with iudgement thinke, but theſe preiſts or diuers of them that had wonne ſo many to Chriſt in that time, were ſent in the dayes of this maſſing Pope S. Higinius, and his ſacrificinge predeceſſors

which beſides that is already ſaid in this matter, will more appeare in the next Pope S. Pius the firſt. Chronicon Landaf. apud Io. Caium l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. pag. 107. Beda l. 1. histor. cap. 4. Chronicle Brutus an. 156. Gocelin. in vita S. Auguſtini cap. 31. Stovve histor. in Kinge Lucius Io. Caius ſupr.
                     
                     17. This holy Pope by all accompts gouerned the church of Chriſt at Rome, whē by ſo many auncient authorities the preiſts ſent from thence, had ſo increaſed and propagated the Chriſtian faith in this kingedome, who the better to bee mindefull of this nation, as his predeceſſors, by that amonge other motiues, were, liued and conuerſed moſte, and more then with any of any other contrie, or nation, with our Chriſtian Britans, that were then at Rome, in ſo much that we haue allowance both from Catholicks & Proteſtants, that a great part of their cheife reſidency was in the houſe of S. Claudia, our noble Chriſtian contriwoman, and with ſuch freedome and libertie to commaund therein, that diuers proteſtants, beſides all Catholicke antiquities aſſure vs, this holy Pope

by the graunt & donation of her holy children did cōſecrate it for the firſt Chriſtian church in Rome. (Robert. Barnes in vita Pontif. Rom. in Pio 1.) Thermas nonati templo dedicauit, Pope Pius the first dedicated the houſe of Nouatus (ſonne of S. Claudia) for a church. An other thus writeth of him, in this matter. Hee conſecrated the firſt temple of Rome, vvhich vvas dedicated to 5. Pudentiana, the Temples of Christians hauing bene in former times in hidden and obſcure caues. Edvv. Grimston booke of est. in the church of Rome. pag. 436.) the Catholicke antiquities that teſtifie this, are to many too be cited. (Act. & vit. S. Pudentianae & Breu. Rom. die 19. Maij. Martyrol. Rom. 19. Maij. Baron. annot. in eod. Rom. Martyrol. die 20. Iunij.) but they all agree, that the Popes of Rome were ordinarily intertayned in this houſe of our Chriſtian Britans, and eſpeciallie this holy Pope Pius ſaid Maſſe there, and vvas there releiued by S. Pudentiana, daughter to our Brittish Ladie Claudia, and the Christians came thither vſually to heare Maſſe, vvhen Antoninus the Emperor had forbidden Chriſtians to haue Maſſe publickly. Quòd ab Antonino Imperatore ſancitum erat, ne

Christiani publicè ſacrificia facerent: Pius Pontifex in adibus Pudentianae cum Christianis ſacra celebrabat.
                     
                     18. And to manifeſt farther vnto vs, what a maſſinge Pope this S. Pius was, and how in all probable iudgement, that holy doctrine amonge others, was propagated here in Britanie, theſe antiquities tell vs, there was in that Brittiſh houſe, ninty ſixe Christian men, nonagiata ſex homines Chriſtiani. (Pius Pap. 1. epiſt.) and the like hee writeth of the houſe of Euprepia, where hee alſo liued, and ſaid Maſſe, vbi nunc cum pauperibus commorantes, Miſſ is agimus. And hee was ſo zelous herein, and to haue Maſſe ſaid with all attention, & deuotion, that he decreed as theſe proteſtants teſtifie, to write in their owne words: Sacerdotibus negligentius Miſſae ſacra facientibus paenas statuit. (Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontific. Rom. in Pio 1. Grimston in Pius 1. Io. Func. commentar. in Chronolog. l. 5. in Pio 1. an. 145.) He ordeyned puniſhments for preiſts that ſaid Maſſe negligently. That if any by imprudency ſhoulde ſhedd any of the blood of Chriſt, vppon the ground, hee ſhoulde doe penance fourtie dayes. If vppon the altare,

3. dayes. That if vpon the linen cloath vnder the chalice 4. dayes. If vpon the other linen cloathe 9. dayes. That hee ſhould lick vp the blood of Chriſt, that was ſhedd, or if that could not be, either pare it, or waſhe it away, and ſo pared or waſhed, either to bee burnt, or kept reſerued in the ſacrarie. Vt ſi quis per imprudentiam de ſanguine Chriſti effunderet in terram, paenitentiam ageret dies 40. Si ſuper altare, dies 3. Si ſuper linteum ſubstratum calici, 4. dies. Si ſuper aliud linteum, dies 9. Sanguinem Chriſti effuſum lambere, vel ſi id fieri non poſsit, aut radere, aut eluere: & raſum aut lotum, vel comburi, vel in ſacrarium repoſitum ſeruari.
                     
                     19. Therefore this Pope beeinge in all mens iudgements, Catholicks and Proteſtants. (Ioh. Bal. l. 1. act. Pontif. Rom. in Pio 1.) an holy Saint, and martyr, and to vſe a Proteſtant Biſhops words, one that did many vvorks of true pietie in the field of the Christian church, multa verae pietatis opera, in agro Chriſtianae Eccleſiae feciſſe perhibetur, was ſo wel acquainted with our Chriſtian Britans, and both claymed and exerciſed ſupreame ſpirituall iuriſdiction ouer all places, and parſons in matters of Religion by

theſe proteſtants. (Robert. Barnes in vit. Pij 1.) Quae ad Religionem ſpectant, à ſuae dioceſeos ſynodis audtenda eſſe ſtatuit: ſalua tamen Pontificia authoritate, of all natious this our Britanie muſt needs then bee an honorer of ſacrificinge preiſts, and holy Maſſe, in this time, and euer after, vnto the generall conuerſion of it in the time of S. Eleutherius, betweene whome and this Saint Pius there were but two Popes, S. Anicetus and S. Sother, both which were not Popes many yeares by theſe proteſtāts, not 18. yeares by any of their accompts. Robert. Barn. in Pio 1. Anicet. & Sother. Io. Balaeus in act. Pontif. in eiſdem Edvv. Grimst. in the ſame Popes. Foxe Tom. 1.
                     20. And theſe Popes were ſo far from croſſinge with this, and others their predeceſſors in theſe points of ſupreamacy, ſacrificinge preiſts, and ſacrifice of Maſſe, that by the confeſſion of theſe proteſtants, they made decrees, which confirmed them all, makinge lawes bindinge all Archbiſhops, Primates, and Metropolitans, and ſhewing they were ſubiect to the Pope of Rome, and preſcribed rules for all preiſts ſayinge Maſſe, and ſhauing their crownes, as they now

vſe in the Roman church, at this day, Archiepiſcopum à ſuo Epiſcopo, aut coram primate, aut Romano Pontifice accuſandum eſſe. Archiepiſcopos non Primates, ſed Metropolitanos appellandos eſſe dixit, niſi iſta praerogatiua à Romano Pontifice concederetur. Capitis verticem ſpherulae instar radendum Sacerdotibus, praecopit. Ne Sacerdos celebraret, niſi vt minimum duo adeſsent, ordinauit, ne Monacha pallam contrectaret, neuè thus in aceram poneret, ſtatuit. So wee are ſure, theſe two holy Popes, Saints and Martyrs, were alſo ſacrificinge Popes, and all preiſts at that time vnder them, whether in Britanie or els where, beeinge ſubiect and obedient vnto them, were maſſinge preiſts. And ſo wee are now come with a continuall deduction of theſe ſacred doctrines and practiſes, both in the church of this our Britanie, and others vntill the time of Pope and Saint Eleutherius, when and by whoſe happy meanes hiſtorians commonly tell vs, this kingedome was generally conuerted to the faith of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE XVI. CHAPTER. Wherin is proued by testimonies of proteſtants, and others, that this kingdome in the time of Kinge Lucius, was conuerted by maſsing Preists, and Bishops, and the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and ſuch maſsinge preists and Bishops, continued here in honor, all this age.
                     IN this happy generall conuerſion of this kingdome, no man of what Religion ſoeuer, can without prophane and irreligious boldnes, and impudentnes affirme in iudgement, that ſo wiſe and vertuous a Kinge, his Nobles, ſo many learned Druides, and others, eſpecially moued to Chriſtian Religion by the pa
                           •…
                        ence, pietie, and vertue of the glorious Martyrs, and Saints of thoſe dayes by all antiquities, Maſſe ſayinge or Maſſe hearinge Chriſtians, would write ſuch ſuppliant letters, and ſend Ambaſſadors ſo longe a iorney, as from hence to Rome, to bee conuerted to any other Religion of Chriſt, but that ſacrificinge and maſſinge profeſſion, by the miracles and ſanctity of whoſe profeſſors, they were ſo

moued and conuinced in iudgement, it was the only truth. Neither would or could Pope Eleutherius an holy & learned Saint, and ſucceſſor onely to ſacrificinge maſſing Popes, and preiſts, recommend vnto King Lucius, and this kingdome, any other then maſſinge preiſts, and Religion, or the learned meſſengers of Kinge Lucius, as our proteſtants ſtile them. (Io. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcriptor. in Eluan. & Meduuin. Math. Parker. antiq. Brit. Godwin. Conuerſ. of Britanie.) conſent to any other, or ſo many renowned both preiſts and Biſhops, as were ſtill remayninge in, or of this nation knowne maſſinge preiſts, and biſhops, ioyne with the Legats of Pope Eleutherius, in teaching and preachinge any other doctrine, or Religion.
                     2. Such were our renowned contrimen S. Manſuetus, yet liuinge except the Annals of Treuers, or the ſame name deceaue vs, conſecrated preiſt by S. Peter, and now remoued from Toul to Treuers, for the eccleſiaſticall Annals of that archiepiſcopall ſea tell vs. (Petr. Merſſaeus Annal. Archiep. Treueren. 7.) that S. Manſuetus (I reade of no other of that name but our holy coutryman

in that time) was Archbishop of Treuers in the yeare of Christ 160. Manſuetus, qui huic nomini & vocationi ſuae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optimè reſpondit. And S. Marcellus or Marcellinus our glorious contryman, who before his departure out of Britanie had moued Kinge Lucius to the faith of Chriſt, and after of the Tungers, and Archbiſhop alſo of Treuers returninge hither with the Popes Legats, was ſo renowned an inſtrument in the conuerſion of this kingdome, that the Annals of the place where hee was Archbiſhop ſay, that by the preachinge of this Saint, the third Biſhop of Tungers Kinge Lucius was baptiſed. (Annal-Treuer. in S. Marcello.) S. Marcellus, alijs Marcellinus fuit Tungorum tertius Epiſcopus, & huius praedicatione Rex Angliae, id est Lucius, baptizatus eſt. The catalogue of the Biſhops of Tunger giueth him greater honor, tellinge vs, that by his preaching hee conuerted Lucius Prince of Britanie with the whole nation to the faith of Chriſt. Lucium Britanniae Principem cum tota gente, ſua praedicatione ad Christum conuertit (Catalog. Epiſcop. Tungrenſ. in S. Marcello.) And yet I haue ſhewed before, that theſe were maſſinge

preiſts and Biſhops, as their predeceſſors in thoſe places, S Valerius, Eucharius, Maternus and others were.
                     3. The ſame I ſay of S. Tymotheus, our holy contryman, by his Mother S. Claudia beeinge a knowne maſſinge preiſt, and one of the owners of that his, and his brother Nouatus and Siſters houſe in Rome, ſo notoriouſly dedicated to bee the firſt publick maſſinge church there: for this holy maſſinge preiſt came hither in this time, and was ſo great a worker in the conuerſion of this his contrie, that the hiſtories of Treuers themſelues, which giue ſuch honor as before to their Archbiſhop S. Marcellus in this buſines, yet freely alſo acknowledge that Kinge Lucius, was brought to the Religion of Chriſt by S. Timothie, whome they call S. Paules diſciple, perhaps becauſe S. Paul maketh ſo honorable a memory of his parents, S. Pudens, and Claudia (2. Timoth. 4.) & likely did baptize this S. Timothie, and therby called his diſciple though a very child, when S· Paul was martyred. (Martyrolog. Rom. die 20. Iunij Baron. annot. ib. Sur. Tom. 3. die 12. Iunij.) and the other S. Timothie his ſcholler dead

longe before. S. Lucius Britanniae Rex S. Timothei Apostoli Pauli diſcipuli cruditione ad Religionem Christi inductus eſt. (Petr. Merſsaeus & Annal. Archiep. & eccl. Treuer. in S. Marcello.) If wee reflect vppon the Saints that were ſent cheife Legats hither, from Rome, S. Fugatius, and Damianus, the principall of them in all antiquities, as wee muſt needs to giue them their due, that bee choſen and ſelected mē, they muſt needes be learned vertuous, and of mature age, and iudgment to be imploied in ſo weightie a buſines, and as all hiſtories teſtifie they were, and ſo muſt needes bee conſecrated maſſinge preiſts, beeing ſacred by thoſe remembred ſacrificinge Popes, which neither did, nor could conſecrate any other, nor they bringe any other doctrine in this or any other points of Religion, but what they had receaued from thoſe holy Popes.
                     4. And to this, beſides ſo many generall Arguments, S. Gildas the moſte auncient and renowned Brittiſh Author is a particular witnes, if it could pleaſe our proteſtants to publiſh it to the worlde, except that renowned Abbot Doctor Fecknham did abuſe his auditory in the firſt parlament of

Queene Elizabeth in his publicke oration, which no indifferent man will thinke, hee did or durſt to doe, for feare of open ſhame and confuſion, if hee ſhould haue aduouched an vntruth in that aſſemblie. And yet ſpeaking principally of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, then to bee condemned by that parlament, citeth Gildas in the proeme of his hiſtory, teſtifyinge that the ſame Religion, and church ſeruice, the ſacrifice of Maſse which was then to bee abrogated was brought hither, and ſettled here in the Latine tonge by the Legats of Pope Eleutherius. (Abbot Fecknham orat. in parlam. 2. of Queene Elizabeth.) and all our cheife proteſtant antiquaries and hiſtorians of England, as their Biſhops, Parker, Bale, Godwine, with others Goſteline, Powell, Foxe, Fulke, Middleton, Stowe, Holinſhed & others confidently affirming, that the Chriſtian Brittans neuer chaunged in any materiall thinge, that holy Religion which they receaued in the time of the Apoſtles, but conſtantly continued in the ſame, vntill the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither, from S. Gregory the great Pope of Rome, and after. Parker antiquitat. Britan. pag. 6.45.46. Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Rom.

in Gregor. 1. l. de ſcriptor. cent. 1. in August. Dronotho. Godwin. conuerſ. of Brit. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giraldi Camb. de Itiner. Cambr. cap. 1. Foxe act. pag. 463. edit. an. 1576. Fulke answ. to a count Cath. pag. 40. Middelt. papistom. pag. 202 Stow hiſtor. in S. Auguſtine and Kinge Ethelbert. Holinsh. hiſtor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102.
                     5. But as I haue proued before by theſe proteſtants and otherwiſe, the Britans by that Apoſtolicke man receaued the doctrine, profeſſion, and practiſe of ſacrificinge preiſthood, preiſts, and ſacrifice of Maſſe, and continued them vnto this time; ſoe I will demonſtrate by them and all antiquities hereafter, in euery age, that they kept and obſerued the ſame inuiolablie to thoſe dayes, and after without interruption. And yet this is but a needles probation; for being ſo inuincibly proued before, that they receaued theſe holy doctrines and profeſſions from the Apoſtles, and from them to theſe daies, if they had departed from them now, or after, they ſhould bee apparantly guiltie of error in departinge from thoſe truthes, which the Apoſtles, and all from them to theſe dayes continued. And if wee looke

into the catalogues of holy writers, in this time, whoſe works bee preſerued to poſteritie, wee ſhall ſee, that the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſts, were generally in al places in as great vſe and honour as at this day. The moſte renowned writers of this time whoſe bookes bee extant now, were S. Iuſtine, S. Irenaeus, and Tertullian, all they doe plainelie teſtifie, that the ſacrifice of Maſſe, offeringe vp the ſacred body, and blood of Chriſt, was the generally vſed, & knowne ſacrifice of the Chriſtians in this time, in omni loco, in euerie place, ſaith S. Iuſtine. (Iuſtin. Dialog. cum Tryhone.) Eccleſia in vniuerſo mundo offert Deo. The church doth offer it in all the world, ſaith S. Irenaeus. (Irenaeus aduerſ. Haereſ. lib. 4. cap. 32.) therefore the church of Britanie muſt needs offer it; and I haue proued by our Brittiſh antiquities before, that Rome, Fraunce, and Britanie in theſe daies of Eleutherius, and Irenaeus which went to Rome in the papacy of S. Eleutherius, vſed one and the ſame order of Maſſe. And Tertullian that notorious maſſing Author, declaring how Chriſtiā Religion was then dilated in the worlde, and the ſacrifice of

Maſſe was the common ſacrifice thereof, expreſſely nameth this our Britanie to haue receaued the Chriſtian faith, and to agree with other Chriſtian nations therin. (Tertullian. de cultu Faeminar. cap. 11. l. ad Scapul. cap. 2. l. de orat. cap 14. l. de vel. Virg. cap. 9. l. contra Iudaeos.) & S. Iohn Chriſoſtome ſpeaking of this conuerſion of our Britans, witneſſeth manifeſtly, and our proteſtants acknowledge it for truth, that the Brittiſh churches then founded, which were many had altars, for their preiſts, erected in them. (Chriſostom. ſerm· de Pentecost. protest. Theater of great Britanie l. 6. §. 12.) which as is confeſſed before by theſe proteſtants, neither were, nor could in Chriſtian Religion bee ordeyned but for maſſinge preiſts, and the ſacrifice of Maſſe, as wee finde in the moſte auncient churches of this nation; as S. Ioſephs dedicated to our Lady at Glaſtē
                        burie. (Antiquit Glaston. Capgrau. in S. Patricio M. S. antiq. in Lucio.) S. Martins at Canterbury, and the olde church at Wincheſter, where as we read there were Chriſtian altares, ſo alſo that the ſacrifice of Maſſe was from their firſt foundation offered on them. (Bed. hist. l. 1. cap. 27. Galfr.

Monum. l. 11. histor. cap. 4. Stowe hiſtor. in Constantine ſonne of Cador. &c.) ſo of S. Peters church in Cornhill in London and others. And S. Damianus and Phaganus the cheife Legats of S. Eleutherius, bearing ſo great deuotion to the maſſing church builded by S. Ioſeph at Glaſtenbury, that they themſelues continued, and dwelled there ſome time, and ſettled twelue of their company to continue there duringe their liues, muſt needs bee maſſinge preiſts, as all had here euer beene from the Apoſtles time: in which faith and Religion this holy Pope, as our proteſtants with al antiquities aſſure vs, confirmed the kingdome of Britanie: Eleutherius vt bonus paterfamilias effecit, vt confirmatis & conſolidatis Britannis in ſuſcepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud regnum, in eius fidei verba iuraret. Ioh. Bal. l. 1. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Eleutherio.
                     
                     6. So that by this Proteſtant Biſhop, and his and other authorities, thoſe doctrines of ſacrificinge preiſts and Maſſe which from the Apoſtles dayes, as I haue aboundantly proued, had without diſcontinuance euer continued here in diuers particular places and parſons, were now generally by this

holy Pope, and his maſſinge Legats, eſtabliſhed and confirmed in this kingedome: confirmatis, & conſolidatis, and this Pope highly commēded for that his general confirmation, vt bonus paterfamilias. And by their firſt Archbiſhop with others before, and as I haue proued by continuall deduction, the order and forme of Maſſe which S. Peter deliuered to the church, was ſtill continued after this time, without any materiall chaunge, alteration, addition, or diminution. Neither doth any Proteſtant Author challenge S. Eleutherius, of any innouation in Religion, but the contrary: how hee condemned all innouators therein as Tatianus and the Seuerians, makinge a decree againſt them, and the knowne Religion of Chriſt, his ſacrificinge Religion, as before is proued was much increaſed by him. Sub hoc Pontifice caepit Eccleſia eſſe ſecurior, ob id Christianorum Religio plurimum aucta est. And yet no chaunge at all therin. (Bal. & Robert. Barnes in vita Eleutherij. Eleutherius epiſt. decretal. ad prouincias Gall. To. 1. conc. Io. Bal. act. Pont. Rom. l. 1. in Eleutherio. Rob. Barn in vit. Pontif. Rom. in eodem.) therefore all thoſe Biſhops, & preiſts

which by all writers hee conſecrated, muſt needs bee maſſinge Biſhops, and preiſts, as all thoſe three Archbiſhops, & 28. Biſhops, which he conſecrated, or confirmed for this kingdome renowned in hiſtories, and all the preiſts of this our Britanie vnder them, muſt needes bee maſſing Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and preiſts. Whoſe ſucceſſion here continued vnto the conuerſion of the Saxons, and after by all hiſtories, and vntill both thoſe peoples vnited themſelues, as well in this maſſinge and ſacrificinge doctrine, which both the Britans, and Saxons had euer obſerued from their firſt conuerſions, as in al other points of Chriſtian Religion. The names of many of them I haue remembred in other places.
                     7. And concerninge the ſupreame ſpirituall power, which this holy Pope both claimed, and exerciſed, both in this kingedome, to ſettle theſe ſacred points of Religion here, and in other nations, theſe proteſtants aſſure vs, it was as great and ample, as euer any his ſucceſſors did, or now doe challenge in ſuch affaires. Theſe men tell vs. (Rob· Barnes in vit. Eleutherij. protest. annot. Mag. in Matth. Weſtm. an. 188.)

hee condemned hereticks, and made decrees againſt them; he made lawes binding all cleargie men, & in the caſes of Biſhops, reſerued judgement to the ſee of Rome, vt nihil niſi apud Pontificem definiretur. In his epiſtle to Kinge Lucius, ſo recommended by our proteſtants, hee preſcribeth what lawes hee was to vſe. Hee appointeth the limits and bounds of Britanie, as theſe men witnes in the lawes of Kinge Edward t
                           •
                        e Confeſſor. His Legats diſpoſed of all ſpirituall things here, in that time, and he by his papal authoritie confirmed them. And ſo they continued vntil hereſie and infidelity in the Pagan Saxons time did ouerthrowe them, as all hiſtories and antiquities, Brittiſh, or Saxon, Catholicks or proteſtants, as their Biſhops, Parker, Bale and Godwine, with Cambden, Powell, Holinſhed, Stowe, and others cited in other places are witneſſes. Therefore it will bee but a ſuperogated worke, to proceede further to followinge ages, yet for a generall and compleate content to all, I wil though with more breuitie, ſpeake alſo of them, and here end this ſecond age, or hundred of yeares, Pope Eleutherius dyinge in the later ende

thereof, and Kinge Lucius not longe after in the beginninge of the next age, and Pope and S. Victor, the immediate ſucceſſor of S. Eleutherius both endinge this, and giuing entrance to the next enſuinge age, and centenary of the yeares of Chriſt by his papall regiment.
                  
               
               
                  THE THIRD AGE, OR HVNDRED YEARES OF CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        THE XVII. CHAPTER. How notwithstandinge the manifold tumults, and perſecution of Chriſtian Religion, in this kingdome of Britanie, in this third hundred yeares, yet the holy ſacrifice of Maſse, ſacrificinge and maſsinge preiſts, and Bishops ſtil here continued, without any totall diſcontinuance.
                     KInge Lucius dyinge, as Matthew of Weſtminiſter with others writeth, in the yeare of Chriſt 201. the firſt of this third hundred yeare, without heire; This our kingdome by that meanes in the beginning of this age was pitifully vexed with warrs,

and tumults; & towards the later end therof lamentably tormented, and afflicted (as the whole Chriſtian worlde almoſte then was) with the moſte cruell and barbarous perſecution of Diocletian, in which among other miſeries, all monuments of Chriſtian Religion, ſo neare as he could, were ruined and deſtroyed; whereby it came to paſſe, that little memory of eccleſiaſticall things then, in this nation is left to poſteritie, yet ſufficient is to be found, that together with the Popes ſupreamacy in ſuch affaires, the holy ſacrificinge preiſthood, the ſacrifice of Maſſe, and diuers renowned ſacrificinge Biſhops and preiſts, here ſtill continued without diſcontinuance, in al this age, notwithſtandinge ſo huge an army of moſte ſauage, and cruell enemies ſtill fightinge againſt them. Matth. Westm. an. gratiae 201. Bed. l. 1. histor. c. 4.6. Parker. antiquit. Britan. Godwin. conuerſ. of Britanie. Stowe hiſtor. in K. Lucius. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Foxe Tom. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. Galfr. Monum. hist. Britan. l. 5. cap. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Ponticus Viran. Brit. hiſtor. l. 5. Gildas l. de excid. & conqueſt. Britan. cap. 7.8.
                     2. For Firſt our cheife proteſtants haue

told vs before, that S. Peters Maſte continued in vſe in the church without any chaunge, vnto the time of Pope and S. Zepherine, which was next ſucceſſor to S. Victor, therefore by their allowance, wee haue the ſacrifice of Maſſe, a maſſinge preiſthood, and preiſts to offer that holie ſacrifice all his time. Therefore when wee finde by many antiquities and hiſtorians, aſwell Catholicks as Proteſtants, that hee ſent many learned preiſts and preachers into this kingedome, eſpecially the more northren parts thereof, which wee now cal Scotland, wee muſt needes if wee had noe other argument, conclude, that they were ſacrificinge, and maſſinge preiſts, becauſe they receaued both their conſecration, and iuriſdiction from ſoe knowne a maſſinge preiſt, and Pope his authoritie. Yet to make this matter more euident, and ſhew the ſupreame ſpirituall power which hee vſed euen in this, beſides that which he both claimed and exerciſed in excommunicatinge the church of Aſia for their not due obſeruation of Eaſter, hee confirmed the order and inſtitution of his predeceſſor S. Eleutherius, in ſubiectinge all the churches, and

Chriſtians of that part of Britany now termed Scotlād, to the Archbiſhop of Yorke, a maſſing preiſt & Prelate, as I haue ſhewed before, theſe parts and countries then beeing temporally ruled by diuers temporall Kings, or Princes, and at difference or enmity at that time one with an other. And to make this Religiō more permanent with that rude nation, the Scots themſelues then began to study diuinitie. (Hector Boeth. Scot. hiſtor. l. 6. fol. 89. pag. 2.) beeing therin instructed by thoſe preists which Pope Victor ſent thither euen to the vttermost part therof to propagate Christian Religion. Incepere & nostri tum primum, ſacras colere literas, Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus, ad Chriſti dogma propalandum in extremam miſerat Albionem. Which was in the yeare of Chriſt 203. Humanae ſalutis tertius ſupra ducenteſsimum. And euer continued in the ſame as theire hiſtorians contend, vnto theſe dayes of hereſie, noſtri qua fide & pietate instituti ſemel fuerunt hactenus erroribus aſpernatis, perſeuerant. Which was written in the yeare of Chriſt 1526. Anno ſalutis Chriſtianae ſexto & vigeſimo ſupra, milleſimum quingenteſimum.
                     
                     
                        3. So longe and longer theſe maſſinge preiſts & ſacrifice of Maſſe continued there with honor, by their writers, and our Engliſh Proteſtants affirme as much in theſe termes. (Edw. Grimſton. in the est. of the K. of great Britanie pag. 20. cap. 17.) Scotland receaued the Chriſtian faith in the time of Pope Victor the first, in the yeare 203. and idolatry did quite ceaſe, vnder Kinge Craknite, who died in the yeare 313. Celeſtine the firſt ſent Palladius thither to roote out the Pelagian hereſie, which began to encreaſe there vnder Eugenius the ſeconde, who died in the yeare 460. ſince this time the realme continued longe in the profeſsion of the Romish church, vntill theſe later dayes, the daies of Kinge Iames, our preſent ſoueraigne, as hee there expreſſeth. Therefore ſeeing the profeſſion of the Romane church, which frō the beginning by theſe authorities, and teſtimonies, both Catholicke and Proteſtant euer continued there, was the profeſſion of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſts, ſuch was the profeſſion euer vntill now in thoſe parts. Againe this part of this Iland was ſubiected both by Pope Eleutherius, and Victor, to the Archbiſhop of Yorke a maſſing Prelate,

either S. Theodoſius or S. Sampſon, therefore the preiſtes ſubiect to that ſee, muſt needs bee maſſinge preiſts. (Harriſon deſcription of Britanie in K. Lucius. Godwin Catalog. in Yorke pag. 555. edit. an. 1515.) and both S. Gildas, S. Bede and all antiquities aſſure vs, that this Religion was preſerued in peace, and quiet here, vnto the perſecution of Diocletian. Gild. l. de excid. Britan. cap. 7. Bed. histor. eccl. l. 1. cap. 4. antiq. Winton. apud Godw. Catal. in Winchester. 1.) and the Annals of Scotland tell vs expreſſelie, of the altars chalices, patens, and all veſſels, inſtruments, and ornaments vſed in the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, to haue bene in honorable, and publicke vſe in this time in that contry. (Hector Boeth. Scot. hiſtor. l. 6. fol. 102.
                     4. And if we leaue Britanie and returne againe to Rome, and the Pope there, S. Zepherine, theſe proteſtants aſſure vs, he was, rei diuinae magis quam humanae intētus, a man more giuen to diuine then humaine affaires, a Proteſtant Biſhops words: and yet they abſolutly teache, hee claimed and exerciſed ſupreame ſpirituall iuriſdiction, and made decrees, concerninge the holy ſacrifice of

Maſſe, of what mater, the chalice and paten, in, and on which the body and blood of Chriſt ſhould be conſecrated, in that ſacrifice, were to bee made, and how preiſts ought to bee preſent when the Biſhop celebrated the ſacrifice of Maſſe, cum Epiſcopus celebraret Miſsae ſacra iuſsit omnes presbyteros adeſſe. (Bal. in act. Pontif. Rom. l. 1. in Zepherino. Edw. Grimſton pag. 436. in Zepherin. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Zepherin. alij. Sacer) and by the ſentence of their firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop, hee was ſo far from doing any diſhonor to this holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, that, ad pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare voluit. The chaunge hee made, was for the more honor therof. Math. Parker antiquitat. Britan. pag. 47. Magdeb. cent. 1. cap. 5 col. 146.) beeing nothing but that I cited before of cauſing the ſacrificing inſtruments to be made of a better matter, making no other chaunge at al therin. And within few yeares after, the next Pope but one, Vrbanus the firſt, as theſe proteſtants aſſure vs made a lawe, that euē in the poorer churches the ſacrificinge veſſels ſhould either bee of gold, ſiluer, or tinne. Ne vaſa ſacra vitrea, ſed aut aurea, aut argen
                              •…
                           ea,

aut ſtannea in inopioribus Eccleſijs eſſent, legem tulit. (Rob. Barnes in Vrban. 1. Edw. Grimston. eſtate of the church of Rome in Vrban. 1. pag. 436. Magdeb. cent. 1. cap. 6. col. 146.) and that Pope Fabian an holy Saint, and miraculouſly choſen to the papall dignitie, made a decree about the ſacrifice of Maſſe, what preiſts were to bee allowed to ſay Maſſe. And they put it out of all queſtion, that the moſt renowned other Fathers of this age, as Tertullian S. Ciprian, with others taught and maintained this doctrine of the ſacrifice of Maſſe. Magdeburg. cent. 1. cap. 4. col. 83. titul. de Euchariſt. & ſacrificio. ſo they write of Pope Stephen, Faelix & Sixtus in this age, whom they acknowledge for holy Saints, and open maintayners and practiſers of this bleſſed ſacrifice, ſhewinge how in their time, the whole canon was ſecretly read, as is now obſerued. Sixtus, dum Sacerdos canonem ante celebrationem ſub ſilentio legeret, vt in populo Sanctus triplicatum caneretur, inſtituit. And neither bringe any Pope, or Father to the contrary, or any Pope altered any thinge in this holy ſacrifice, which they doe or can diſlike.
                     
                        5. And concerning communion it ſelfe in one onely kinde, by the laitie, and ſuch as ſaide not Maſſe, now vſed in the Latine church, with much diſlike of many proteſtants, theſe proteſtants themſelues confeſſe vnto vs. (Magdeburgen· cent. 3. cap. 6. de ritib. circa caenam col. 149) that it was the cuſtome of the church of Rome, of Italy, and with other Biſhops for the communicants, to receaue onely vnder the forme of bread. And ſome of our Engliſh Proteſtants as Maſter Parkins. (Parkinſus l. demonſtr. problem. pag. 155.) giueth many inſtances and examples of ſuch communicating. And amonge others bringeth S. Ciprian to bee a witnes hereof, writinge in this time, as alſo the Proteſtants of Germany doe, teachinge this cuſtome in thoſe churches of Rome, Italy, and others to haue bene more auncient then this time: and moſte certaine it is, that both S. Ciprian, and Tertullian before him, teſtifie it was alſo ſoe vſed in Afrike to communicate onely vnder the forme of blood. (Ciprian. l. de lapſ. & l. de ſpectacul. Tertullia. l. 2. ad Vxorem. cap. 5.) S. Irenaeus proueth the ſame of the age before; and both S. Chriſoſtome, or whoſoeuer author

of the opus imperfectū ſuper Matthaeum, S. Auguſtine, Iſichius, S. Bede, Theophilact, and others doe ſo expound, that act & example of Chriſt at Emaus, in S. Lukes Ghoſpell, after his reſurrection, thus by our proteſtants tranſlation: hee tooke bread, and bleſſed it, and brake, and gaue to them. (Homil. 16. operis imperfect. ſupr. Matth. Auguſt. conſenſ. Euang. l. 3. c. 25. Iſych. l. 2. in Leuit. c. 9. Bed. & Theop. in c. 24. Luc. cap. 24. v. 30.) the ſame expoſition is made of breakinge of breade, in the 2. and 20. chapter of the acts of the Apoſtles, by the auncient author, of that vnperfect worke, and our learned coutrimen, Ionas Aurelianenſis, and S. Bede, and the Syriake text readeth, in fractione Eucharistiae, in breakinge the Euchariſt. And Iohn Caluine himſelfe doth ſo plainely expounde the later place of the 20. chapter. Actor. cap. 2. v. 42. cap. 20. v. 7. Homil. 17. operis imperfecti. Beda ad cap. 20. act. Ionas Aurelianen. l. 3. de Imaginib. text. Syriac· Caluin. in act. 20.
                     6. And to make all ſure, the parlament ſtatute of three Proteſtant Princes, Kinge Edward 6. Queene Elizabeth, and Kinge Iames. (Statut. parlam· an. 1. Edw. 6. an. 1.

                        Elizab, and an. 1. Iacobi Abridg. of stat. titul. ſeruice and Sacram.) doth warrant vs, that in the primatiue church, communion was often vſed in one only kinde. And the three firſt Euangeliſts S. Matthew, Marke and Luke ar ample witneſſes, that the words of Chriſt, drinke you all of this (the ground of proteſtants in this contention) were onely preſent with him, and by him at that time made preiſts by all antiquities. (Matth. cap. 26. v. 20. Marc. cap. 14. ver. 17.18. Luc. c. 22. v. 14.) and ſo the words and commaundement could not poſſibly bee generall, for that cauſe, and if they had beene generall, all the whole Chriſtian worlde, in all ages Catholicks from the beginninge, and proteſtants ſince their new cominge, had beene, and ar guiltie of tranſgreſſinge that inſtitution and commaundement. Therfore ſeeing wee cannot finde any innouation in theſe miſteries, in this time, let vs ſeeke out ſome more maſſing preiſts of this nation, in this tempeſtuous ſeaſon. For ſuch we finde particularly at Rome S. Mellanius as the Romane Martyrologe with others nameth him, but by the auncient Manuſcript hiſtory of his life and Capgraue,

S. Mellon. He beeing a noble Britane, and going hence to Rome to pay the tribute of his contry and ſerue the Emperor, was conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, by the maſſing Pope S. Stephen, and by him takinge firſt all inferior orders, was made a maſſinge preiſt. Quem praefatus Papa ſibi adhaerentem per omnes Eccleſiae gradus vſque ad Sacerdotium promouit. (Martyrolog. Rom. die 22. Octob. Baron. ib. Vincent. l. 11. c. 74. Petr. de natal. l. 9. c. 93. Demochar. contr. Caluin. M. S. antiq. de vita S. Mellonis. Ioh. Capgrau. in catal. in S. Mellone Epiſcopo.) and was ſo deuout a ſayer of Maſſe, that among other times, as hee was ſayinge Maſſe, an Angell openly appeared both to the holy Pope, and him, at the right hand of the altare, and Maſſe beeing ended deſigned him to goe to Rouen in Normandy, where hee was the ſecond Biſhop, next to S. Nicaſius, as the Annals of that church are witneſſe, and continued there a maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop ſent from that maſſinge Pope, vntill about the yeare of Chriſt 280. which being before the beginninge of the perſecution of Diocletian, wee had then here in Britanie great numbers of maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops,

as I haue proued before by our beſt antiquities.
                     7. And though for that time wee are in a great defect and want of monuments, yet wee haue warrant enough, that both in, and after that perſecution, wee had both maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops to continue our hierarchicall ſucceſſion for the preſent time of the perſecution in this part of Britanie, where the Romans ruled, & the perſecution by that oportunitie and power raged, wee muſt not looke into our churches and altars deſtroyed for publick vſe of theſe holy points of Religion; for as our beſt and moſte auncient author, S. Gildas writeth, the Chriſtians that remained, did hide themſelues, in woods, and deſerts and hidden caues. Qui ſuperfuerant ſiluis ac deſertis abditiſque ſpeluncis ſe occultauere. (Gildas l. de excid. & conq. Biitan. cap, 8.) S. Bede and others after both Catholicks and proteſtants haue the like. (Bed. hiſtor. Eccl. Angl. l. 1. cap. 8. Matth. Westm. in Dioclet. Theater of Brit. 16. Stowe Holinsh. histor. of Eng.) but if wee goe into the Northern parts, beyond the Romans walland bounds, where the Chriſtian Britans and Scots vnder King Crathlint

that renowned glory of that nation then reigned, we ſhal finde both Maſſe, and maſſinge preiſts of this our part of Britanie flying thither in honor, and offeringe publicklie the moſte holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, with great reuerence and ſolemnitie: ſuch were the holy maſsinge preist and Bishop S. Amphibalus, Modocus, Priſcus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and very many others, alijque permulti, preachinge the doctrine of Chriſt in all the Scottiſh contries, Christi ſeruatoris doctrinam omnes per Scotorum regiones concionando multis pijſque ſudoribus ſeminantes. Hector. Boeth. Scot. hiſtor. l. 6. fol. 102. Veremund. apud eund. ib. Holinsh. hiſtor. of Scotland in K. Crathlint.
                     
                     8. And among theſe holy doctrines, that of holy Maſſe, ſacrificing preiſts, & preiſthood were ſo honorable, and renowned, that this religious Kinge Crathlint did build a cathedrall church, for that our perſecuted maſſinge Biſhop, and preiſts, endowinge it with great guifts, and al things neceſſary for the honorable and reuerent ſayinge of Maſſe, as chalices, patens, Candlesticks, and other ſuch thinges, requiſite for the vſe of ſacrifice, made of ſiluer and gold, and

an altare incloſed with copper and braſſe. Sed & Crathlintus Rex, ſacra Antistitis aedem muneribus ornauit ampliſsimis, calicibus, patenis, candelabris, alijſque ſimilibus, ad ſacrorum vſum commodis, ex argento auroque fabrefactis, altarique cupro, & aere clauſo. And that theſe and many others flyinge thither, in this time were of this part of Britanie, where the Engliſh inhabite, it is plaine by theſe hiſtories: ſo that it is moſte manifeſt, that all this third age or hundred yeeres of Chriſt, the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, maſſing preiſts, & preiſthood, ſtil cōtinued in al this kingdome of great Britanie, although not in ſuch ſplendor, and glory, by reaſon of the great afflictions, and miſeries of thoſe dayes: as in better times, I will make mention of diuers our maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops, that eſcaped death, and ſuruiued after this perſecution, in the next age, and ſo end with this.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE FOVRTH AGE, OR HVNDRED YEARES OF CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        THE XVIII. CHAPTER. How the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificing and maſsinge preisthood, preiſts and Biſhops continued in this kingdome of great Britanie in al this age, without any interruption or diſcontinuance.
                     IN the beginninge of this age, and fourth hundred yeare, the ſtate of the church of Chriſt was little different, either in Britanie, or any other nation, from that wherin it was in the later end of the former, for as our hiſtories tell vs, the perſecution begun by Diocletian did not ceaſe, although not in ſuch extremitie of rigour, vntill Cō
                        ſtantine the great our contriman had bene Emperor ſome yeares, in the ſeuenth yeare of his Empire by Matthew of Weſtminſter, Florentius Wigornienſis, and others: caepta ſemel perſecutio, vſque ad ſeptimū annum Constantini feruere non ceſſauit. (Matth. Weſtm. an. gratiae 304. Florent. Wigorn. an. 299. al. 321.) neither doe our Scottiſh writers, Veremundus,

Hector Boethius, and others differ herein, for they are witneſſes, that manie holy Chriſtians of this ſouthern part of Britanie, in the time of Conſtantius, fledd to the Picts, and Scots, for ſuccour, and were there religiouſly entertained by King Crathlint. (Veremund. apud Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Scotor. histor. fol. 102. pag. 1.) Constantius Diocletiani more in Britannia Christianae Religioni fuerit inſidiatus. Vnde magnus piorum numerus perſequētium ſaeuitiam declinare cupiens, ad Scotos & Pictos cōceſsit. Hos Crathlintos Rex, ad ſe confugientes beneuolo affectu ſuſcepit. And the Romane hiſtories agree with this, teachinge, that in the beginning of the Empire of Conſtantine, & vntill he had the viſion of the Croſſe, and was admoniſhed to ſeeke and ſend for S. Silueſter, then Pope, to baptize him, the perſecution ſtill continued, and S. Silueſter hid himſelf in the mountaine Soracte, which an Engliſh Proteſtant Biſhop with the Italian writers thus relateth. (Io. Bal. l. 1. de act. Rom. Pont. in Siluestro.) At postquam ſoboles Helenae ſanctiſsima, Caeſar Constantinus, apud diuos homineſque fauorem nactus, in excelſo vidit crucis aere formam. Tunc redijt tandem

Romam, Soracte relicto, atque ſub Auguſto magnos ſortitus honores.
                     
                     2. Yet notwithſtanding this ſecret profeſſion and practiſe of Chriſtian Religion, in this time wee haue certaine teſtimonies of the continuance of theſe holy doctrines of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificing preiſts, and preiſthood, in this our Britanie in thoſe dayes. For our Scottiſh hiſtorians before alleaged, giue euidence, that thoſe maſſinge preiſts which I haue named before, did I liue a while after this time, and that in the iſle Mona, there was a ſacrificinge Biſhop, and preiſts that ſaid Maſſe, with ſuch ritche ornaments and inſtruments for that time as I haue deſcribed, and that this maſſinge Biſhops name was Amphibalus Biſhop of Soder, beeing a Britane, liued, and died there an old man, longe after the death of S. Amphibalus our martir. Amphibalus Brito vir inſigni pietate, primus Antistes ibi creatus, Chriſti dogma per Scotorum Pictorumque Regiones propalando, multa contra Gentilium Religionem dicendo, ſcribendoque glorioſum & Christiano viro planè dignum, multa ſenectute viuendo feſſus, faelicemque ſortitus eſt finem. (Boeth. & Veremund. ſup. l. 6. histor.

Scot.) where beſides the time not agreeing, and the old age wherein this S. Amphibalus liued and died a glorious confeſſor, but no Martyr, the contry whence hee was a Britan, Amphibalus Brito, proue it was an other different Saint, from the Martyr Amphibalus, of whome we doe not reade that hee was a Biſhop, nor a Britan, but coming hither from other places of perſecution, as the writers of his life are witneſſes. Vir quidam meritis & doctrina clarus nomine Amphibalus, tranſiens in Britanniam verolamina Domino ducente perue
                              •…
                           it. (M. S. antiq & Author vitae S. Albani antiquus in vit. S. Albani Ioh. Capgrauius & alij in vit S. Albani.) which he alſo himſelfe doth witnes in this words to S. Alban My Lord Ieſus Christ the ſonne of the liuinge God, hath preſerued mee from daungers, and for the ſaluation of many, ſent mee into this nation. Dominus meus Ieſus Chriſtus filius Dei viui ſecurum inter diſcrimina me custodiuit: & pro multorum ſalute ad istam me miſit prouinciam.
                     
                     3. And we had at this time here in Britanie, liuinge after the perſecution of Diocletian, many others both Biſhops, and preiſts, that exerciſed and offered the ſacrifice

of Maſſe, amonge which S. Taurinus was Archbiſhop of Yorke, ex
                           •…
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         proteſtant antiquaries, and others ar deceaued: not that Taurinus which was in, or before the dayes of Kinge Lucius, but another more late, and liuinge in this time, placed Archbiſhop there in the time of Conſtantius Chlorus, who came hither as Matthew of Weſtminſter writeth, in the yeare of Chriſt 302. (Matth. Weſtm. an. gratiae 302.) and by the conſent of the ſame Conſtantius, or more, as a Proteſtant Biſhop and antiquary from antiquities thus deliuereth. (Godwin. Catal. of Bishops in Yorke 1. pag. 555.) it is reported that Conſtantius Chlorus appointed Taurinus Bishop of Eureux to bee Archbishop there, at Yorke. Which is almoſte or fully 200. yeares after the other Taurinus was ſent into Fraunce by S. Clement, both by Catholicks and Proteſtants. And by all writers S. Reſtitutus was at this time or ſoone after Archbiſhop of London: for in the yeare of Chriſt 326. hee was of ſuch renowne and honor, that he was choſen the onely Biſhop of this Britanie, to be preſent at the great councell of Biſhops, at Arles in Fraunce, to which hee thus ſubſcribed

for this our Britanie: Ex Prouincia Britanniae ciuitate Londinenſi Reſtitus Epiſcopus. Martyrol. Rom. die 11. Augusti Vſuard. eod. die. Vincent. in ſpec. l. 11. c. 78 79. Petr. in catal. l. 4. cap. 50. Matth. Weſtm. an. 94. proteſt. annot. marg. in eund. Tom. 1. concil. in Arelat. conc. Io. Bal. l. de ſcrip. cent. 1. in Restit. Godwin Catal. in London in Restitutus Matth. Parker antiq. Brit.
                     
                     4. And a friuolous exception it is, for Stowe with all others ſo to confeſſe, and after to add: Hee writeth not himſelfe Archbishop, and therefore maketh that matter of Archbishops doubtfull, or rather ouerthroweth that opinion. (Stowe histor. in Kinge Lucius.) For it is euident by the ſubſcriptions of that councell, that many of the greateſt Archbiſhops in this part of the world were preſent, and ſubſcribed there: yet not anie one of thē ſubſcribed by the name of Archbiſhop, ſo it was in other councels. And as a Proteſtant Biſhop and antiquary aſſureth vs, in theſe words. (Godwin ſupr.) hee ſubſcribed to the decrees of the ſame coūcel, which hee brought ouer with him. In which it is decreed, that none but ſacrificinge conſecrated preiſtes, might offer the ſacrifice of

Maſſe. (Concil. Arelat. can. 15.) And among ſo many Biſhops, and preiſts, as were preſent there, Claudianus and Auitus the Legats of that renowned maſſinge preiſt and Pope S. Silueſter by proteſtants confeſſion, were preſent and ſubſcribed to this councell. Therefore this our Archbiſhop, then the primate of all Britanie, muſt needs bee a maſſinge preiſt, as alſo all preiſts and Biſhops vnder him. Of our third Archiepiſcopall ſee at Caerlegion I doe not finde the name of any Archbiſhop, before Tremounus vrbis legionum Archiepiſcopus, Archbiſhop there in the time of Aurelius Ambroſius. (Galfrid. Monum. histor. l. 8. cap. 10.) though wee know, that many were there before this time. And yet the memories of all our Biſhops that eſcaped aliue from this perſecution, are not periſhed. For beſides thoſe I haue recompted, we are aſſured both by Catholicke and Proteſtant antiquaries, that the Biſhop of Wincheſter called Conſtance, was now liuinge, and dedicated there a church newly reedified to the honour of S. Amphibalus the Martyr, in the yeare of Chriſt 310. within 21. yeares after it was deſtroyed in the perſecution. Becauſe

it is a memorable hiſtory, and not onely warranted by an old Manuſcript, but publiſhed and approued by a new Proteſtant Biſhop, I will relate it in theſe his owne words. Manuſcript. antiq. Godwin. Catal. of Bish. in Winch. pag. 207.
                     
                        This church as the ſame Author, olde Manuſcript, ſaith, was hallowed and dedicated vnto the honour of our Sauiour, October 29.189. by Faganus & Damianus Bishops, about the ſpace of 100. yeare the church of Christ had then peace in this land, viz. vntill the reigne of Diocleſian, who endeauouringe to roote out Chriſtian Religion, not onely killed the profeſsors of the ſame, but pulled downe all churches and Temples, any where conſecrated vnto the exerciſe thereof. Amongest the rest this of Wincheſter at that time went to wracke, the buildings thereof beeinge ruinated, and made euen with the grounde, and the Monkes and all the officers belonginge vnto it, either ſlaine or enforced to flie for the preſent time, and yet afterward to denie Chriſt. This happened anno 289. not longe after the death of this cruell Tyrant, to witt, the yeare 309. The church aforeſaid was againe reedified, and that with ſuch wonderful forwardnes, and zeale, as within

one yeare and thirtie dayes, both it and all the edifices belonginge vnto it, as chambers and other buildings for the Monkes, were quite finished in very ſeemely and conuenient maner. The 15. day of Marche following, it vvas againe hallovved and dedicated vnto the honor, and memory of Amphibalus, that had ſuffered death for Christ, in the late perſecution, by Conſtance Bishop, as my author ſaith, of Winchester, at the request of Deodatus, Abbot of this nevv erected monaſtery. The like or greater expedition was vſed in buildinge, and dedicatinge a church to S. Alban of great coſte & ſumptuouſnes, where hee ſuffered Martyrdome, and yet as Matthew of Weſtminſter writeth, it was finiſhed or builded within ten yeares of his death and martyrdome. Fabricata decem ſcilicet annis poſt paſsionem eius elapſis. S. Bede ſaith as ſoone as the perſecution ceaſed, a church of wonderfull worke was builded there vnto his honor. Vbi poſtea redeūte temporum Chriſtianorum ſerenitate Eccleſia est miri operis, atque eius Martyrio condigna extructa. So our hiſtories teſtifie of S. Iulius and Aaron in particular. Bed. hiſtor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 7. Matth. Westm. an. gratiae 313. Io.

Capgrau. in S. Albano.
                     
                     6. And to make it manifeſt vnto vs, that there were many Biſhops left here after this perſecution, to conſecrate and dedicate ſo many new builded, founded and conſecrated churches, as were preſently (after the perſecution ended) erected in this kingedome, and to execute other epiſcopall functions, the beſt and moſte auncient hiſtories wee haue, as S. Gildas, S. Bede with others teſtifie, that, bilustro necdum ad integrum expleto, before ten yeares of perſecution were ended (S. G
                           •…
                        ldas words) the Chriſtiās eueryvvhere renevv their churches pulled dovvn to the ground, found, build & finish churches of their holy Martyrs, and celebrate their feſtiuities. Biluſtro ſupradicti turbinis necdum ad integrum expleto, emerceſcentibuſque nece ſuorum Authorum nefarijs decretis, laetis luminibus omnes Chriſti Tyrones renouant Eccleſias, ad ſolum vſque deſtructas, baſilicas Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, conſtruunt, perficiunt, ac velut victricia ſigna paſsim propalant, dies feſtos celebrant. And that wee may be aſſured, that among theſe holy Chriſtian exerciſes, the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe was offered, by their ſacrificinge

and maſſinge preiſts, it immediatly followeth in theſe renowned antiquities: ſacra mundo corde oreque confi
                              •
                           iunt. They celebrate theire ſacrifice with a pure hart and mouth. And our antiquaries both Catholicks and Proteſtants aſſure vs, there were altars for ſacrifice in theſe churches. S. Gildas calleth the altars, altaria ſacroſancta, ſacred altars, whereon the heauenly ſacrifice is offered and laied. Sacrifieij caelestis ſedem. And that all the preiſtes, of theſe Brittiſh churches, were ſacrificing or maſſing preiſtes at the altars: Sacerdotes ſacrificantes inter altaria stantes. Gild. l. de excid. Stovv hiſtor. in Constantine 2. Galf. Mon. histor. Brit. l. 11. cap. 4. Matth. Weſtm. an. gratiae 543.
                     7. And if we wil appeale to other churches and iudges in this time, whether to our Kinge and Emperor now a Chriſtian, or to the Popes of Rome, yet Saints and holie men by the licence of our proteſtants, or to generall councels the firſt being celebrated in this time, or to the renowned Fathers that liued and wrote in this age, wee ſhall finde theſe holy doctrines and exerciſes of the ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificinge, & maſſinge preiſts, and preiſtho
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         haue beene

in greateſt honor, as well in all other Chriſtian nations, as in this kingdome. For Cō
                        ſtantine our Kinge, Emperor, and contryman, we cannot better learne what minde, and Religion hee was of, in theſe matters, then from S. Silueſter then Pope, and his Maſter and Father in Chriſtian Religion, who inſtructed him therein: and from the firſt generall councell of Nice, wherin, and wherto hee was preſent and conſented. And to make all ſure, and walke with the paſſe of proteſtants in this trauaile, wee are told by theſe men, that this maſſinge Pope, declared and decreed, in what ſacred attire, both the preiſts which offered, and the deacons which ſerued, and miniſtred in the ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſhould bee inueſted. (Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Roman. in Siluestro.) and to ſpeake in a proteſtant Biſhops wordes: Huius Silueſtri permulta feruntur instituta, de chriſmate conſecrando, pueris confirmandis, temptis ornandis, altaribus tegendis, miſsatoribus conſtituendis, vngendis, veſtiendis, hostijs adorandis, ſeruandis, ſacrificijs, ceremonijs alijſque ritibus. Very many inſtitutions are aſcribed to this Silueſter, of conſecratinge chriſme, confirminge children,

adorninge churches, coueringe altars, makinge maſſinge preiſts, anointinge and veſtinge them, adoringe and reſeruing the conſecrated hoſtes, of ſacrifices, ceremonies, and other rites. By which no man can doubt, but S. Silueſter was a maſſing preiſt, and Pope, & this renowned Emperor conuerted by him, a reuerencer of holy Maſſe and ſacrificinge preiſthood.
                     8. which truth and doctrine for this age is more confirmed, by the great generall councell of Nice, where Conſtantine preſent aſſented, and S. Silueſter alſo preſent by his Legats, Victor and Vincentius ſubſcribinge, approued: in which it is plainely declared, that none but conſecrated maſſinge preiſts haue power to offer that holie ſacrifice. (Concil. Nicen. 1. can. 14. & per al. tranſlat. can. 18.) and to carry our proteſtants conſents with vs herein, the preſent proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, director of Maſter Frauncis Maſon, together with this his directed ſecretary, warrant vs herin ſufficiently in theſe words. The Nicen councell in that canon which Caluine and all other receaue, ſaith plainely, that the Lambe of God offered vnbloodily, is laide vpon the holy

table. Fran. Maſon in pref. of his booke of conſecrat. & pag. 243.) therfore this holy councell being by all iudgements generall, hauinge beſides the conſent of the Pope, and Emperor, the allowance and ſubſcription of 318. Biſhops, and immediatly in thoſe dayes, as our proteſtants. (Theater of great Britanie l. 6.) with others aſſure vs, receaued here in Britanie, and at this preſent by our proteſtant parlaments of higheſt authoritie, and to bee embraced of all. (Statut. in parl. an. 1. Elizab. & an. 1. Iacob.) we muſt needes ſay, that the ſacrifice of Maſſe and maſſinge preiſthood then was, & now ought by all men to bee honored, and approued in this kingdome. And if wee will enquire of the other holy and learned Fathers which liued in this age, and were not of that number 318. preſent in the Nicen councell, we ſhall finde they were al without any exception, both of the Greeke, and Latine church, ſacrificinge, and maſſinge preiſts, their number is too great to bee related, therefore I will exemplifie onely in thoſe, which all accompt renowned, as S. Baſile, S. Epiphanius, and S. Chriſoſtome in the greeke church, all which as our proteſtants

confeſſe, were not onely maſſinge preiſts, but did write and ſet forth a publick forme of Maſſe; which are yet extant, and in noe materiall thinge different from that of the preſent Latine church, and by the confeſſion of theſe proteſtants. (Edw. Sands Relat. of Relig. cap. 53. or 54. Middleton. Papistom. pag. 51. Morton Apol. part. 2. pag. 81.) ſtill vſed in the churches of Greece, which alſo vſe the preſent Romane Maſſe of S. Gregory tranſlated into Greeke, as they teſtifie of the Greeke church in theſe termes. Their liturgies bee the ſame that in the olde time, namely S. Baſils, S. Chriſostomes and S. Gregories tranſlated without any bēding them to that chaunge of lāguage, which their tonge hath ſuffered, Edwine Sands ſup.
                     
                     9. And if wee come nearer, vnto the Romane and Latine church, wee ſhall finde S. Ambroſe in Italy, ſo renowned for this, that to ſpeake in proteſtants wordes. (Foxe act. and Mon. Tom. 1. & Tom. 2. pag. 131.) vntill about the yeare of our Lord 780. the Liturgie of S. Ambroſe was more vſed in the Italian churches then S. Gregories. Pope Adrian the firſt was hee, vvhom vve declared in the former part of this treatiſe, to ratifie

and confirme the order of S. Gregories Maſſe, aboue the order of S. Ambroſe Maſſe. Where wee ſee this twice approued by one great proteſtant; which an other, a Biſhop among them, thus confirmeth. (Ioannes Bal. act. Pont. Rom. l. 3. in Hadriano 1.) Hadrianus primas miſſarum ritus à magno Gregorio editos, occidentalibus Eccleſiis imperauit. Pope Hadrian the firſt, commaunded that order of Maſſe which was publiſhed by Pope Gregory the greate, to bee vſed by the weſtern churches. Yet, to vſe the words of an other proteſtant Author. (Edvv. Grimſton. in Pope Adrian 1.) this Pope Hadrian vvas one of the moste famous of all his predeceſsors, in bountie, learning, and ſanctitie of life. And hee could not bee the worſe, for ſo recommending the Maſſe of S. Gregory. (Bal. act. Pont. Rom. l. 2. in Gregor. Magno.) the moſt excellent of all the Romane Popes, both for learning, and life. Gregorius Magnus omnium Pontificum Romanorum doctrina & vita praeſtantiſsimus. As the laſte cited, proteſtant Biſhop. (Bal. ſupr. in Greg. Magno. writeth, and ſtileth him iuſtly with the title of honor therefore commonly and duely giuen vnto him, Gregory the great. That the Maſſe

vſually called the Maſſe of S. Gregory, becauſe hee was the laſte Pope that added to the old Maſſe, yet not foure lines, and not eſſentiall in any thinge, nor doth not in any leaſte point, now queſtioned, differ from the olde Maſſe, continued ſince the Apoſtles time, as theſe our proteſtants ſhall ſufficientlie teſtifie in due place, and order hereafter.
                     10. Or if we will come nearer home, into Fraunce, wee ſhall finde there by the euidence of the brittiſh old Manuſcript I haue cited before, that S. Caeſarius Archbiſhop of Arles, the greateſt in that kingedome then in preeminence, and power, and S. Porcarius Abbot there, by whome S. German, and S. Lupus which were ſent Legats into Britanie to ſettle the ſtate of our then diſturbed church, by S. Caeleſtine Pope, were brought vp, and inſtructed, did vſe S. Markes Maſſe. (M. S. antiq. Britan. in S. Caeſario Arl. & Porcar.) at which time alſo S. Kebius our noble contryman of Cornwal, was many yeares ſcholler to S. Hilary, that renowned ſacrificinge preiſt, and Biſhop of Poictiers in Fraunce, which was ſo far engaged for the honor of this holy ſacrifice

of Maſſe, and ſacrificing preiſthood, that he boldly and roundly wrote to Conſtantius the Arrian Emperor, that his ſouldiers and himſelf in offering violence vnto theſe, had ſinned as greatly as the Iewes did in puttinge Zachary to death. Mediolanenſem pijſsimā plebem tu furore terroris tui turbasti, Tribuni tui adierunt Sancta Sanctorum, viam ſibt omni per populum crudelitate pandentes, protraxerunt de altario Sacerdotes. Leuius te putas, ſceleste, Iudaeorum impietate poccaſſe? effuderunt quidem illi Zacharia ſanguinem, ſed quantum in te, concorporatus Christo, à Chriſto diſceàisti. (Hilar. l. 3. ad Constantium Imperatorem.) and yet that our worthie contriman liued 50. yeares with this maſſinge Biſhop. (M. S. antiq. in vit. S. Keb. Io. Capgrau. in eod.) and by him made a maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop, returned into, and liued ſo and died a miraculous Saint in his owne contry in this kingdome. Apud Hillar-pictanēſem Epiſcopum per quinquaginta annos manens Sanctus Kebius, caecos illuminauit, leproſos mundauit, Paraliticos, mutos, & daemoniachos ſanauit, & gradu Epiſcopali ab Hillario accepto, admonitus eſt ab Angelo in ſuam patriam remeare.
                     
                     
                        11. And that all the Biſhops of Britanie, beinge many at that time, together with their preiſts, vnder iuriſdictions, were maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and in this holy ſacrifice aſwell as other matters in Religion cōſenting with the Popes of Rome, the Fathers of the councell of Nice, and Sardice, where wee had diuers brittiſh Biſhops preſent, and with the ſacrificing Catholicke Biſhops and preiſts of Fraunce, namely S. Hilary the great glory of that nation, and S. Athanaſius that moſt renowned maſſing Prelate, who as Zonoras writeth, was here in Britanie, we haue a world of witneſſes: and great S. Chriſoſtome, S. Hilary, S. Athanaſius, Conſtantine our Kinge, and Emperor, S. Hierome, Theodoret, Socrates, Sulpitius Seuerus, Glycas, Zonoras, as appeareth in my marginall citation of them, and other later writers, not only Catholicks, but Proteſtāts alſo in their great Theater of Britanie, Stowe, Howes, Hollinſhed with others. Chriſost. in Homil. quod Christ. ſit Deus. Hilar. l. de Sinod. Athanaſ. epiſt. ad Cōstant. 2. Hieron. epiſt. ad Euagr. Theodoret. l. 4. hist. cap. 3. Socrat. l. 2. c. 16. Sulpit. Seuer. l. 2. ſacra hiſtor. Glyc. part. 4. Annal.

Zonor. To. 3. c. 2. Theater of great Britanie. l. 6. Stowe and Howes hiſtor. in Lucius. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Godw. Conuerſ. of Brit.
                     
                     12. And ſuch plentie, and great numbers of theſe maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops wee had here in this our Britanie, at that time, that as I am warranted both by forreine and domeſticall writers, leauinge our Archbiſhops, and Biſhops ſees furniſhed, we had diuers britiſh Biſhops, beſides, with their preiſts and cleargie, ſent from hence for Armorica, or little Britanie in Fraunce, as the holy maſſinge Biſhops, and Martyrs, ſent and martyred with S. Vrſula, and the other 11000. Virgins, and Martyrs of Britanie, S. Michael, Iacobus, Columbanus, Iwanus, Elutherius, Lothorius and Mauritius. Epiſcop. Gen. in vit. S. Vrſul. Matth. Westm. an. 391. Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Vrſula. M. S. antiq. ibid. Harris in Theatr. To. 4. in S. Vrſula. antiquitat. Eccleſia Coloticen. & al. al which with all other Biſhops and preiſts of this kingdome cōſented with the whole Chriſtian world, as is ſhewed before in the doctrine of holy Maſſe, ſacrificinge preiſts, and preiſthood, which our proteſtants will more demonſtrate vnto vs, by the publicklie

taught and receaued Religion of Britanie in this time: for they produce vnto vs, an old auncient ſermon, written in the latine tonge, and tranſlated into the ſaxon language by Aelfricus in the yeare 996. and to write in proteſtants words, this ſermon was vſuall to bee read in the church here in England in the yeare 366. (Iohn Foxe Act· Monum. pag. 1142.) which muſt needs bee a moſte excellent teſtimonie for this age & time. And yet amonge many other thinges tendinge to the ſame purpoſe, thus we finde by our proteſtants tranſlation therof. In the olde lawe faithfull men offered to God diuers ſacrifices, that had fore ſignification of Christs body, which for our ſinnes hee himſelfe to his heauenly Father hath ſince offered to ſacrifice. Certainely this houſell which wee doe now halow at Gods altare, is a remembrance of Christs body, which he offered for vs, and of his blood, which hee shed for vs: So hee himſelfe commaunded, doe this in my remembrance. Once ſuffered Christ by himſelfe, but yet neuertheleſſe his ſufferinge is daily renevved at this ſupper, through miſtery of the holy houſel. And againe: In that holy houſel, there is one thing in it ſeene, and an other vnderstoode. That

vvhich is there ſeene hath bodily shape: and that vvee doe there vnderſtand, hath ghoſtly might. The houſell is dealed into ſondry parts, chevved betvveene teeth, and ſent into the belly: hovvbeit neuertheleſſe after ghostlie might, it is all in euery part. Many receaue that holy body, and yet notvvithſtandinge, it is ſo all in euery part, after ghostly miſtery.
                     
                     13. And ſhewing how the Paſchal Lambe was a figure of this holy ſacrifice of Chriſt, the Lambe of Innocency, and God, which taketh away the ſins of the worlde, as in holy Maſſe wee ſo pray vnto Chriſt there preſent, vnder that denomination, they teach it was the vſe and cuſtome of our Chriſtians in Britanie in that time, to doe the ſame, the very words of that olde brittiſh publicke homely by our proteſtants tranſlation bee thus: That innocent Lambe vvhich the olde Iſraelites did then kill, had ſignification after ghostly vnderſtandinge, of Chriſts ſufferinge, vvho vnguiltie shedd his blood for our redemption. Hereof ſinge Gods ſeruants at euery Maſse, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miſerere nobis: That is in our ſpeache: Thou Lambe of God, that takeſt away the ſinnes of the worlde, haue

mercie vpon vs. Where wee ſee plainelie acknowledged, by this ſo auncient antiquitie, in this fourth hundred yeare, and the proteſtants themſelues, ſo tranſlatinge and propoſinge it, that generally in that time, the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe was offered by the Biſhops, and preiſts of Britanie in all places, and all the ſeruants of God did then acknowledge, & profeſſe, that Chriſt the true Lambe of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the world was therin offered, and there preſent, prayed vnto by all Gods ſeruants. Which is as much as any maſſing preiſt, Biſhop, or Pope holdeth, teacheth, or practiſeth at this time concerning theſe things.
                     14. And becauſe in this age this our kingedome had by agreement both of auncient and late writers, and by proteſtants themſelues. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. in Palladio & Niniano.) a greate dependance of Rome, both in temporall and ſpiritual affaires, and many of our cheifeſt cleargie men, as S. Teruanus, and S. Ninianus thoſe two glorious Northrē Biſhops, had both their education, inſtruction, ordination, and iuriſdiction from thence, as many others had

at this time, and the Biſhops of Rome are ſo much charged by our proteſtant writers for adding vnto the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, I will only vſe theſe mens authority, which ſay they will ſet downe what euerie Pope did add, Quid alij Pontifices addiderint, ſuo loco in Pontificijs actis dicetur. And they are ſo farr from not performinge their promiſe in this, that they rather relate more then leſſe added by theſe holy Popes, as will bee made euident by theire owne teſtimonies hereafter. Yet for more ample ſatisfaction let vs followe them in this point. Of S. Silueſter I haue ſpokē before, next to him ſucceeded S. Marke, who as theſe men ſay, was Pope in the time of Conſtantine the great, Conſtantino Imperante in Pontificatu ſedit, which time was an holy time in Religion, by our Kings iudgement, and ſo this Pope not likely to make any publick lawe vnholie. Therefore theſe proteſtants onely ſay of him, that hee ordeyned the creede of the Nicen councell to bee ſaid or ſunge at Maſſe. (Rob. Barnes in act. Pont. Rom. in Marc. 1. Io. Bal. in vit Pont. in eod. Edw. Grimſton. in Marc.) but this Nicen creed is holy in all iudgements, and was receaued, and vſed in

Britanie here, in that time, as I haue proued, & it is receaued by the proteſtant parlament of England, ſubſcribed and ſworne vnto by all the proteſtant Biſhops and miniſters of England, allowed in the articles of their Religion, and practiſed in theire churches. (Parlam. an. 1. Eliz. K. Iames can. articles of Relig. articl. Creed. commun. booke &c.) and therefore doth a proteſtant antiquarie iuſtly ſay of that holy creed, & time, in the yeare of Chriſt, 330. At this time the Nicen creed was commaunded to bee ſunge or ſaid, in all Christian churches. (Stowe hist. Rom. ad an. 330.) therefore none but Arrian Hereticks euer did, or will impugne it.
                     15. The next Pope which theſe mē finde, to haue added any thinge to this holy ſacrifice, was holy Damaſus, an acknowledged good Biſhop, and as they teache, hee onely added the Confiteor, Confeſſion, vſed in the beginninge of Maſſe, in which there is nothinge, which proteſtants diſallowe, but confeſſion and prayer to Saints there remembred. (Io. Whitguift. ansvv. to the admonit. pag. 78. and def. of ansvv. pag. 489. Bal. in vit. in Damaſo. Barnes in eodem. Grimston. in Damaſus.) which as I haue proued

before was vſed in the church of God, and in this Realme of Britanie in the Apoſtles dayes. And to paſſe ouer ſo many examples, and teſtimonies, of other Chriſtian people, and places, in the ſecond age our Apoſtles S. Damianus and Fugatius praied to S. Michaell the Archangell, and other Angels, & dedicated a church or chappell to them, the ruines yet ſtandinge neare Glaſtenburie. (antiquit. Glaſton M. S. Gapgrau. in Catal. & alij.) diuers churches beſides with their allowance were founded and dedicated to S. Peter, S. Martin, and other Saints. In the third age S. Amphibalus at his Martirdome publickly prayed to S. Alban Martyred a little before, ſo did other holy Brittiſh Chriſtians to him and other Martyrs and Saints of Britanie at that time. (tabul. M. S. in Eccleſ. S. Petri in Cornhill. Stowe histor. in K. Lucius Caius antiq. Cantabrig. Harris l. 2. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. M. S. antiq. in Lucio M. S. antiq. in S. Amphibal. Capgrau. in eod. & S. Alban. legend. antiq. & alij.) in the beginninge of this fourth age, I haue ſhewed before, what generall buildinge, and dedicatinge of churches there was, to our Martyrs, that had ſuffered a little

before, and ſolemnizinge their feſtiuities, and conſequently prayer and inuocation vnto them. And all this longe before S. Damaſus was Pope, being ſcarcely borne at that time. Therefore many our proteſtants of England confeſſe, that prayer and inuocation of Saints and Angels, was publicklie vſed in the primatiue church, euen in the ſacrifice of Maſſe. And ſome of them make it an article of our creede: for to ſpeak in their wordes. If wee deny it, wee ſhall peraduenture depriue ourſelues of a great part of their Angels ministery, and diſſolue that communion of Saints, which vvee profeſſe to beleeue as an article of Gods truthe. Couel examin. pag. 295.178. Parkins problem. pag. 89.93. Ormerod. Pict. Pap. pag. 26.27. Middlet. papiſtom. pag. 129. Morton. Apolog. part. 1. pag. 227.228. Couel ag. Burges pag. 89.90.
                     16. Wherefore I may boldly conclude of this holy Pope, in this matter, in theſe words of a Proteſtant Archbiſhop: Damaſus vvas a good Bishop, and therefore no good thinge by him appointed, to bee diſallovved. (Io. Whitg. ansvv. to the admonit. pag. 78. ſect. 2.3. and def. of ansvv. pag. 489. of Pope Siricius they ſay, hee commaunded that

Maſſes ſhould bee ſaid in places conſecrated by the Biſhops: Miſſas in loco ab Epiſcopo ſacrato celebrandas eſſe. (Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pont. Rom. in Ciricio.) but this was onely a ceremoniall decree, and to Gods more honor, as I haue ſhewed in our old Britans by their dedication of churches, and our proteſtants in England after their ceremonies obſerue it to this day. What a proteſtant Biſhop meaneth, when hee writeth of this Pope, Miſſae memorias adiunxit. Hee adioyned memories to the Maſſe. (Io. Bal. l. 1. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Siricio.) I know not, if hee meaneth memories of Saints, to pray vnto them, or memories of other faithfull departed, to pray for them (as one of them hee muſt needs vnderſtand) I haue proued before, they were both vſed from the Apoſtles time, and ſo cannot bee ſaid to bee any additiō of Pope Siricius in this time. Theſe proteſtants do not mention any other Pope in this age, to haue added, or altered any thinge, in this holy ſacrifice: Therefore by their good leaue I doe here end this fourth hundred of yeares.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE FIFTHE AGE, OR HVNDRED YEARES OF CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        THE XIX. CHAPTER. Wherein is manifeſtly proued, that all this fift age, the ſacrifice of Maſſe, maſsing preiſts and Bishops did continue in honor in this our Britanie.
                     THe firſt Pope which offereth himſelfe in this next and fifth hundred of yeares, to ſpeake as a late proteſtant writer doth, was Innocent of Albania, or Scotland. (Edw. Grimst. est. of the church of Rome Pope 41. pag. 44. an. D. 402.) and commonly it is written of him, both by proteſtants and others. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Innocentij & Io. Bal. in eodem.) that by contrie hee was Albanus, or of Albania, the old common and receaued knowne name of Scotland. And if hee was of this our Albania, it might be occaſion that the Scots and Britans of this kingdome did more frequent Rome at this, then other times. But whether hee was of Northren Albania, that is in the eaſt, or of

Alba in Italy, or whenceſoeuer, ſure wee are, that many of this nation which proued holy preiſts, and Biſhops alſo, had their education, and inſtruction in Religion, at Rome in theſe dayes, by the maſſing and ſacrificinge preiſts, and Popes in that place. Such were S. Teruanus made Archbiſhop of the Picts, by S. Paladius the Popes Legate in Scotland, about the yeare of Chriſt 432. as our Scottiſh writers teſtifie. And that he was inſtructed in the faith at Rome, I gather from the ſame Authors, affirming that S. Paladius baptized him, beeing an Infant. Teruanum Infantem lustrico lauerat fonte Paldius. (Hector Boeth. l. 7. histor. foli 133. Poſſeuin. in appar. To. 2. pag. 452.) which muſt needs bee at Rome from whence S. Palladius was ſent into this kingdome, in or about the yeare of Chriſt 431. & died ſoone after his cominge hither. And ſo hauinge for his Maſter and Tutor in Religion, that maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop, and the Pope alſo then being the like, this man could not bee inſtructed there in any other Religion, different from that. And in the ſame age, before this, S. Ninian who was alſo brought vp, and inſtructed by the maſſinge Popes,

and their diſciples at Rome, was ſent from thence, to teach the ſame and other holie doctrines of Chriſtian faith to the ſame people, and was theire Biſhop, as all antiquaries Catholicke and Proteſtant teſtifie. (Bed. hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 4. Bal. l. de ſcriptor. cent. 1. in Ninian. Capgrau. in eod. Theat. of great Brit. l. 6.) whoſe ſucceſſor S. Teruanus was, and about the ſame time as our Scottiſh and other hiſtories tell vs, S. Seruanus was made Biſhop of the Orchades beinge inſtructed and conſecrated by the maſſinge Biſhop Paladius, which that famous maſſinge Pope S. Celeſtine ſent his Legate into this nation, of whome herafter. Hector Boeth. Scotor. histor. l. 7. fol. 133.
                     2. Beſides theſe extraordinary, the ordinary Archbiſhops, and Biſhops with their whole cleargie perſeuered in theſe holy doctrines, none to contradict them herin but in other queſtions moued by Pelagian hereticks. And that S. Innocentius the firſt Pope in this age vnder whome our remembred Biſhops had theire education and inſtruction, was a maſſinge Pope, our proteſtants aſſure vs, teſtifyinge that hee confirmed the ceremonie of giuinge the Pax in

Maſſe. Vt pax in Miſſa daretur ordinauit. The like they teſtifie of Pope Sozimus, and Bonifacius, which were betweene S. Innocentius, and S. Celeſtine, that ſent ſo many Biſhops into this kingdome, affirming how they both maintayned ſacrificinge preiſthood, and holy Maſſe, with the ceremonies thereof, and the ſupreamacy of the ſee of Rome. (Io. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pont. Rom. in Innocent. in Sozimo & Bonifacio. Robert. Barne in vit. Pontif. in eiſdem.) And for the ſacrifice of Maſſe, that it was, Miſsa papiſtica, the papiſticall, or, papiſts Maſse, ſuch as Catholicks of this time (whome they call papiſts, and their Maſſe preiſts and Religion papiſticall) doe vſe. (Bal. ſupr. lib. 2. in Caeleſtino.) before the dayes of Saint and Pope Celeſtine, who as they ſay added ſome thinges to the papiſticall Maſſe, vſed before his papacie. Papisticae Miſsae inſeruit. And yet this ſacrificinge maſſinge and papiſticall Pope was hee, by all antiquities, on whome Britanie in thoſe dayes did cheifly depend for direction, and inſtruction in matters of Religion.
                     3. Therefore to make all peace, and attonement, wee may by the proceedings and

inſtitutions of this holy Pope, and our Maſter and Pedagogue in Chriſt, let vs learne of our proteſtants themſelues, what were the things he added to the ſacrifice of Maſſe, whether any matter eſſentiall, or that may be excepted againſt. They haue told vs, that before his additions, the Maſſe was papiſticall, and concerninge his additions, In initio ſacrificij, vt pſalmus, Iudica me Deus, & diſcerne cauſam me am &c. à ſacrificaturo diceretur ordinauit: graduale in Miſſa ordinauit. He ordeyned that the pſalme, Iudge mee ô God & diſcerne my cauſe, ſhould be ſaid in the beginning of the ſacrifice, by the preiſt that offereth the ſacrifice: and he ordeyned the graduale ſhould be ſaid in Maſſe. (Rob. Barn. l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Caelest. Magdeb. cent. 5. in Caeleſt.) ſo write others of theſe proteſtāts, amōg whom one a Biſhop ſaith: Caelestinus introitum, graduale, reſponſorium, tractum, & offertorium, vt propria inuenta, papiſticae Miſſae inſeruit. Pope Celeſtine did put into the papiſticall Maſſe, as inuentions of his own, the introite, graduale, reſponſorie, tract and offertory. (Iohn Foxe Tom. 2. in Q. Mary. Cartwright admon. Whitg. answ. to the admonit. pag. 94. ſect. 1.2. Io. Bal. l. 2. act. Pontif.

Roman. in Caelestino.) which wordes of his, vt propria inuenta, as his owne inuentions, are the euident forgery and inuention of this proteſtant, for all theſe thinges are plaine wordes of holy ſcriptures in all places, and ſo the inuentions of God himſelfe, and not Pope Celeſtines; And if hee meaneth that the placing them in the Maſſe was his inuention, which hee doth not inſinuate, why was it not lawfull for him to vſe the ſcriptures in Maſſe? otherwiſe no prayer or part of Maſſe, or whatſoeuer liturgie or publicke office of any church could bee lawfull, nothinge could be lawfull, for nothinge is more lawfull or warranted then the word of God and ſcripture. Yet it was not S. Celeſtines inuention, to place any one of theſe in the Maſſe, but they were all vſed therin, before his time, euen by the confeſſion of theſe proteſtants themſelues. For firſt concerning the introite, it is one of the pſalmes of Dauid the 42. by the Latine accompt, and by the Hebrue 43. and ſuch kind of introite to the holy Maſſe, was in vſe longe before this Popes time, as our proteſtants acknowledge, wherof one thus confeſſeth.. (Io. Foxe To. 2. Act. and Monum.

Q. Mary pag. 1401.) Chriſoſtome in the eleuenth homely vpon the Ghoſpell of S. Matthew, ſaith, that in his time, and before his time, the vſe was to ſinge whole pſalmes till they were entered and aſſembled together: And ſo belike Caelestinus borrowed this custome of of the Greekes, and brought it into the Latine church. Therfore by theſe men S. Caeleſtine was not the Author of this cuſtome: yet if he had bene, no proteſtāt or Chriſtian will ſay, that ſayinge or ſinginge holy pſalmes, ſo warranted in ſcripture, is an vnlawfull, but a lawfull and godly exerciſe.
                     4. The ſame proteſtant Author maketh the graduale, reſponſe, and tract of as auncient ſtandinge, when hee thus ſpeaketh of the graduale and conſequently of the others belonging vnto it. (Foxe ſupr.) the graduale the people were went to ſinge when the Bishop was about to go vp to the pulpit, or ſome higher standinge, where the worde of God might be better & more ſenſibly heard at his mouth, readinge the epiſtle and the ghoſpell. Which cuſtome hee maketh as auncient, or more auncient, then the time of Pope Alexander, in the Empire of Traian. Touchinge the laſte which is the offertorie, it is euident by

theſe proteſtants, and al teſtimonies before, that it was, and of neceſſitie muſt needs be vſed from the begininge, for where there is Maſſe ſacrifice, and oblation offered, there muſt needes bee an offeringe or offertorie thereof, otherwiſe it could not bee offered. Foxe ſupr. Therefore this proteſtāt acknowledgeth it to haue bene vſed before the time of S. Irenaeus ſo neare the Apoſtles, and that hee thus doth remember it. Iren. l. 4. cap. 18. pro diuerſis ſacrificiorum ritibus ſimplex oblatio panis & vini fidelibus ſufficiat. In ſtedd of diuers rites of ſacrifices in the olde lawe, one oblation of breade and wine ſerueth. Therfore I will conclude with theſe words, of a proteſtāt Archbiſhop. Celeſtinus was a godly Bishop, and the church of Rome at that time had the ſubstance of the Sacraments, according to Gods word, neither was there any ſuperstition mixed with them. Iohn Whitg. def. of the answ. to the admonit. pag. 588.
                     5. And in this opinion are, and ought to bee, all our Engliſh Proteſtant antiquaries, and diuines, which generally hold, & teach, that the Britans of this kingedome, inuiolablie kept the true faith and Religion of Chriſt, in all things, vntill the cominge of

S. Auguſtine, and his companions from S. Gregory the great Pope of Rome, in the later end of the ſixt hundred yeares: for moſt certaine and vndoubted it is, by all antiquities, that this nation at this time of S. Celeſtine, being infected with the Pelagian Hereticks, learned and ſubtile in diſputation, this holy Pope ſent many holy Biſhops hither to confute that hereſie, inſtruct the ignorant, repaire the decaied diſcipline of our church, and reforme many abuſes growne by reaſon of that hereſie, and the Saxon Pagans, which then were entered into this Iland. Which Legates of this holy Pope, muſt needs bee adiudged to bee of the ſame faith, and Religion with him, that ſent them, by his authoritie and direction to effect thoſe holy labours. He ſent the two holie Biſhops S. Germanus, & Lupus into this part of Britanie, S. Palladius into Scotland, S. Patricke and Segetius into Ireland. I haue ſpoken of S. Palladius before, how by his power from the ſee of Rome, hee placed ſacrificing and maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops amonge the Scots, and Picts, in the north parts of this kingdome, of vnited great Britanie. Proſper. in Chronic. ad An. 432. Rob.

Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Caelestino. Io. Bal. l. 2. Act. Pontif. Rom. in eod. Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Brit. cent. 1. in Leporio Agricola.
                     
                     6. Alſo I haue ſhewed out of our auncient Brittiſh Manuſcript & otherwiſe before, how both S. German and Lupus were maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops, and obſerued the auncient forme of Maſſe compoſed by S. Marke, therefore beeing ſent by authoritie from that maſſinge Pope, S. Celeſtine, they neither did, nor might vary and differ from the opinion, and practiſe of him, that ſent him, as S. Proſper who liued at that time, and others write, to ſupply his owne place and parſon in ordering and reforminge the church of Britanie. Papa Celestinus Germanum Antiſiodorenſem Epiſcopum voce ſua mittit, vt deturbatis haereticis Britannos ad Catholicam fidem dirigat. Hee conſecrated many maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops in this kingdome, among whom the cheifeſt was, that maſſing Saint Dubritius Archbiſhop, the cheife Doctor, Primate & the Popes Legate. (Proſper. in Chronic. An. D. 432. Io. Capgrau. in S. Dubritio. Matth. Westm. Galfrid. Monument. hist. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12. Rob. Caenal. l. 2. M. S. Gallic. antiq. M. S.

antiq. & Io. Capgrau. in vita S. Dubritij.) Epiſcopos in pluribus locis Britanniae conſecrarunt: & dextralis partis Britanniae beatum Dubritium ſummum Doctorem & Archiepiſcopum ſtatuerunt: a proteſtant Biſhop writeth: Dubritius was made Archbiſhop by Germanus and Lupus, and they appointed his ſee to bee at Landaffe. (Godwin. Catalog. in S. Dauide.) this holy Archbiſhop by the heauenly direction, did conſecrate that notorious maſſinge preiſt S. Sampſon Archbiſhop of Yorke, in whoſe conſecration a miraculous viſion appeared to confirme his callinge and Religion, and both S. Dubritius and others did ſee a piller of fier miraculouſly proceeding from his mouth as hee celebrated the holy Maſſe, and hee himſelfe all his life had Angels miniſtring vnto him in that bleſſed ſacrifice. Angelus Domini beato Dubritio apparens, Sampſonem ordinari Epiſcopum praecepit. In cuius conſecratione qui aderant, columbam celitus emiſſam immobiliter ſuper eum stare videbant. Eodem die Sampſone celebrante, Dubritius cum Monachis duobus, columnam ignis de ore eius procedentem rutilare perſpexit. Ille vero omni tempore vitae ſuae Angelos dum celebraret,

ſibi aſsistere, & in ſacrificio ministrare meruit. (M. S. antiquit. & Capgrau. in S. Sampſone Epiſcopo.) what maſſinge preiſtes and Archbiſhops the immediate ſucceſſors of theſe two renowned Archbiſhops were, I ſhall lay downe herafter more at large.
                     7. And ſuch as theſe were, ſuch alſo was the Archbiſhop of London S. Vodinus, and all Biſhops and preiſts vnder him, and ſo conſequently in all Britanie at that time: which aſwel appeareth, by their owne hiſtorian, S. Gildas, venerable S. Bede, as alſo Matthew of Weſtminſter with others, who ſpeaking of the miſerable and generall perſecutiō of the chriſtian Britans, in al places quaſque Prouincias, amonge other cruelties they tel vs, theſe infidels martyred the Brittiſh preiſts, as they were ſtanding at the altars where they ſaid Maſſe. Sacerdotes iuxta altaria trucidabāt. (Gild. de excid. & conqueſt. Brit. Matth. Westm. an. gratiae 462. Bed. l. 1. histor. Eccleſ. cap. 15.) therefore the preiſtes generally then, were altare, ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſts, otherwiſe they could not haue beene thus cruelly put to death, at the altars, and places of ſaying Maſſe, in all

all parts of this nation at that time. Neither could there poſſibly, at that time bee any other preiſts, but maſſinge preiſts, except they would turne hereticks (which we doe not reade) and leaue the doctrine and Religion of their both Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and Maſters in diuinitie, which in this time were by all teſtimonie both of Catholicks, and Proteſtants, either the onely or principall, S. Dubritius of whome I haue ſpoken before, S. Iltutus, and S. Gildas, all moſte holy and miraculous men, and knowne maſſinge preiſts. For concerninge S. Iltutus he was (as a Proteſtant Biſhop with Vicentius, and Antoninus confeſſeth) ſcholler to the renowned Popes Legate and maſſinge Biſhop S. German, ſpoken of before, Io. Bal. l. de ſcript. Britan. cent. 1. in Ilchtuto alias Iltuto. And to proue him a maſſinge preiſt, and all his ſchollers after him, that were preiſts, to haue bene maſſinge preiſts, Nennius our moſte auncient (exceptinge Gildas) writer which wee haue left, teſtifieth in his Manuſcript hiſtorie, that there was in a church which this maſſinge Saint Iltutus builded, a miraculous Altar, ſuſteyned only without any propp, or foundation by the

power of God, altare quod nutu Dei fulcitur. (Nennius hiſtor. M. S. in fine post nomina ciuitatum Britanniae.) and this miraculous altar ſo inuiſibly ſuſteyned, did remayne in Nennius time, & manet vſque in hodiernam diem altare potestate Dei fulcitum.
                     
                     8. To proue S. Gildas to haue beene of this opinion, and practiſe, his hiſtorie, de excidio Britanniae, often cited in this treatiſe, is full of altars, maſſinge and ſacrificinge preiſts, and maketh their irreuent ſayinge of Maſſe, and often neglect of celebrating that holy ſacrifice, to haue beene one of the cheife cauſes of Gods indignation againſt them, and depriuinge them of this kingedome, and giuinge it to the Saxons theire profeſſed enemies. And hee was one of the renowned ſchollers of his maſſing Maſter, S. Iltutus, as S. Sampſon the great maſſing Archbiſhop of Yorke, of whome I haue ſpoken before, and S. Dauid, that moſte holy ſacrificinge and miraculous Archbiſhop of Caerlegion, of whome hereafter, and S. Paulinus were: as both Catholicks and Proteſtants are witneſſes. (M. S. antiq. de vit S. Iltuti. Ioh. Capgrau. in Iltuto. Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcriptor. Brit. in eod.) what

this Paulinus was, and whether hee that was ſent hither with S. Auguſtine I dare not affirme, yet conſidering the longe time S. Iltutus liued, as many then did, and hee beeing liuinge as diuers write. (Bal. ſupr.) in the yeare of Chriſt 520. hee might haue in his olde age a ſcholler, that might liue longer then S. Paulinus death, that came with S. Auguſtine, and was Archbiſhop of Yorke: for many our holy Biſhops as S. Kentegern, and S. Dauid liued longer, and we finde no other renowned Paulinus here in thoſe times. And Nennius who ſaith expreſſely, that hee omitteth of purpoſe to ſpeake of thoſe that came with S. Auguſtine, and were not of this nation, yet maketh a moſt honorable memory of that Paulinus Archbiſhop of Yorke, ſaying that hee baptized 12000. at one time, and ceaſed not baptiſinge fourtie dayes together. Nennius in histor. M. S. prope finem.
                     
                     9. So that it is not vnprobable but this holy man S. Paulinus, was the ſcholer of S. Iltutus, and leauinge his contry (as manie did in that rage of the Saxons) wēt to Rome and liued to come hither againe to accompliſh ſo holy labours, as hee did with thoſe

other maſſinge preiſtes ſent hither at that time. Which hee might well performe, if wee allowe him, to bee 20. yeares old, at the death of his Maſter S. Iltutus, as before in the yeare 520. and as an other Proteſtant Biſhop writeth. (Godwin Catalog. Yorke 1. pag. 558.) to haue died in the yeare 644. which accompt maketh him but 124. yeares old, two yeares yonger then his fellow ſcholler S. Dauid by all antiquities makinge him 146. yeares of age at his death. Poſt 146. aetatis annum, vt omnes eius fatentur hiſtoriae, mortuus. In the yeare of his age, 147. anno aetatis ſuae centeſimo quadrageſimo ſeptimo. And twenty one yeares yonger then S. Kentegern by all hiſtories, dyinge when hee was one hundred eightie and fiue yeares old, cum eſſet centum octaginta quinque annorum. Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcriptorib. Britan▪ in Dauid Menenien. Ioh. Capgrau· Catal. in S. Dauid. M. S. antiq. in eod. S. Aſaph. in vita S. Kentegern. Capg. in eod. Io. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcript. Brit. in Kentegern. Elgnen. Godwin Catalog. in S. Aſaph. and Probus the auncient writer of S. Patricks life, dedicateth it to Paulinus, about that time S. Paulinus was Archbiſhop here, which argueth

that Paulinus had ſome acquaintance with, or reference to S. Patricke, otherwiſe an Iriſh Author would not haue dedicated his worke to one in England.Thoſe ſcholes were here of high authority approued both by the Popes & Kings of Britanie, as Cambridg teacheth. Prebus in vita S. Patricij inter opera S. Bedae. Io. Caius l. antiquitat. Camtab. pag. 147.148.
                     10. Now let vs come to S. Patricke, who although he was cheifly ſent by S. Celeſtine to the inhabitants of Ireland and Scotland, yet hee was a Britane borne, and by many antiquities preached much, and by ſome many yeares together before his death liuinge in this nation, died here. Therefore wee may boldly apply him as a Maſter and witnes in this buſines. This man being ſent by the maſſinge Pope S. Celeſtine, was ſo farr alſo a maſſinge preiſt, and Biſhop, that as the auncient writer of his life, not S. Bede but Probus an Iriſh man more aunciēt then S. Bedes time, witneſſeth. (l. 2. de vita S. Patricij in fine.) the inchaunters and magiciens of that contry, eſpecially three which he called Locri, Egled, and Mel, did tell to the Kinge and nobles of that contry beinge

idolaters, diuers yeares before the cominge of S. Patricke thither, that a certaine Prophet ſhould come thither with a new Religion, that though it was hard and auſtere, yet it ſhould quite deſtroy theire auncient worſhip, and there continue for euer. And to ſpeake in this auncient Authors wordes of S. Patricks ſayinge Maſſe in particular: praecinebant quaſi in modum cantici lirico modo compoſiti ante aduentum Sancti viri duobus aut tribus annis decantantes de eo. Haec ſunt autem verba cantici ſecundum linguae illius Idioma in latinum conuerſa, non tamen manifesta. Adueniet artis caput, cum ſuo ligno praecuruo capite: ex eo omnis domus erit capite perforata: incantabit nephas ex ſua menſa ex anteriore parte domus ſuae, reſpondebit ei ſua familia tota, fiat, fiat. Quod nostris verbis poteſt manifestius exprimi. Adueniet totius artis Magister cum ſigno crucis, & quod omne cor hominum compungitur, & de altari Sacramentorum conuertet animas ad Chriſtum, & omnis populus Chriſtianorum reſpōdebit Amen. Quādo erunt haec omnia regnum noſtrum gentile non ſtabit. Quod ſic totum completum est. They did ſinge before the cominge of the holy man S. Patricke a ſonge made lyrickwiſe

of him two or three yeares. And theſe are the words of the ſong according to that language turned into latine, but not manifeſt. The head of art will come, with his ſtaffe with a crooked head, with that al the houſe ſhall bee bored in the heade: he ſhall ſinge wickednes from his table from the former part of his houſe, all his houſeholde ſhall answere, ſo bee it, ſo bee it. Which in our words may be more manifeſtly expreſſed. The Maſter of all art ſhall come with the ſigne of the croſſe, and all the harts of men ſhall haue compunction, and from the altare of Sacraments hee ſhall conuert ſoules to Chriſt, and all Chriſtian people ſhall anſwere Amen. When all theſe things ſhall bee, then our heathen kingedome ſhall not ſtand. All which was ſo fulfilled. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Patricio.
                     
                     11. Iohn Capgraue and others in S. Patricks life thus ſet downe this prediction of S. Patricke, adueniet homo cum ſuo ligno cuius menſa erit in oriente domus ſuae, & populus eius retrorſum, & ex ſua menſa cantabit, & familia reſpondebit ei Amen. Hic cum aduenerit, Deos noſtros destruet templa ſubuertet, & doctrina eius regnabit in ſeculū ſeculi. A man

ſhall come with his ſtaffe, whoſe table ſhall be in the eaſt part of his houſe, and the people behinde him, and hee ſhall ſinge from his table, and the companie ſhall anſwere vnto him Amen. He when he cometh ſhall deſtroy our Gods, ouerthrowe our temples, & his doctrine ſhall reigne for euer. Where wee ſee an euident prediction, and foretelling, how this great Apoſtle ſhould be a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt, his altar ſhould bee in the eaſt part of the church, as altars vſually are, and the people ſhould anſwere Amen. How deuout a ſacrificinge maſſinge man hee was, the hiſtorie of his life is witnes, and of many miracles to proue the ſanctitie and holines, both of that ſacrifice, and the ſacrificer; Amonge which a ſorcerer ouerthrowinge his chalice when hee ſaid maſſe, the earth opened and ſwallowed him vp. Factum est alto die cum Patricius Miſsam celebraret quidam magus effudit calicem ſuam, & ſtatim terra aperiēs os ſuum deuorauit eum. (M. S. antiq. in vit. S. Patric. Capgrau. in eod.) and the altare on which hee vſuallie ſaid Maſſe, healed diſeaſes and wrought other miracles. And this moſte holy Saint by all teſtimonies both of Catholicks, and

Proteſtants. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. in Patric. Prob. in vita eius. Capgrau. & al in eod.) was ſo great a promoter of the bleſſed ſacrifice of Maſſe, and ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops, that for the honor and propagation of them, to inſiſt in the words of Nennius. (Nenmus M. S. hiſt. in S. Patricie.) hee founded 345. churches to that vſe. Hee conſecrated ſo many or more Bishops, endued with the ſpirit, of God, and ordered 3000. maſsinge preists. Eccleſias numero fundauit 345. ordinauit Epiſcopos trecentos quadraginta quinque aut amplius, in quibus ſpiritus Domini crat. Presbyteros autem vſque ad tria millia ordinauit.
                     
                     12. Therefore this maſſing Archbiſhop liuinge and rulinge in Ireland and Britanie vntill the yeare of Chriſt 491. by a Proteſtant Biſhop makinge his age 122. yeares, and longer by Capgraue, & others, ſaying hee was, annis centum triginta, an hundred and thirty yeares old, & by Probus an hundred thirtie two, and more, when hee died. (Bal centur. 1. de ſcriptor. Britan. in Patricio. Capgrau. Catal. in eod. M. S. in vita S. Patric. Prebus in vit. eiuſd.) this kingdome of Britanie could not bee without Maſſe,

and many maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops in this age. And as the great recited number of maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops, eſpecially Biſhops, aboue 340. could not bee wholly employed in theſe kingdomes, which neuer had ſo many in ſo ſhort a time, we may be bold to extend his miſſion of ſuch maſſinge men, to a larger circuite, and ſay hee ſent diuers of theſe his maſſinge diſciples, euen into Armerica it ſelfe: for wee finde in the aunciently written life of S. Brendan 1100. yeares ſince. (M. S. antiq. & Io. Capgrau. in vit. S. Brendani.) of whom one of the Ilands of America ſtill beareth name, that in his longe and tedious trauailes, hee founde in thoſe parts, diuers maſſinge preiſtes, that did vſually ſay Maſſe, and had moſt ſumptuous Altars of Chriſtal, who affirmed they were diſciples to S. Patricke, and by him directed thither. And were moſt holie and miraculous men, and amonge other things then propheſied to S. Brendan, how that contrie ſhould bee deſcryed, and viſited againe by Chriſtians, to their great good & comforte after many ages, as happily wee finde it was: Poſt multa annorum curricula declarabitur ista terra vestris Succeſſoribus,

quando Chriſtianorum ſuperuenerit perſecutio. Written in many Manuſcripts manie hundreds of yeares before the late diſcouerie of America, and by Capgraue & others publiſhed longe before that time.
                  
                  
                     
                        THE XX. CHAPTER. Wherein is proued by proteſtants and others, that the church of Britanie and Rome, accorded in this age in theſe misteries: and how all the Popes beeing maſsinge preiſts and Popes, yet no one of them made any materiall alteration in this ſacrifice.
                     THus hauinge ſhewed both by Catholicke, and Proteſtant authorities, that the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, maſſing preiſts, and preiſthood generally, and inuiolablie continued in Britanie all this age and hundred of yeares, becauſe it is confeſſed this nation was ſtill hitherto directed in Religion, by the ſee Apoſtolicke of Rome, and there want not proteſtāt aduerſaries, which ſay the Popes there in this time alſo added, and altered diuers things, to, and in the ſacrifice of Maſſe, wee will now proue by

theſe proteſtants them ſelues, that not anie one Pope altered, or added any one materiall, or leaſte eſſentiall thinge therein in this age. The firſt Pope after S. Celeſtine which theſe men accuſe for addinge, or alteringe in this matter, is that moſte learned and renowned Pope, S. Leo, againſt whom a Proteſtant Biſhop thus exclaimeth. (Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Leone 1. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in cod.) Leo primus Thuſcus, in canone Miſſae, hoc ſanctum ſacrificium, immaculatam hoſtiam, & hanc igitur oblationem, non ſine magna Dei blaſphemia addidit. Pope Leo the firſt, a Tuſchan by birth, did add in the canon of the Maſſe, not without great blaſphemie of God, this holy ſacrifice immaculate offeringe, and therefore this oblation. To this I anſwere, and firſt to the pretended addition of the prayer. Hanc igitur oblationem: That as our renowned contryman S. Albinus with others, proueth. (Albin. Alcuin. l. de diuin offic. cap. de celebrat. Miſſae.) this prayer, eſpecially the firſt part which hee taxeth, is as auncient in the Maſſe, as the Apoſtles time, and was vſed both by S. Peter and others of that ſacred order: Miſſam Petrus Antiochiae dicitur celebraſse,

in qua tres tantum orationes in initio fidei proferebantur, incipientes ab eo loco, vbi dicitur; Hanc igitur oblationem. Therefore S. Leo added nothinge in this prayer, beeing for the firſt part vſed by the Apoſtles, and others in their dayes, which is that, this Proteſtant Biſhop excepteth againſt: and for the later end thereof, which hee taxeth not, was by this man himſelfe, and others, both Catholicks, and Proteſtants, added longe time after, and then, firſt by S. Gregorie the great and firſt Pope of that name. Baleas l. 2. de Act· Pontfic. Rom. in Gregorio 1. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in eodem. & alij communiter.
                     
                     2. So that it is euident S. Leo neither did, nor could add any part of this prayer, to the ſacrifice of Maſſe as his owne addition or inuention, all that hee did, or poſſiblie could doe therin, was to take order that the decree or cuſtom of the Apoſtles ſhould be obſerued, which cannot be either great or little blaſphemie of God, as this barbarous mouth affirmed, but honor vnto God in that behalfe. To make all ſure, I will cite the whole praier then vſed thus in Engliſh: Therefore ô Lord wee beſeech thee, that thou

wilt be pleaſed to accept this oblation of our ſeruice, and all thy family through Christ our Lord. The reſt being added by S. Gregory, is thus: and diſpoſe our dayes in peace, and commaund wee may bee deliuered from euerlasting damnation, and numbred in the flocke of thy elected ſeruants. In which addition of S Gregory there is not any one word, of matter now in controuerſie, but al holy and allowable, by Proteſtant Religion. And in that part, which I ſay with S. Albin or Alcuine, was vſed by the Apoſtles, there is not one word, except, oblation, which is, or can by proteſtants bee called into controuerſie, by them or any Chriſtiā; Therfore to anſwere that & hoc ſacrificium, immaculatam hoſtiam, together; If S. Leo added theſe wordes, to the canon of the Maſſe, then the canon of the Maſſe was before S. Leo his pretended additions: and in other places of this canon of which no proteſtant doth, or will produce any Author, beeing as is proued before apoſtolicall, this Liturgie of Maſſe is called. (in can. Miſſae antiq.) donum, munus, ſanctum ſacrificium illibatum, oblatio benedicta, adſcripta, rata, rationabilis, ſacrificium, hoſtia pura, hostia ſancta, hostia immaculata. A preſent,

a guift, holy ſacrifice vnſpotted, an oblation bleſſed, adſcribed, ratified, reaſonable, a ſacrifice, a pure hoſte, an holy hoſte, an immaculate hoſte.
                     3. And this Proteſtant Biſhop himſelfe hath teſtified alſo, that the offertorie was vſed in S. Celeſtines time before: which is this in Engliſh: O holy Father omnipotent eternall God, receue this immaculate ſacrifice, or oblation, which I thy vnworthie ſeruant doe offer vnto thee, my liuinge and true God, for my innumerable ſinnes, and offences, and negligences, and for all here preſent, as alſo for all faithfull Christians both liuinge and deade, that it may bee to mee and them for ſaluation to eternal life. Suſcipe ſancte Pater omnipotens aeterne Deus, hāc immaculatam hostiam, quam ego indignus famulus tuus offero tibi Deo meo, viuo, & vero, pro innumerabilibus peccatis, & offenſionibus, & negligentijs meis, & pro omnibus circumstantibus, ſed & pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis, viuis atque defunctis: vt mihi & illis proficiat ad ſalutem, in vitam aeternam Amē. So likewiſe it was for the chalice: offerimus tibi Domine calicem ſalutaris: ô Lord wee offer vnto thee the chalice of ſaluation: And I haue proued in all ages before,

from Chriſt, euen with the allowance of our proteſtants, that Maſſe was an holie ſacrifice, and all truely conſecrated preiſtes, did euer in all times and places ſtill offer that moſte holy ſacrifice, both for the liuinge and faithfull departed, and that this was ſo an vndoubted and generally receued cuſtome, & truth in the whole church, that by our proteſtants graunt, it was iuſtly condemned to bee hereſie, to deny it, and this longe time before S. Leo was borne: Therefore none of thoſe names could bee by any poſſibility his inuentiō in this kind. Which this proteſtant accuſing Biſhop him ſelfe to confound and contradict himſelfe, teacheth in the ſame place, when hee ſaith of S. Leo, Miſſae ſacrificium approbanit. Hee did approue the ſacrifice of Maſſe: therfore Maſſe was termed and knowne to be ſo accepted a ſacrifice, before his time, and approbation. For a thinge approued, or to bee approued, vnſeparably carrieth with it a precedency to the approbation, that which is, not cannot poſſibly bee approued, as a thinge paſt or preſent, and euery ſuch allowance or approbation neceſſarily ſuppoſeth the thinge to bee ſo allowed or approued.

And this will ſuffice for S. Leo.
                     4. After whome in this age the onely Pope which is produced by theſe men to haue added, or altered in the Maſſe, is Gelaſius: of this Pope a proteſtant thus writeth. (Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontif. in Gelaſio.) praefationem Miſſae, verè dignū & iustum est, instituit. But this is euidentlie vntrue, as I haue proued before, for S. Ciprian, and before him Tertullian informe vs, it was in vſe in the church before their times; and S. Ciprian alleadgeth it is an apoſtolicall, common, & known cuſtome of the church. (Ciprian. l. de orat. Dominic.) and Foxe the proteſtant proueth. (Io. Foxe Tom. 2. in Q. Mary.) that this could not bee any inuention of Gelaſius, for that both the auncient Greeke church before that time, and both S. Ciprian, and S. Auguſtine ſo agree it was in vſe before. Ciprian. ſup. Aug. de vera Religione cap. 3) therefore followeth therein the opinion of Thomas Waldenſis, that it could not bee the inuention of Pope Gelaſius. And Pope Vigilius which liued not longe after Gelaſius, who writinge to the Biſhops of Germany and Fraunce, deſirous to know the order which the church of

Rome obſerued in the prefaces of Maſſe, anſwereth in this maner. (Vigilius epistola ad Epiſcopos Germaniae & Galliae.) Inuenimus has nouem praefationes in ſacro catalogo tantumodo recipiendas, quas long a retro veritas in Romana Eccleſia hactenus ſeruauit. Wee finde that theſe 9. prefaces are to bee receued in the holy catalogue, which truth hath longe time from former ages hitherto obſerued in the Roman church. And thus hee recōpteth them: one of Eaſter, another of the Aſcenſion of our Lord, the third of Pentecoſte, the fourth of the natiuitie of our Lord, the fift of the apparition of our Lord, the ſixt of the Apostles, the ſeuenth of the holy Trinitie, the eight of the Croſse, the ninth in Lent. And thus concludeth: has praefationes tenet & cuſtodit ſancta Romana Eccleſia, has tenendas vobis mandamus. Theſe prefaces the holy Roman church obſerueth, theſe wee commaund to bee kept by you. And Houeden as our proteſtants haue publiſhed him, reciteth all theſe, out of the ſame authoritie to haue bene receued in England in a councel of our Biſhops manie hundred yeares ſince, ſetting downe the begininge of euery one of them, and addeth the tenth of the bleſſed Virgin, decimam de

beata Virgine. Roger. Houeden in annal. part. poſterior. in Henr. 2.
                     5. And our Engliſh Proteſtants themſelues by their higheſt parlamentary authoritie in ſuch things with them, vſe the ſame prefaces, except that of the Apoſtles and bleſſed Virgine, in their publick church ſeruice, their communion booke. (Protest. communion booke titul. communion.) and yet in that of the bleſſed Virgine which ſeemeth to haue beene added after the dayes of Pope Vigilius, there is no inuocation of her, nor any matter now queſtioned by proteſtants found in it. And concerninge that of the Apoſtles of matters queſtioned there is onely this clauſe, or petition vnto God, for preſeruing his church: vt gregem tuum Pastor aeterne non deſeras: ſed per beatos Apostolos tuos continua protectione cuſtodias, vt ijſdem Rectortbus gubernetur, quos operis tui Vicarios eidem contuliſti praeſſe Pastores. That God the eternall Pastor will not forſake his flocke, but keepe by his bleſſed Apoſtles, with continuall protection, that it may bee gouerned by the ſame Rulers, whome Vicars of his worke, hee hath appointed Pastors to rule it. Which is not a prayer immediatlie to the Apoſtles,

but to God for the protection of his Apoſtles, and ſuch as our proteſtants themſelues in their publick ſeruice, on S. Michael his day, doe vſe for the protection of Angels, as is manifeſt in their collect or prayer of that feaſt, being the old Catholick prayer word by word tranſlated into Engliſh. And yet if there were any immediate prayer vnto the Apoſtles, or any other Saints or Angels, in any ōf theſe prefaces, I haue proued before, that it was the receaued doctrine of Chriſts church, from the beginninge.
                     6. And if wee ſhould allow vnto proteſtants, that Pope Gelaſius did add in the prefaces, all that clauſe, verè dignum & iuſtum est: vnto, per Christum Dominum noſtrum. What is there in it, but holy, and allowable, and ſtill practiſed by themſelues in their church ſeruice. This it is: verè dignum & iuſtum est aequum & ſalutare nos tibi ſemper & vbique gratias agere Domine ſancte Pater omnipotens aterne Deus, per Christum Dominum nostrum, ô Lord holy Father omnipotent eternall God, verely it is a thinge worthie and iuſt, right and belonginge to ſaluation, that wee alwayes and in all places

giue thanks to thee by Chriſt our Lord. Are not all Chriſtians in all iudgements bound to bee of this minde, and this being a dutie ſo bindinge and belonginge vnto al that beleeue in Chriſt, is it not the better, the oftner, and more publickly it be acknowledged? o
                           •…
                         if it be good by proteſtants, and in their publick practiſe, how can it be ill in Catholicks, or could bee ſo in Pope Gelaſius? And if hee had added, Te igitur clementiſsime Pater per Ieſum Christū filium tuum Dominum noſtrum ſupplices rogamus ac petimus: Therefore ô moſte mercifull Father, wee aske and beſeeche thee, by Ieſus Chriſt, thy ſonne our Lord. It is the ſame reaſon, as before, this beinge a very Chriſtian, and holy prayer, by Proteſtant Religion, to aske all things of God in the name of Chriſt as hee himſelfe ſaid: whatſoeuer you shall aske in my name, that will I doe. (Io. c. 14. v. 13.) and whatſoeuer yee shall aske of the Father in my name hee may giue it you. Io. c. 15. v. 26.
                     7. Whereby theſe men may ſee, that neither the primatiue church which vſed inuocation of Saints, nor the preſent church of Rome inſiſtinge therein, did, or doe diminiſh

any honor, or dutie to Chriſt, by honoringe them, which honor him, and are honoured by him. Yet S. Remigius witneſſeth, this prayer, Te igitur clementiſsime Pater, to haue beene vſed from the Apoſtles. (Remig. in epist. 1. ad Timoth. cap. 2.) Wheras ſome proteſtants write of Pope Gelaſius. (Balaeus l. 2. de actis Pontif. Rom. in Gelaſio.) Gelaſius hymnos, prefationes, gradualia, collectas & orationes praeſcripſit: Pope Gelaſius did preſcribe hymnes, prefaces, graduals, collects, and prayers: I haue proued by theſe proteſtants, that all theſe were vſed in the church, and laudably longe before: and by the word praeſcripſit, hee did preſcribe, what hymnes, prefaces, graduals, and collects, or prayers were to bee vſed, it is euident, theſe were before, and he being Pope, and cheife, preſcribed the order how they ſhould bee vſed: which proueth, he rather tooke ſome away, then added any, for amonge them were before, praeſcripſit, he preſcribed, which, and no others ſhould bee vſed. And wheras there is a controuerſie, by ſome, whether this preſcription and orderinge theſe things was by Pope Gelaſius, or one called Scholaſticus; Maſter Foxe the Proteſtant hiſtorian

decideth this queſtion. (Io. Foxe in Q. Mary pag. 1403.) teaching out of, vetusto quodam libro de officio Miſsa, an old booke of the office of Maſſe, that theſe were both one, and Gelaſius, beinge Scholaſticus before, was made Pope: Gelaſius Papa ex Scholaſtico effectus in ordine 48) And thus much of Gelaſius.
                     8. After whome, for an intermedler in theſe affaires, our proteſtants propoſe Pope Symmachus. (Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Symmacho. Bal. l. 2. in eod.) who commaunded, gloria in excelſis Deo, to bee ſunge vppon ſondayes, and feaſts of Saints. In Dominico die & Sanctorum natalitijs, gloria in excelſis canendum eſſe dixit; or by an other, praecepit. But if they meane the firſt part, of this holy hymne, it was the ſonge of the Angels, at the birthe of Chriſt, and recommended vnto vs in ſcripture, and by one of theſe proteſtants, vſed at Maſſe by the commaundement of Saint, and Pope Teleſphorus, who liued in the Apoſtles time: gloria in excelſis Deo &c. in Miſsa canendum praecepit. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Teleſphoro. & S. Petro) and if they meane the whole canticle, as it is now vſed, their brother

Iohn Foxe, with others, thus teſtifieth. (Iohn. Foxe ſupr. in Q. Mary.) The hymne, gloria in excelſis, which was ſunge of the Angels at the birth of our Sauiour, was augmented by Hilarius Pictauienſis, with thoſe words, that follow, ſinging it first in his owne church, which was an. 340. & afterward brought into other churches by Pope Symmachus. And our hiſtories teſtifie it was vſed here in Britanie by S. German in his time. And our Engliſh Proteſtants vſe it, in their publicke church ſeruice, at this day, by publicke authoritie. Engl. Proteſtant communion booke morninge prayer.
                     
                     9. That which a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth of this Pope, that he reduced the Maſſe to forme, Miſsam in formam redegit. (Bal. l. 2. Act. Pontif. Rom. in Symmacho.) is his formall forgery, or foolery, confounded by many vndeniable inſtances graunted by proteſtants before, as the forme of Maſſe of S. Peter, S Iames, S. Matthew, S Marke, S. Clement, S. Baſile, S. Chriſoſtome, and Popes of Rome longe before this time, as amonge other witneſſes this Proteſtant Biſhop himſelfe teſtifieth of S. Innocentius, Syricius, S. Celeſtine, S. Leo and Gelaſius.

(Bal. in Act. Pontif. Rom. in Innocent. Syric. Caleſtino Leon. Gelaſ.) therefore without euident contradiction, and wilfull errour, he cannot intend, or affirme, that Pope Symmachus did firſt bringe the Maſſe into order. Therefore of neceſſitie to keepe himſelfe from theſe abſurdities, he muſt vnderſtand, that Pope Symmachus confirmed, or allowed of the forme of Maſſe, formerlie vſed in the church, which all Popes & good Chriſtians euer did, and ought to doe.
                     10. And here endeth the fift hundred yeare, at which time, and longe after, as with others, our proteſtants aſſure vs, that S. Dubritius that great maſſinge Prelate, and Archbiſhop primate here, & the Popes Legate, and great Maſter of diuinitie, together with S. Iltutus priuiledged in the ſame facultie by papall authoritie, and S. Gildas by whome all Britanie and other contries receaued inſtruction were liuinge, and conſequently agreeing in all thinges with the church of Rome. (Bal. cent. 1. in Dubritie Iltuto Gylda Albanio. Godwin. Catal. in S. Dauids. Capgrau. Catal. in Dubrit. Iltut. Gild.) About which time alſo amonge diuers others thoſe three great lights of our Brittiſh

church knowne maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops S. Dauid that ſucceeded S. Dubritius in his archiepiſcopall dignitie, S. Thelians and S. Patern, began to floriſh, and went that great Pilgrimage to Hieruſalem. (M. S. antiq. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Dauid. S. Thelian. & S. Paterno & alij. M. S. S. Theliai apud Godwin. Catal. in Landaff. 2.) and both in going and returninge through Italy and thoſe places, and ordinarily ſayinge Maſſe, muſt needs vſe that order and forme therof, they found to bee vſed at Rome, and all places receauinge direction from thence in ſuch affaires, and ſo here I end this age, and centenary of yeares.
                  
               
               
                  THE SIXTH AGE, OR HVNDRED YEARES OF CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        THE XXI. CHAPTER. Wherein being confeſſed by our proteſtant writers, that all the Popes of Rome vnto S. Gregory were maſsinge preiſts, and Popes, yet not any one of thē by theſe proteſtāts cō
                        feſsion, made any the least materiall chaunge, or alteration in theſe miſteries.
                     NOw wee are come to the ſixt age, or hundred of yeares, of Chriſt, wherin

liued S. Gregory the great, Pope of Rome, that ſent S. Auguſtine and diuers other holie cleargie men hither, which conuerted a greater part of this nation, and kingdome, called England; Wherefore ſeeing by confeſſion of our beſt learned proteſtants, the Chriſtian Britans of this Iland, had from their firſt conuerſion vnto Chriſt, and did at the coming of S. Auguſtine from Rome, continue in the ſame holy faith, and Religion, which they had learned, and receued in the Apoſtles time, and hitherto we haue not found any materiall difference in any age between them, & the church of Rome in theſe cheif queſtions I haue in hand; now to make euidēt demonſtration by theſe aduerſaries to the holy Romane Religion, that this church neuer altered any ſubſtantiall matter, by their owne iudgement, at, before, or after, the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither, I will firſt ſet downe all the pretended chaunges additiōs or alteratiōs, which theſe proteſtants charge that holy church withall, in theſe affaires, prouinge them to bee of no moment, or eſſentiall; And after ſhew how the Chriſtian Britans in this age alſo, as in all the former, ſtill agreed in theſe

queſtions with the church of Rome. And wheras there was then ſome difference betweene the diſciples of S. Gregorie and the Britās here about the obſeruation of Eaſter, and ſome other queſtions, rather ceremoniall, then ſubſtantiall in Religion, that the church euen by the teſtimonie of our proteſtants, did hold the truth in theſe matters, and ſuch Britans and Scots as held the contrary, were in confeſſed, and vnexcuſable error.
                     2. The firſt alleaged chaunger or additioner of any thinge in the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, which our proteſtants obiect among the Popes of Rome, in this age, is Horſmida, who as theſe men write: commaunded that altars should not be erected, without the aſſent of the Bishop. Ne altaria ſine Epiſcopi aſsenſu erigerentur iuſsit. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Horſmida. Bal. in Act. Pont. in eod.) but this was according to holy ſcriptures, to haue Superiors and commaunders to bee obeyed: remember them which haue the rule ouer you. Obey them that haue the rule ouer you, and ſubmit yourſelues. (Hebr. cap. 13. v. 7.17. and S. Ignatius liuinge in the firſt hundred yeares, proueth noe ſuch

thinge ought to bee done without the Biſhops aſſent. (Ignat. epiſt. ad Smyrnenſes.) and the puritan presbytery, and among our Engliſh parlament Proteſtāts no ſuch matter in their Religion may bee done, without the allowance of theire Proteſtant Biſhops. And theſe proteſtant obiectors themſelues before confeſſe, that Pope Syricius tooke order, that Maſſe ſhould not bee ſaid but in places cōſecrated by the Biſhop. Miſſas in loco ab Epiſcopo ſacrato celebrandas eſſe. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Syricij Papae.) which was ſoone after the ceaſinge of perſecution by the Emperors, that places might bee freely dedicated to God, and hallowinge of altars belōged properly euer to the epiſcopal dignitie. And our proteſtants ar witneſſes, that this was then practiſed and obſerued in Britanie by S. Dauid, S. Dubritius and others, too many to be recited. And in Kinge Lucius his time, when ſo many churches with their altars were dedicated by our holy Biſhops to God, S. Peter, and other Saints. Godwin conuerſ. cap. 2. pag. 11. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Theat. of great Britanie. Capgrau. in S. Patricio & alij.
                     
                     3. From Horſmida, they lepp ouer Ioannes

1. Faelix 4. Bonifacius 2. Ionnes 2. Agapetus 1. Syluerius 1. vntil they come to Pope Vigilius, who as theſe men ſay, decreed, that Maſſe should bee ſaid towardes the caste: Instituit vt Miſsa celebretur verſus orientem. (Io. Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Vigilio.) or as an other proteſtant interpreteth it: Vigilius inſtituted that preists being to ſay Maſſe, should turne their face towardes the east. (Barnes in vit. Vigilij) Vigilius instituit, vt Miſsam celebraturi, faciem ad orientem verterent. But this is onely a ceremony if he had firſt inuented it: but S. Baſile telleth vs it was an apoſtolicall tradition, ſo to pray towards the eaſt. (Baſil. l. de Spiritu Sancto cap. 27.) for ſpeaking of ſuch traditions from the Apoſtles, not conteyned in ſcripture he ſaith: vt ad orientem verſus precemur, quae decuit ſcriptura? to pray with our faces towardes the eaſt is a tradition, and not taught in ſcripture. And this tradition and cuſtome of the primatiue Chriſtians to pray, and ſay Maſſe turning their faces towards the eaſt, was ſo common, publick, and well known longe before this time (Proclus ſupra in vita S. Patricij. Holinsh. hiſtor. of Ireland in S. Patrick) that as I haue declared before,

both Catholick and Proteſtant antiquaries ſo aſſuring vs, it was giuen for a diſtinctiue ſigne, by the deuils and magiciens of Ireland, to the then Pagan inhabitants therof, before the cominge of S. Patrick thither, to know him and his Chriſtian diſciples by, that they ſhould ſett their Altar, ſay Maſſe, and pray towards the eaſt, as wee generallie ſee chauncels & high altars of Chriſtian churches are framed. Therefore wee may be ſecure, that hitherto the church of Rome and Britanie agreed in theſe miſteries, nothinge added yet by any Pope, which the Britans did not embrace. For better teſtimonie whereof we are told by the antiquaries of Cambridge, that Kinge Arthur in his charter of priuiledge, to that ſchole, or vniuerſitie, bearinge date at London, in the yeare of Chriſt 531. doth therin expreſſe, that hee giueth that confirmation with the counſaile and aſſent of all and euery Bishops, and nobles of his kingdome, and licence of the ſee Apostilick of Rome. Conſilio & conſenſu omnium & ſingulorum Pontificum & Principum iſtius regni, & licentia ſedis Apoſtolicae. (Io. Caius l. 1. antiquit. pag. 69. Diploma Regis Arthuri 7. die Aprilis an. 531. Londini

apud Caium ſupr. pag. 68.69.70.) therfore if the then Kings of Britanie, and all the Biſhops, and Noble men thereof, by which the reſt were gouerned, did then ſo firmly adhere to the Pope of Rome in matters of Religion, that they would not ioyne in ſuch an Act, without his licence, no man will thinke, there was or then could be any difference in Religion betweene them. And to cōfirme vs the more in this great vnion, and amitie of Rome and Britanie, in ſuch affaires, at this time of Pope Vigilius, and Kinge Arthur, our proteſtants Matthew of Weſtminſter telleth vs. (Matth. Westm. an. 533. that this Religious Kinge committed Walwan ſonne to Loth his ſiſters ſonne, Who should haue inherited the kingedome of Norwey to Pope Vigilius to bee brought vp, when hee was but 12. yeares of age, and that hee was knighted by him. Erat autem Walwanus filius praedicti Loth, duodecim annorum iuuenis, Vigilio Papae traditus ad nutriendum, à quo etiam & militiae cingulum accepit. How farr this Pope intermeddled in ordering the prefaces in Maſſe, I haue ſaid before, & theſe proteſtants being ſilent therin, thereby reſt contented in that point.
                     
                        4. The next additioner with theſe proteſtants, is the next Pope, Pelagius the firſt: who as theſe men ſay, gaue allowance that in time of Lent preiſts might ſay Maſſe at the ninth hower of the day, which is three of the clocke in the afternoone by our accompt. In quadrage ſima presbytero licere ſacra facere hora nona pronuntiauit. (Rob. Barnes in Pelag. 1.) an other ſaith: vt quadrag eſimali tempore hora nona ſacrificulis miſſare liceret. (Bal. in Pelag. 1.) but this was but a ceremony, and argued, how reuerent and deuout preiſts were, in that time, to this holy ſacrifice, that they did, and would faſt ſo longe to ſay Maſſe, ſo nere the time it was inſtituted by Chriſt, and Chriſt was offered vpon the Croſſe, this proueth, they were not proteſtants in that time, which neither reuerence Maſſe, nor faſt ſo longe, or at all in Lent. But they add of this Pope: mortuorum memorias approbauit, ac lucri gratia miſſis adiecit. Hee approued the memories of the dead, and for gaine added them to Maſſes. (Bal. in Pelag. 1.) but this Proteſtant Biſhop is either very forgetfull, or maketh no ſcruple to contradict himſelfe, for he telleth vs before in the life of Saint and Pope Siricius

lōge before S. Celeſtine ſent S. German and the reſt into theſe parts, that this S. Syricius adioyned memories vnto Maſſes, and yet died a confeſſor in the yeare of our Lord 399. Syricius Miſſae memorias adiunxit, & anno Domini 399. confeſſor occubuit. (Balaeus. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Syricio.) and Tertullian in his time ſetteth it downe for an Apoſtolicall tradition, to ſay Maſſe for the deade, and keepe their anniuerſary daies, oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annua die faecimus. (Tertul. l. de coron. milit. cap. 3.) S. Ciprian S. Chriſoſtome and others haue the like. And our proteſtants haue confeſſed before, that it was an Apoſtolicall tradition to ſay Maſſe for the dead, and that Aerius was iuſtly condemned of hereſie, and for an hereticke for his denyall thereof. And wee had here in Britanie many foundations to ſay Maſſe, and pray for Chriſtian ſoules, and frends deceaſed, as we find in the charter of Kinge Arthur before recited, wherin among other motiues of that his confirmatorie priuiledge to the vniuerſitie of Cambridge, hee ſaith expreſſely, that hee doth it, with the conſent of all his Biſhops, for the helpe of the ſoules of his anteceſſors

Kings of Britanie. Pro amore caelestis patriae, remedioque animarum Anteceſſorum meorum Britāniae Regum. Charta Regis Arthuri apud Caium ſupr. antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. pag. 69.
                     5. After this Pope, vntill they come to S. Gregory, theſe proteſtants complaine of no additions, but onely in Pope Pelagius the ſecond, which was the immediate predeceſſor to S. Gregory, and ſent him, yet a priuate preiſt, his legate to Conſtantinople: of this Pope they write: nouem praefationes ante canonem in Miſſa canendas de dit. Hee gaue nyne prefaces to bee ſunge before the canon in Maſſe. (Bal. in Pelag. 2. l. 2. in Act. Pontif. an other thus more particularly expreſſeth it: Pelagtus nouem praefationes Eccleſiae de dit ante canonem, in Miſſa canendas: in Natali, in Epiphania, in Quadrageſima, de Cruce, de Reſurrectione, de Aſcenſione, in Pē
                           tecoſte, de Trinitate, de Apoſtolis· (Barnes in Pelag. 2. in vit. Pont.) Pelagius gaue nyne prefaces to the church, to bee ſunge before the canon in Maſſe, one in the natiuitie of Chriſt, an other in the Epiphanie, in Lent, of the Croſſe, of the Reſurrection, of the Aſcenſion, at Whitſontyde, of the Trinitie, of the Apoſtles. I haue anſwered this before,

in Pope Gelaſius, to whome theſe proteſtants before contradictinge them ſelues aſcribe the preface, how vaine this quarrell is I haue there declared, and onely add here from theire proteſtant like publiſhed Matthew of Weſtminſter: Anno gratiae 581. Papa Pelagius decreuit nouem praefationes tā
                           tum ad Miſſas debere cantari, caſsatis quotidianis quae dici ſolebant. In the yeare of grace 581. Pope Pelagius decreed that only nine prefaces ſhould bee ſunge at Maſſe omittinge the daily prefaces which were wont to bee ſaid. Where wee ſee that this Pope did not add any thinge in this buſines, but rather deducted ſome prefaces, though they had beene vſed to bee ſaid before, for ſo the words, dici ſolebant, manifeſtly proue, as I wrote of Pope Vigilius before. All which doe euidentlie teſtifie, that the auncient receued cuſtome of the church of Chriſt was longe before theſe dayes, to vſe theſe prefaces.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE XXII. CHAPTER. Wherein euident demonſtration is made, euen by theſe proteſtants themſelues, that neither S. Gregory the great, which ſent S. Augustine, with many other holy learned men into England, did make any materiall addition, or alteration in theſe miſteries. But the Religion which thoſe his diſciples preached here, was in all points by all testimonies both of God and man, Britans them ſelues, and Saxons, Catholicks and Protestants, auncient and late writers, the true Religion of Chriſt, and in all things wherin they differed from the Britans, more pure then that which they then profeſsed.
                     NOw wee are come to the happy dayes of S. Gregory the great, that ſent ſo many holy men, to preach Chriſtian Religion to this Engliſh nation, and ſo called our Apoſtle, in which it will bee more manifeſt, euen by theſe proteſtant accuſers themſelues, that whatſoeuer differēce there was, betweene the holy diſciples which he ſent hither, and ſome Britans, the error in

euery point was in thoſe that oppoſed againſt the Roman miſſion. And for S. Gregory himſelfe, one of the four holy Doctors of the church of Chriſt, he was by all teſtimonies a great learned man, & holy Saint, and ſo honored both in the Greeke and Latine church, and the Maſſe hee vſed as our proteſtants haue told vs. (Edw. Sands relation of Relig. ſupr.) both was, and is receued and publickly vſed euen in the Greeke church, beeing tranſlated into Greeke: hee is ſtiled by all writers proteſtants and Catholicks, Gregory the great, and commonlie named the Apoſtle of the Engliſh nation, in all publicke proteſtant Kalenders placed amonge the holy Saints, and by a Proteſtant Biſhop his greateſt accuſer, dignified, with theſe honorable termes. (Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontific. Rom. in Gregorio Magno.) Gregorius Magnus omnium Pontificum ſeu vt dictum est Patriarcharum Romanorum, doctrina, & vita praeſtantiſsimus: inuitus ac demu
                              •…
                            coactus Pelagio praedicto ſucceſsit, vir doctus & bonus. Gregory the great the moſt excellent both for learninge and life, of all the Romane Popes or Patriarkes, did againſt his will, and at laſte therto compelled, ſucceed

Pelagius the ſecond, hee was a learned and good man. Therefore it cannot bee either probable, or poſſible, that a man ſo learned, vertuous, and holy, that hee is thus dignified by ſo great enemies, both for learninge and pietie aboue all the Popes that euer were ſo learned, & knowne holy Saints, and ſo vnwillinge to take that greateſt honor, and charge vpon him, would or could contrary both to ſo great learning, and pietie, which could not conſiſt with any the leaſt error in Religion in eſſentiall things, make any erroneous publick decree in ſuch affaires. For in ſo doinge hee ſhould haue beene ſo farr from that eminent learninge, and pietie, and beinge a glorious Saint in heauen, which both by proteſtants and Catholicks are generally held and written of him, that quite contrary hee ſhould haue beene an vnlearned, wicked, and damned man. Which no tonge or mouth that hath learned to cōfeſſe Chriſt, dareth to affirme or vtter.
                     2. But to giue all contentment, I will examine all whatſoeuer in particular, they ſay this ſo holy learned Pope added, or altered in theſe miſteries, as they pretend. This

Proteſtant Biſhop ſaith of him (Bal. l. 2. ſupr. in Gregor. Mag.) introitum in Miſſa ex aliquo pſalmo cancre iuſsit. Hee commaunded the introite in the Maſſe to bee ſunge out of ſome pſalme. They haue told vs before of more auncient times wherein the introite was vſed, before S. German, Lupus, Palladius & Patricius were ſent into theſe parts. But if S. Gregory did any ſuch thing, ſeeing it was ex aliquo pſalmo, out of the holy ſcripture, neither theſe men, nor any which will not diſallow of holy ſcripture, may reprehend it. And where this proteſtant accuſer further ſaith: Nonies in Miſſa, Kyrie eleyſon canere iuſsit. S. Gregory commaunded that Lord haue mercy vpon vs, should bee ſunge 9. times in Maſſe. Hee is deceued, for that is ſonge but 6. times, and Christ haue mercy vpon vs, thriſe: And his frend Maſter Foxe. (Io. Foxe in Q. Mary pag. 1401.) will tell him, that this was the auncient cuſtome of the Greeke church longe before, frō which is was taken by S. Gregory, only that S. Gregory added, Christ haue mercy vpon vs. But howſoeuer is it not a moſte holy and warranted cuſtome, ſo to pray? our proteſtants thēſelues obſerue it in their publick church

ſeruice. (Com. booke tit. Litan. & alibi.) and commonlie preferr them before all other prayers, both in their priuate, and publicke writings.
                     3. Of S. Gregories addinge, dieſque noſtros in tua pace diſponas, and diſpoſe our dayes in peace, and graunt wee bee deliuered from eternall damnation, and numbred in the flock of thy elect. I haue ſpoken before, & here only I add, that S. Bede, whome this Proteſtant Biſhop. (Io. Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. centur. 1. in Beda Girwino.) doth equall or rather preferr before S. Gregory, S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, and S. Chriſoſtome, thoſe great lights of Chriſts church, doth ſay, that theſe wordes which S. Gregory added in the holie Maſſe, are words ful of greateſt perfection: Beatus Papa Gregorius in ipſa Miſſarum celebratione, tria verba maximae perfectionis plena ſuperadiecit, dieſque nostros in tua pace diſponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos cripi, & in electorum tuorum iubeas grege numerari. (Beda Eccleſ. histor. l. 2. cap. 1.) in which place hee alſo commendeth him, for cauſinge in the churches of S. Peter and S. Paul at Rome, Maſſes to be ſaid ouer their bodies. Fecit inter alia beatus Papa Gregorius, vt in

Eccleſijs beatorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli ſuper corpora eorū Miſſae celebrarentur. Which ſacred bodies of thoſe two glorious Apoſtles, this lewde proteſtant ſuperintendent, & therin as his phraſe teacheth, a V
                           •…
                        gilantian hereticke, calleth the deade 
                           •…
                        arcaſſes of the Apoſtles, ſo as wee terme the deade bodies of beaſtes, and therefore diſliketh S. Gregory for that inſtitution: ſuper Apostolorum mortua cadauera Miſsas celebrari mandauit. (Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Gregor. Magno.) but though it doth not belonge to this place, and my promiſe, yet to free S. Gregory from all pretended error in any matter, I wil ſhew in the next chapter, when I come to ſpeake of the brittiſh preiſts, and Biſhops of this age, that they were as farr engaged in this doctrine of reuerēce to holie relicks, as either S. Gregory, or his diſciples hee ſent hither were, or the Catholicks of the preſent Roman church bee at this time. The ſame I wil demonſtrate concerning the doctrine of Indulgences, an other pretēded blott, which they would gladly find out, to ſtaine, and blemiſh the glory of that great Doctor, Pope, and Saint.
                     4. And whereas this proteſtant Biſhop

ſaith of this holy Pope: Hee admitted Maſſes for the dead, Miſſas pro mortuis admiſit, I haue often ſhewed by theſe proteſtants, that this was vſed from the beginninge. And whereas hee obiecteth. (Bal. ſupr. in Greg. Magno.) that S. Gregory firſt inſtituted Candelmaſſe day, and palme ſonday, with ſolemnitie of proceſſion, though theſe bee but ceremoniall, yet he contradicteth himſelfe, knowinge and acknowledginge, that proceſſions were longe before in vſe, and that Candelmaſſe day was kept with candels in the time of Pope Vigilius, and by his approbation: candelarū feſtum inſtituit. (Bal. in Vigilio l. 2. Act. Pontific. Rom.) whereas this man ſaith in S. Auguſtine, S Gregories diſciple, that hee brought hither altars, veſtiments, holy veſſels, relicks, and bookes of ceremonies, introduxit altaria, veſtimenta, vaſa ſacra, reliquias, & ceremoniarum codices. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. l. 1. in Auguſtino. Monocho.) I haue ſhewed already, that all theſe were in vſe with the Chriſtiā Britans longe before, and this proteſtant obiector among others, ſo acknowledgeth in diuers, both Scots, and Britans, in this Iland, and in the life of S. Patrick he receueth as S. Patricks,

the epiſtle written in his name: Patricius ſcripſit ad Aualonios Inculas epiſtolam. (Bal. centur. 1. Gild. l. de excid. Bed. l. v. histor. Eccleſ. Bal. centur. 1. in Brigida Lagin. Kentegern. Patric. Iona. Monacho & alijs.) in which hee proueth both S. Patricke, S. Pope Celeſtine, S. Pope Eleutherius, and his Legates S. Damianus, and Fugatianus in Kinge Lucius time, and all the Britans in thoſe times, to haue beene as great Patrons, and practiſers of theſe doctrines and cuſtomes, which hee diſliketh in S. Gregory & his diſciples, as any of them thē was, or any learned Catholicke at this preſent is. Thus f
                           •…
                        rr theſe proteſtants exceptions againſt the doctrine of S. Gregory, and his diſciples, all turning to theire glory, and confuſion of the proteſtant accuſers by their owne ſentence.
                     5. To which I will add one thing more from our holy contrimā S. Aldelmus ſcholler to S. Gregory as his words import, who thus relateth an addition of S. Gregorie to the canon of the Maſſe, which our proteſtants doe not remember in their oblations. (S. Adelmus l. de laudib. Virginitat. cap. 22.) mihi operae pretium videtur, vt Sanctae Agathae rumores caſtiſsimae Virginis Luciae praeconia

ſubſequantur: Quas Praeceptor & pedagogus noster Gregorius, in canone quotidiano, quando Miſſarum ſolemnia celebrantur copulaſse cognoſcitur, hoc modo in Catalogo Martyrum ponens: Faelicitate, Anastaſia, Agatha, Lucia. It is a thinge worth labour, that after ſpeach of S. Agatha (he ſpeaketh of the praiſe of virginitie) the praiſes of the moſte chaſte Virgin Lucia, should follow, which our Maſter and Inſtructor Gregory, is knowne to haue coupled in the daily canon, when the ſolemnities of Maſse are celebrated, placing them thus in the Catalogue of Martyrs: Faelicitas, Anastaſia, Agatha, Luciae. But this rather maketh againſt proteſtant quarrels, in this kinde, for they contendinge againſt the doctrine of prayer to Saints, are taught here, that it was the auncient cuſtome of Gods church to pray vnto them, euen in their publick Maſſes. (can. Miſſ. §. nobis quoque peccatoribus.) for S. Gregory did here onely add S. Agatha, and S. Lucia, vnto the others, which were in the canon before, copulaſſe cognoſcitur, and bee very many in particular, as appeareth in that place, beſides all the Apoſtles and holy Martyrs in generall, cum tuis Sanctis Apoſtolis, & Martyribus: and the

words, in canone quotidiano, in the daily canon of Maſſe, are an euident conuiction, that the daily canon of Maſſe was vſed, and this honor of Saints alſo therin before this time: as wee ſee in all old Maſſes, Greeke, Latine, or Syriake. And I haue before proued, that this holy doctrine was euer from the beginning of Chriſtianity in this kingdome reuerently obſerued. Of the truth and excellency of S. Gregories and S. Auguſtines Religion planted amonge the Saxons, I haue ſpoken ſufficiently in all things in my eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie at large.
                     6. To proue it breifly in this place more ſound and perfect then the Religion of the Chriſtian Britans, ſo dignified by our proteſtant writers, I firſt vſe them for witneſſes thereof. And firſt the preſent Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury D. George Abbots, the director of Maſter Frauncis Maſon, and this his directed ſcribe thus write, producinge the Brittiſh Biſhops themſelues at that time ſo acknowledginge. (George Abbot and Franc. Maſon l. 2. of conſecrat. of Bish. cap 4. pag. 59.) The brittish Bishops confeſſed, that they vnderstood that to be the true way of righteouſnes, which Auguſtine had

preached. Yea the faith which S. Augustine brought, and that which the Britans had before, muſt needs be one and the ſame in all materiall and ſubstantiall points. Wherefore wee cannot excuſe the Britans, for refuſing to ioyne with him in the conuerſion of the Saxons. The like haue, Stowe, Howes, Hollinſhed and other proteſtants. (Stowe and Howes hiſtor. in K. Ethelbert. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 5. cap. 15. pag. 96. pag. 97. an. 581.) ſhewinge directly, that the Chriſtian Britans at the coming of S. Auguſtine, and his companions, were farr inferiour vnto them, both in holines of life, and puritie of doctrine. Which is teſtified with great lamētation by S. Gildas a Britane, S. Bede writer of the brittiſh hiſtory. (Gildas l. de excid. & conquest. Brit. Bed. histor. Eccl. l. 1. Galfrid. Monument. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 10. & 11.
                     7. And if wee diſcend vnto the particular differences, which then were betweene S. Auguſtine, and the Britans, there is not any one to bee found in any antiquitie, that concerned the queſtions I haue in hand, but in them there was an vniforme conſent by all writers, onely I finde that they differed in ſome ceremonies about the conſecration

of Biſhops, but in no materiall thinge. (S. Aſaph. in vit. S. Kentegerni. M. S. in vit. eius & Capgrau. in Catal. in Kenteg.) and our proteſtants differ from them both therein. For the Britans did then conſecrate Bishops with anointing their heads with holy Chriſme, Inuocation of the holy Ghost, Benediction, and Impoſition of handes: Mos in Britannia inoleuerat in conſecratione Pontificum tantummodo capita eorum ſacri Chriſmatis infuſione perungere, cum inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, & Benedictione, & manus Impoſitione. And the Romans beſides theſe neceſſarie things, in that conſecration, kept and obſerued the decrees of the holy Canons, in this buſines; Which the Britans did not omit for any diſlike they had of thoſe ſacred ceremonies, but by diſtance of place, and infeſted with Pagans inuaſions, were ignorant of the canons, as our Authors ſay: Inſulam enim quaſi extra orbem poſiti, emergentibus Paganorum infestationibus, canonum erant ignari· (M. S. de vita S. Kenteger· antiq. & Capgrau ſupr. in eod.) and yet our proteſtants both knowinge the canonicall inſtitutions, and what both the Romans and Britans, with all the Chriſtian worlde at that time, thought

to bee eſſentiall, and neceſſary in this holy Sacrament, neither follow the one, or other, and ſo by al iudgement, haue depriued them ſelues of lawfull and true Biſhops, and conſequentlie of all true cleargie men, which cannot be without true and lawful Biſhops, ſuch as they want, to conſecrate them.
                     8. The other differences betwene S. Auguſtine, and the Britans, may appeare out of the words of S. Auguſtine vnto them, related by S. Bede, and others, and thus ſett downe by our proteſtant hiſtorians. Auguſtines oration breifly was thus. (Bed. histor. Eccleſ. l. 2. cap. 2. Stowe and Howes histor. in Kentish. Saxons. K. Ethelbert.) although deare bretheren, in many other points yee doe contrary to our cuſtome, or rather contrary to the cuſtome of the vniuerſall church of Christ: yet notwithstandinge if yee will in theſe three things conſent vnto mee, that is, to celebrate the easter in due time, to accomplish the ministerie of Baptiſme accordinge to the Roman, and Apostolick church, and last of all to preach with vs to this English nation, the vvord of our Lord, all your other ceremonies, rites, and customes, though they bee contrary to ours, yet vvee vvill vvillinglie ſuffer, and bee content

to beare vvith them. But they ansvvered they vvoulde doe none of theſe thinges requested. Where wee ſee, that S. Auguſtine and the Britans did differ principally, in theſe three things, and by our proteſtants themſelues, S. Auguſtine held the truth in them, and the Britans were in error. And ſo likewiſe in all other ceremonies rites and cuſtomes then cōtrouerſed: for S. Auguſtine iuſtifieth that the Britans in them all were, contrary to the cuſtome of the vniuerſall church of Christ. In multis quidem nostrae conſuetudini, immo vniuerſalis Eccleſiae contraria geritis. And their learned contriman Gyraldus Cambrenſis diuers hundreds of yeares ſince, beeing as a proteſtant, Biſhop ſtileth him, vetustae cognitionis verè helluo, an vnſatiable ſeeker forth of antiquities, with proteſtants allowance thus ſetteth downe the ceremonies of the Britans, wherein they differed from all other churches, in this order. Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. in Gyrald. Cambren. cent. 2. Gyrald. Cambren. deſcript. Cambr. cap. 18. Dauid Powell ib.
                     
                     9. De quolibet pane appoſito primum fractionis angulum pauperibus donant. Of euerie loafe of breade ſett before them, they giue the

firſt corner they breake to the poore. They ſitt three and three together, at dinner in memorie of the Trinitie. They cast away theire armour, and bare headed aske the benediction of euery Monke or preist, or any wearinge the habit of Religion: The people doth greatly, and more then other nations, deſire confirmation by a Bishop, and Inunction of Chriſme, by which the grace of the holy Ghoſt is giuen. They giue tythes of all things they poſſeſſe, cattell, sheepe ſometimes whē either they marry wiues, or go on pilgrimage, or correct their life by the counſaile of the church. Aboue all forreine labour, moste willingly going on pilgrimage to Rome, they more readily vvith deuout mindes adore the Tombes of the Apoſtles. Wee ſee they yeeld deuout reuerence to churches and eccleſiastical men, and relicks of Saints, and portable bells, vvouen books, and the croſse, & giue farr more honor to all theſe then any other nation. The immunities of theire churches, farr exceedeth the Indulgence of the canons. You shall not ſee any vvhere the Eremites and Anachorites of greater abstinence, or more ſpirituall. And ſpeakinge of the Britans in the time of S. Germanus, and Lupus, when they were troubled with Pelagianiſme, and firſt irruptions

of the Pagan Saxōs, theſe Authors ſay. Theſe cuſtomes and ceremonies of the Britans continued from them, to the time of Gyraldus Cambrenſis, that died in the yeare of Chriſt 1190. ab eorundem doctrina haec, vt fertur, vſqe in hodiernum documenta tenuerunt.
                     
                     10. Thus wee haue learned all the differences, that were betweene S. Auguſtine, and the Britans: and finde, that S. Auguſtine was the innocent partie in them all. For amonge all theſe laſte recited, where any thinge is remembred as ſingular, and differing from other churches, it is the caſe of the Britans, and the Romans agreed with the common and receued cuſtomes of the church of Chriſt: And concerninge thoſe doctrines and cuſtomes which our proteſtants doe moſte diſlike in S. Gregory, and S. Auguſtine, with his aſſociates, and the now preſent Roman church, which are pilgrimages, and eſpecially to Rome, with the honor of that holy Apoſtolicke ſee, reuerence of holy relicks, Indulgences, honor to ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and Religious men, and more Sacraments then proteſtants admit, as namely the Sacrament of

confirmation, giuinge of the grace of the holy Ghoſt, by anointinge with ſacred Chriſme, reuerencing of the croſſe, and holie images, wee ſee by the teſtimony both of the Britans, and proteſtants themſelues, that theſe were more zelouſly obſerued of the Chriſtian Britans at that time, whoſe faith and Religion is ſo much commended by our proteſtant writers, then they were by S. Gregory, or S. Auguſtine then, or be at this time by the preſent church of Rome, and the members therof.
                     11. Therfore it being the common and generally receued opinion, both of our Engliſh Proteſtant Biſhops, as Parker, Bale, Godwin, with others, and their Doctors and antiquaries as Powel, Foxe, Fulke, Middleton, Goſceline, Stowe, Howes, Holinſhed, and too many to be recited, that at the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither, the faith and Religion of the Chriſtian Britans here, was in all materiall points ſounde, and perfect, and the ſame which they receued in the time of the Apoſtles, much more and rather muſt they needes yeeld, and allowe that honor, to the Religion and doctrine of S. Auguſtine, and the other diſciples of S.

Gregory, which they preached and planted here, being by ſo many and all humane teſtimonies before acknowledged in all matters controuerſed betweene them, to be the vndoubted true, and perfect Religion of Chriſt. Parker. antiquit· Britan. pag. 6.45.46. Balaus l. 2. de Act. Pontific. in Gregorio Magno & l. de ſcriptor. Brit. centur. 1. in Auguſtin. Dionotho. Godvvin. conuerſ. of Brit. Povvell annotat. in l. 2. Giraldi Cambr. de Itinerar. Cambr. cap. 1. Foxe Act. and Mon. pag. 463. edit. an. 1576. Fulke ansvv. to counterf. Cathol. pag. 40. Middlet. Papiſtom. pag 202.) Io. Goſcelin. hiſt. Eccl. de vit. Arch. Cantuar. Stovve and Howes hist. in K. Ethelbert. Holinsh, histor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102.
                     12. And to make all ſure, and vnqueſtionable, except with atheſts, and infidels, enemies to Chriſt himſelfe, wee haue both the preſent and propheticall witneſſe of God himſelfe, that by no poſſibilitie can deceiue vn in this caſe, and this confeſſed, and receued euen by our proteſtant writers, who firſt aſſure vs, that in the controuerſie betweene the Britans and S. Auguſtine, God gaue ſo miraculous teſtimony, for S. Auguſtine & his Roman companions to teach

the truth in all thinges controuerſed then betweene them and the Britans, that the Britans were therby ſo extraordinarily conuicted, and confounded (to ſpeake in proteſtant wordes) that they confeſsed in deede, that to bee the true way of righteouſnes which Auguſtine had preached, and shewed them. (Stowe and Howes histor. in K. Ethelbert.) and God could not poſſibly giue other teſtimony by theſe proteſtants, and all learninge, except hee would or could (blaſphemie to affirme) contradict himſelfe, for by all profeſſors of Chriſtian Religion he had promiſed, that Catholicke church vniuerſall ſhould neuer err, and yet proteſtants with others thus confeſſe: all other churches throughout the world agreed with Augustine in Chriſt. Of Gods propheticall teſtimonie hereof wee haue many witneſſes, Catholicks and Proteſtants, S. Aſaph in the life of S. Kentegern, many Manuſcripts, the Brittiſh hiſtory, Matthew of Weſtminſter, with others for Catholicks; and amonge proteſtants, their firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, their proteſtant Biſhop Bale, with others. (S. Aſaph. in vit. S. Kentegern. M. S. antiq. in eod. Galfr. Monum. l.
                        
7. cap. 3. Matth. Weſtm. an. 465. Matth. Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 49. Io. Bal. l. de ſcript. Britan. cent. 1. in Kentegern.) this laſt ſpeakinge of the Pagan Saxons inuadinge this kingdome, and ouerthrowinge Chriſtian Religion, bringeth S. Kentegern thus to propheſie lōge before, how S. Auguſtine and his aſſociats ſhould reſtore it againe, not onely vnto the auncient ſtate of Religion, but a better then it enioyed in the time of the Britans. Christianae legis Religio vſque ad praefinitum tempus diſsipabitur. Sed in pristinum ſtatim immo meliorem miſerante Deo in fine reparabitur.
                     
                     13. The auncient Manuſcript hiſtory of S. Kentegerns life, S. Aſaph, Capgraue and others ſay, S. Kentegern propheſied this, and publickly told it, to his diſciples at the time of the death of S. Dauid, which as our proteſtants write, was aboue 50. yeares before the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither. (M. S. antiq. de vita S. Kentegerni. Io. Copgrau. in S. Kentegerno Epiſcopo & Confeſſore.) who beeing at that time as often, very earneſt at his prayers, and much lamentinge, after being demaūded by his diſciples the cauſe of his great ſorrowe, after a short ſilence, thus answered:

Knovve you my dearest children that S. Dauid the ornament of Britanie, Father of his contry, is euen novv looſed from the priſon of his flesh, and gone to the heauenly kingdome. Vnderstand you that Britanie depriued of ſo great a light, shall lamēt the abſence of ſo great a patrone, who oppoſed him ſelfe againſt the sword of God, halfe drawne against it, for the wickednes of the inhabitants thereof, that it should not be fully drawne and bringe it to deſtruction. Our Lord will giue Britanie ouer to forreine nations, that know him not. And the Iſle shall bee emptied of the inhabitants, by Pagans. The Religion of the lawe of Chriſt shall bee destroyed, vntill a certaine time in it. But by the mercy of God, it shall be againe repayred vnto the former, and vnto a better state then it was before. Seruo Dei quodam die prolixius orationi intento, facies eius quaſi ignea apparens stupore & extaſi circumstantes repleuit. Intucbantur enim faciem eius tanquam vultum Angeli ſtantis inter illos. Completa oratione, grauiſsimis lamentis ſe dedit. Et cum diſcipuli cauſam triſtitiae humiliter ab eo peterent, pauliſper in ſilentio reſidens, tandem ait. Noueritis filij chariſsimi, Sanctum Dauid decus Britanniae, patrem patriae, carnis carcerem modo

egreſſum, regna caelestia penetraſſe. Credite mihi, quod non ſolum Angelorum multitudo in gaudium Domini ſui illum introduxit, ſed & Dominus noſter Ieſus Christus ei obuiam procedens, ad portas paradiſi gloria & honore coronauit eum, me vidente. Scitote etiam quod Britannia tanto lumine orbata, tanti patroni lugebit abſentiam: qui gladio Domini propter malitiam inhabitantium ſemi euaginato ſuper illam, ne penitus ad internitionem extractus percuteret ſemetipſun opponebat. Tradens tradet Dominus, Britanniam exteris nationibus Deum ignorantibus: ſed & à Paganis ab indigenis euacuabitur inſula, Christianae legis Religio vſque ad praefinitum tempus diſsipabitur in ea: ſed in priſtinum ſtati
                              •…
                           , immo meliorem miſerante Deo iterum reparabitur.
                     
                     14. Our proteſtant hiſtorians doe likewiſe relate the actuall chaunge of Religion here then for the better, and for better preachers in theſe wordes, (Edvv. Hovves and Stovve hiſtor. in K. Ethelbert. Gild. l. de excid.) Amonge many the Britans doings which their ovvne historiographer Gildas doth lamentably ſett forth in vvritinge, hee ſaith of them thus, that they neuer tooke care to preach the ghoſpell of Christ vnto the Angles, and

Saxons, vvhich inhabited the land amonge them. But yet the goodnes of God prouided for the ſaid nation of the ſaid Angles, much more vvorthie preachers by vvhome they might be brought to the faith. And then immediatly they ſet downe S. Auguſtine, Mellitus, Iuſtus, and Iohn, with others ſent hither by S. Gregory, to bee theſe much more vvorthie preachers, by vvhom this nation was brought to the faith. And this might ſuffice in this matter, but for the ful clearing of al doubts, I will further & fully proue, how al preiſts and Biſhops in Britanie in this age, were ſacrificing maſſing preiſts: and the beſt learned and moſt holy amonge them, did in all things ioyne with the Popes, and church of Rome; and they which oppoſed moſte againſt S. Auguſtine, and his aſſociates ſent from thence in ſome ceremoniall cuſtomes, did in theſe points & all others which proteſtants moſt diſlike in Catholick Romane Religion, vtterly diſagree from theſe proteſtants, and hold the ſame doctrine & practiſe generally, as S. Auguſtine did, and the members of the preſent Romane Apoſtolick church doe at this day.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE XXIII. CHAPTER. Wherein demonſtration is made both by proteſtants, and other testimonies, that during all this age and hundred of yeares vntill and after the coming of S. Augustine, this kingdome had many holy maſsinge preists and Bishops, agreeinge in theſe, and all other articles of Religiō with the church of Rome.
                     IN the later end of the fift hundred of yeares, of Chriſt, I made relation, how amonge many others, thoſe two renowned maſſinge preiſts, S. Dubritius the great Archbiſhop of Caerlegion, and the Popes Legate, made Biſhop by the maſſing Biſhop and Legate of the ſee Apoſtolicke, and S. Iltutus diſciple of the ſame maſſing Biſhop and Legate S. Germanus were Tutors, and Maſters in Religion and diuinitie, not only to the cleargie of this Iland but many others, and neither did, nor could teach them any other doctrine in theſe points, then they had receued from others, and practiſed by themſelues, about holy preiſthood, and ſacrifice of Maſſe; And as both proteſtants & other antiquaries tell vs, both theſe liued 20. yeares at the leaſte, in the beginninge

of this ſixt age, S. Iltutus beeing aliue and floriſhinge in the yeare 520. claruit anno à Chriſti natiuitate 520. and S. Dubritius liuinge two yeares after, obijt anno gratiae 522. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. cent. 1. in Ilchtuto. & in Dubritio. Godw. Catal. in S. Dauids. in Dubritius.) therefore wee may boldly ſay, that among ſo great numbers of their maſſing ſchollers, many of them liued a great part, if not all this age. The auncient Manuſcript of the Saints of Wales, the Apologiſt of the antiquitie of Cambridge, and others thus teſtifie of S. Dubritius. (M. S. antiq. de vit. Sanctorum Wall. in S. Dubritio. Io. Caius l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. Academ. pag. 145.146.) Creuit illius fama cum vtriuſque legis, nouae & veteris peritia per totā Britanniam, ita quod ex omni parte totius Britanniae ſcholares veniebant, non tantum rudes, ſed etiam viri ſapientes & Doctores ad eum ſtudendi cauſa confluebant. Imprimis Sanctus Helianus, Sampſon diſcipulus ſuus, Vbelnius, Merchiguinus, Elguoredus, Gunuinus, Longual, Artbodu, Longur, Arguistil, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elheharn, Iudnon, Curdocui, Aidan, Cinuarch, & cum his mille clericos per ſeptem annos continuo

in podo ſeu pago Hentlan ſuper ripam Guy, in ſtudio literarum diuinae ſapientiae & humanae retinuit. Where we ſee he had a thouſand ſchollers at one time, and place, ſeuen yeares together that were clergy men ſtudents in diuinitie, and in an other place, called in the Brittiſh languadge Mocros, miraculouſly aſſigned vnto him, hee had as theſe antiquities ſay, innumerable ſchollers many yeares together, cum ſuis innumerabilibus diſcipulis manſit per plures annos regendo studium. l. de vit. Sanct. Wall. Caius ſup. pag. 147.148. M. S. antiq. & Capgrau. in S. Iltuto & Tatheo.
                     
                     2. The like they write of the ſcholes of S. Iltutus, and S. Tatheus, or as ſome call him Thatheus. The antiquaries of Cambridge alleage for the immunities and priuiledges of their vniuerſitie, the auncient Charter dated at London in the yeare of Chriſt 531 of Kinge Arthur, that knowne reuerencer of ſacrificing preiſts, and Maſſe. Charta priuileg. Arthuri an. 531. apud Caium antiq. Cantabrig. l. 1.) and both Catholicks and proteſtants teſtifie, that the auncient vniuerſitie of Standford continued in this time, and vntill S. Gregory interdicted it for

hereſies that fell amonge the Saxons and Britans together mixt. (Harding hiſtor. in King Ethelbert. Stowe and Howes historie in Bladud.) therefore wee may aſſure our ſelues, that notwithſtandinge ſo many troubles, & alterations, as chaunced here in thoſe daies, they continued the holy doctrine and cuſtome of Maſſe, and ſacrificinge preiſts; For S. Gregory ſo knowne and confeſſed a Patron and practiſer of theſe thinges, neither would, nor could haue interdicted that vniuerſitie, for any thinge which hee himſelfe ſo embraced and honored. So that it is euident, that the whole kingdome of Britanie in this time followinge the doctrine which their ſcholes and vniuerſities taught them, muſt needs then allowe theſe holy miſteries of which I write. The ſame is euident, both by the Kings which then reigned here, as alſo by the Archbiſhops who ruled in Religious affaires. The Kings in the beginning of this age were Vther pendragon, who died about the yeare of Chriſt 515. beeinge for Religion of the ſame with the maſſinge Archbiſhops S. Dubritius and S. Sampſon, with the ſacrificinge Biſhops, and preiſts, by whoſe generall conſent he was crowned

Kinge. Vther conuocato regni clero, caepit diadema Inſula: annuētibuſque cunctis ſublimatus est in Regem. (Galfr. Mon. l. 8. cap. 17. Math. Westm. ad an. 498) and when his death was knowne they as ſolemly aſſembled to giue him Princely Chriſtian buriall. Cum obitus Regis diuulgatus fuiſſet aduenerunt Pontifices cum clero regni: tuleruntque corpus eius ad caenobium Ambrij, & iuxta Aurelium Ambroſium more regio humauerunt.
                     
                     2. Next was Kinge Arthur, how he was engaged in this holy doctrines it is ſufficiēt Argument, that being but 15. yeares of age, and his birth by many not without exception, hee was with the generall applauſe both of the ſacrificinge cleargie, and their ghoſtly children, crowned Kinge by S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, and renowned maſſinge Archbiſhop, and primate of Britanie with the other maſſing Biſhops therof. Defuncto Vtherpendragon conuenerunt ex diuerſis Prouincijs proceres Britonum, Dubritio Vrbis Legionum ſuggerentes, vt Arthurum filium Regis in Regem conſecraret. Dubritius aſſociatis ſibi Epiſcopis Arthurum regni diademate inſignuit. (Galfrid. Mon l. 9. cap. 1. Matth. Westm. ad an. gratiae 516. Stowe

histor. Britans and Saxons in Arthur. Io. Bal. l. de ſcript. Brit. cent. 1. in Dubritio. Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauids.) to this his whole life in fighting againſt the enemies of that holy Religion, the ſacred churches, and altars which he reedified for that heauenly ſacrifice, and charters of immunities which he graunted to the moſt knowne maſſing places of Britanie, as Glaſtenbury and others, and the great reuerence he vſed to all maſſinge preiſts and Prelates, are ſufficient teſtimony of this, and to bee ſeene allmoſt in all hiſtories, Manuſcripts and others of that time, and hee liued vnto the yeare of Chriſt 542. Now if wee come to the Archbiſhops & Biſhops vnder them, Matthew of Weſtminſter and others tell vs, that for Yorke, that renowned maſſinge man S. Sampſon was Archbiſhop there, 7. yeares after the beginning of this age, anno gratiae 507. Floruerunt in Britānia Sanctus Sampſon Eboracenſis Archiepiſcopus, & S. Dubritius Vrbis Regionum Archiepiſcopus. (Matth. Weſtm. an. 542. & alij. Matth. Weſtm. an. gratiae 507.) what a miraculous maſſing preiſt, and Prelate he was, I haue ſpoken in the former age.
                     3. That S. Dubritius ruled all in the Archiepiſcopal

ſee of Caerlegion, where moſt both Biſhops & preiſts were in theſe daies, at the leaſt vntill the 16. yeare of this age I haue ſhewed before, whē S. Dubritius with the reſt of the Biſhops of Britanie crowned King Arthur in that yeare. Who was Archbiſhop of London at this time, it is not ſo certainly remembred in particular. But the Author of the Brittiſh hiſtory tranſlated by Galfridus aſſureth vs, that there was an Archbiſhop of London at this time, & that hee together with S. Dubritius Archbiſhop of Caerlegion, & the Archbiſhop of Yorke did crowne Kinge Arthur. Trium Metropolitanarum ſedium Archi Praeſules, Londonienſis videlicet, Eboracenſis, nec non ex vrbe Legionum Dubritius hic Britanniae primas, & Apostolicae ſedis Legatus. (Galfr. Mon. hiſtor. Reg. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12.13.) and by the circumſtances of the hiſtory, theſe three Archbiſhops performed that great ſolemne coronation at the ſolēnitie of Maſſe, at which both the Kinge, theſe three Archbiſhops with the other Biſhops of theire diuiſions, and the nobilitie of Britanie were preſent. And this coronation is cheifely attributed to S. Dubritius, becauſe it was in his dioceſſe.

                        Dubritius quoniam in ſua dioceſi caria tenebatur, paratus ad celebrandum obſequium, huius rei curam ſuſcepit, and he was the Popes Legate. And all hiſtories agree, that when the Biſhops, and cleargie, either of London, or Yorke diuiſion, were perſecuted by the Pagans, they fledd for ſuccour, to the knowne maſſinge preiſtes, and Prelates of Caerlegion dioceſſe, communicatinge with them in Religion.
                     4. S. Dubritius waxinge old, and deſirous to liue a ſolitary and contemplatiue life, the holy Saint Dauid was miraculouſlie choſen to ſucceed him. (Capgrau. in S. Dauid. Gyrald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. l. 2. cap. 1. Godwin in S. Dauids.) I haue ſhewed before, that he was the ſcholler of the maſſing preiſt, S. Iltutus, ſcholler of the maſſinge Prelate & Popes Legate S. Germanus. This holy Archbiſhop was ſo renowned a maſſinge preiſt, and Prelate, that as wee reade both in auncient Manuſcripts, and other hiſtories, hee brought with from Hieruſalem, beeinge a pilgrime there, an holy and miracalous Altar, giuen him by the Patriake there, on which he conſecrated the body of our Lord. In quo Dominicum conſecrabat corpus.
                        
(M. S. antiq. de vit. S. Dauidis. Capgrau. in Catalog. in eod.) and to make euident vnto all, that S. Dauid did ſay ordinarily Maſſe in Britanie, aſwell as at Hieruſalem, and likewiſe ſo did all the Biſhops here of Britanie then, and with great ſolemnitie, to omitt many other memorable teſtimonies hereof, we reade in the antiquities of Glaſtenbury, Capgrauius, and others, & a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth, that the hiſtory is ſtill preſerued engraued in Braſſe at Wells in Sommerſetſhire, though hee ſomewhat minceth it, how S. Dauid and ſeuen other Biſhops goinge to Glaſtenbury to dedicate the holy church there, Chriſt appeared vnto him the night before the intended dedication, and bid him abſteine from dedicatinge it, for it had beene dedicated before to the bleſſed Virgin Mary his Mother. (M. S. antiq. & Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in S. Patricio. antiq. Glaston. Godwin conuerſ. of Brit. pag. 11.) and to teſtifie the truth of this viſion, & teſtimony, left a miraculous wound in the right hand of S. Dauid, tellinge him how it ſhould bee as miraculouſly healed as it was hurt, in this maner: craſtina die cum Pontificalibus inductus, cum per ipſum, & cum

ipſo, & in ipſo, in Miſſa pronuntias, ipſo qui tecum loquitur operante, per ipſum quem ſacro conficies ore, vulnus quod nunc abhorres; nuſquam eſſe videbis. Et cum ſanctus iuſſa compleſſet, ſicut praedixit Dominus, efficitur ſanus. To morrow when thou art adorned with thy pontificall veſtiments, and ſhalt pronounce in Maſſe the words by him, & with him, and in him, he that ſpeaketh with thee workinge by him whome thou ſhalt make with thy ſacred mouth, thou ſhalt ſee noe where the wound, which thou now abhorreſt. And when the Saint had done as hee was commaunded, as our Lord foretold, he was made found. And it followeth in the ſame ātiquitie, preſerued in Braſſe by Thomas Highes of Wells eſquier, as that proteſtant Biſhop writeth heretofore, fixed vppon a piller of S. Ioſephs chappell, which hee himſelfe had read. Godwin ſupr. cap. 2. pag. 11.
                     5. Poſtea idem Epiſcopus Domino reuelante quendam cancellum in orientali parte haic Eccleſiae adiecit, & in honore beatae Virginis conſecrauit, cuius altare ineſtimabili ſapphiro in perpetuam huius rei memoriam inſigniuit. Afterward the ſame Biſhop (S. Dauid) by the reuelation of our Lord, did add a certaine

chauncell to this church, in the eaſt parte, and conſecrated it in the honor of the bleſſed Virgin, whoſe Altar for perpetuall memory of this thinge hee did adorne, with a ſapphire of an ineſtimable price. Where we euidently ſee, the doctrine & practiſe, both of the Archbiſhop, and Biſhops of Britanie, ſeuen of them beeing then preſent, to goe on pilgrimage, to holy places, and relicks, that they were ſacrificing preiſts, ſaid Maſſe, and with great reuerence, and ſolemnitie, and in that holy ſacrifice conſecrated by conſecratinge wordes of their mouthes, and offered the bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt, vſed the ſame canon wee now doe, as the wordes, per ipſum, & cum ipſo, & in ipſo, with the other circumſtances tell vs, and ſo honored the holy Altars, whereon this heauēly ſacrifice was offered, that they there offered ineſtimable guifts, and ornaments to honor them withall, which is as much as any preiſt of the preſent Roman church teacheth, or contēdeth at this time, or Catholicke Religion alloweth them to doe.
                     6. This renowned Archbiſhop ſo miraculous for his birth prophetically foretold,

his life, and death and ſo holy and pleaſing vnto God, that as I haue ſhewed in him alreadie, God ſpared to take vengeance on the ſinnes of the Britans, for his ſake, during his life, died in the yeare of Chriſt 546. but 50. yeares before S. Auguſtines coming hither, as our proteſtants themſelues with others witneſſe. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. cent. 1. in Dauid Meneuienſi.) and by an other proteſtant which faith, he ſate longe to witte, 65. yeares. (Godwin Catal. in S. Dauids 1. S. Dauid.) hee liued within 16. yeares or nearer to S. Auguſtins arriuall in this kingedome, an 596. for as I proued before, his predeceſſor S. Dubritius was Archbiſhop there, in the yeare 516. and after, and died not vntill the yeare 522. though in his old age he had a little before reſigned his charge to S. Dauid. (Godwin ſup. in S. Dauids. in S. Dubritius. Bal. cent. 1. in eod. Galfr. Mon. l. 11. hist. Britan. cap. 3.) there is ſome queſtion in hiſtories whether, as Giraldus Cambronſis and ſome others ſay, Cenauc was immediate ſucceſſor to S. Dauid, or S. Theliaus, Telianus, Eliud, all one man, by others. (Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. l. 2. c. 1. Godw. M. S. Dauids antiquitat. Eccleſ. S.

Dauidis apud Godwin Catal. Epiſ. pag· 506. in S. Dauids.) but for this matter it mattereth nothing: for this Cenauc was ſcholler, and ſucceſſor to S. Patern, that great knowne maſſinge preiſt and Prelate, companion to S. Dauid, in his holy pilgrimage: And ſo could not differ from theſe holy Saints, in ſo great queſtions in Religion. And for the other S. Telian or Eliud, there is no doubt, for hee was ſcholler to the renowned maſſinge Prelate S. Dubritius, and by him ſo throughly inſtructed in diuinity, that being indued with the holy Ghoſt, hee could perfectly expound all difficulties of holy ſcriptures. A ſancto Dubritio Epiſcopo in ſcripturis ſanctis eruditus fuit, donec explicaret. (M. S. de vita S. Theliai & Capgr· Catalog. in eod.) and was ſo vndiuided a companion of S. Dauid, his predeceſſor, not onely vnder their Maſter Paulinus (not vnprobably hee that liued to bee Archbiſhop of Yorke that great maſſing Prelate in S. Auguſtines time) but in his pilgrimage to Hieruſalem, and ſo by Rome from which hee could not differ in Religion: and ſo intrely and nearely conioyned in Religion, and affection, that as wee reade in his life, they were both of one

minde, perfectly in all things; Sanctum Dauid perfectae hominem vitae ſibi aſſociauit: quos tanta coniunxit dilectio & ſancti ſpiritus gratia, quod idem velle, & nolle ambobus eſſet. Therefore hee could not poſſibly, nor the Biſhops and preiſts vnder him, differ from S. Dauid, in ſo great matters, but were wholly of the ſame mind, and practiſe with him in thoſe thinges. And the church of Rome in all Catalogues receueth and acknowledgeth him for an holy Saint, which it neuer did, will, or can doe, to any an enemie and appoſite vnto it, in thoſe miſteries. And this ſacrificinge maſſinge Prelate, probably was Archbiſhop of Caerlegion amonge the Britans, at the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither, liuinge longe after that time, and as a late writer holdeth. (Engl. Martyrolog. die 25. Nouembr.) vntill the yeare of Chriſt 626. liuinge before diuers yeares amonge the maſſing preiſts and Biſhops of Fraunce, and not vnprobably was there when S. Auguſtine firſt landed here, and neither preſent at, or conſenting vnto that oppoſition, to S. Auguſtine.
                     7. And concerninge the two other Archiepiſcopall ſees, London, and Yorke, although

there is little memory left of Eccleſiaſticall affaires in them, beeing both with their whole dioceſſes in thoſe times moſte greeuouſly afflicted, and almoſte wholly eaten and deuoured vpp, by the Pagan perſecutors in Religious things; yet for theſe doctrines wee haue in hand, there is ſufficient teſtimonie left in antiquities, that ſo longe as the ſtate of Chriſtian Religion had publick and open profeſſion, there was alſo there the like publicke vſe, and exerciſe, of theſe points of Catholicke Religion; And after the external face of Chriſtianitie was ouerthrowne, yet at the leaſte in many places, of thoſe Prouinces, a priuate vſe and exerciſe was ſtill cōtinued of theſe articles, euen to the coming of S. Auguſtine and after, vntill the general conuerſion of the Saxons themſelues. And for Yorke wee haue the knowne maſſing Prelate Pyramus chapeline to Kinge Arthur, that great Patron of ſacrificinge preiſts & holy Maſſe, which as his place required, was deputed to ſay Maſſe, and ordinarily ſo did before that Religious Kinge. (Galfrid. Monum. l. 9. histor. Reg. Briton. cap. 8. Matth. Weſtm. an gratiae 522.) and as Thadiocus ſucceeded him in

place and dignitie ſo likewiſe hee was his ſucceſſor in opinion, and practiſe in thoſe queſtions, as will euidently appeare, if wee onely conſider that they were both ordeyned by the authoritie & Legantine power, either of S. Dubritius or S. Dauid thoſe famous maſſinge preiſts, Prelats, primats and Saints. But wee haue the generall warrants of the renowned S Gyldas Badonicus, which now liued and vntill within 16. veares of S. Auguſtins cominge hither, floriſhinge in the yeare of Chriſt 580. as a proteſtant Biſhop and antiquary with others writeth. (Bal. l. de ſcriptor. Britan. cent. 1. in Gilda Badonico.) & proueth that in this time all the preiſts of Britanie were, ſacrificantes ſacrificinge maſsinge preiſts, inter altaria, at the holy altars, the ſeates of the celestiall ſacrifice, ſedes caelestis ſacrifi
                              •…
                           ij, and Probus that wrote the life of S. Patricke, in this age teſtifyinge as much. Gildas l. de excid. & conquest. Britan. Probus in vita S. Patricij inter opera S. Bedae.
                     
                     8 And if we turne our eyes to looke into the further, and more northien parts of the dioceſſe of this Archiepiſcopall ſee in Golloway, and Albania, wee ſhall finde many

particular teſtimonies of this veritie. There wee ſhall finde S. Kentegern; that moſt miraculous holy Saint, ſo far a maſſing preiſt, and Prelate, and after the Roman order, that hee had in his ſchole or monaſtery vnder him in the north of Britany, beſides 600. that were not learned, 260 learned diuines, trayned vp to p
                           •…
                        eac
                           •…
                         and offer the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe. (M. S antiq. de vit. S. Kentegerni. Io Capgrau. Catal. in eod. Io. Bal. l. ſcript. Britan. cent. 1
                           •…
                         
                        in Kentern. Godwin Catal. in Aſaph. Hector Bo
                              •…
                            Scotor. hiſtor. l. 9.) and he had an other as great a ſchoole and compan
                           •…
                        e of maſſinge men in Britany, which he left to S. Aſaph, and ſent of theſe into all parts both of this our Britanie, and into other nations, as Norwey, and Iſland, beeing warranted in all theſe things by the Popes of Rome, where hee was ſeuen times on pilgrimage, Romam ſepties adijt; and in all things conformed himſelfe to that holy Apoſtolicke church, and at his death, gaue strict ommaund to all vnder his charge, to be in all thinges obedient to the church of Rome: de Sanctorum Patrum decretis, ſanctaeque Roman
                              •…
                            Eccleſiae institutis firmiter custodiendis, fortia dedit, ac dereliquit praecepta. And that

hee liued either after, or vnto the cominge of S. Auguſtine I will demonſtrate herafter.
                     9. And to come to London dioceſſe, now afflicted with Pagan perſecutors, yet wee find Theonus a maſſinge preiſt and Prelate familiarly acquainted with S. Dauid, that maſſing Archbiſhop, hauing beene Biſhop of Gloceſter before, to haue beene Archbiſhop there in theſe times. A Proteſtant Biſhop writeth: Theonus being firſt Bishop of Gloceſter, forſooke it, and tooke the charge of London vpon him the yeare 553. (Godwin Catalog. in London. in Theonus.) but the Brittiſh hiſtorye, proueth him to haue beene Archbiſhop of London, before the death of S. Dauid: Theonus Glouecestrenſis Epiſcopus, in Archiepiſcopatum Londoniarum eligitur. Tūc obijt ſanctiſsimus Vrbis Legionum Archiepiſcopus Dauid in Mineuia ciuitate. (Galfrid. Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 11. cap. 3.) and ſo hee muſt needs hee ordeyned Archbiſhop, by the conſent, and allowance of that maſſinge high Prelate, S. Dauid. And hee continued Archbiſhop there, vntill the yeare of Chriſt 586 when together with Thadiocus, Archbiſhop of Yorke, and very many of their cleargy they fled into Walles

and other places. (Matth. Westm. an. 586. Stowe hiſtor. Galfrid. Monum. hist. l. 11. cap. 10.) And to proue all then were ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts here, S. Gildas then liuing at that time hath ſo before affirmed; the ſacrificinge maſſinge which proteſtants and others confeſſe, to haue beene then in London, and other places of that dioceſſe, confirme it; their flying for ſuccour only to the places, where Maſſe and maſſinge preiſtes continued, as in Wales, Cornewayle, and little Britanie, manifeſtly conuince it to be ſo. Stowe histor. in Constantine 2. Galfr. Monum. l. 11. hiſtor. cap. 4.
                     10. This is proued by thoſe holy churches, and maſſinge altars, which the Pagans did reſerue, and not deſtroye, by conuerting to them to the Idolatrous worſhip, and ſacrifices of theire Pagan Gods. Si qua Eccleſia illoeſa ſeruabitur, hec magis ad confuſionem nominis Christiani quàm gloriam faciebant. Nempe ex cis deorum ſuorum templa facientes, prophanis ſuis ſacrificijs, ſancta Dei altaria polluerunt. (Matth. Westm. ad an. gratiae 58
                           •…
                        .) And when aboue al other thinges queſtioned, our proteſtants moſte diſallowe the reuerence of holy relicks, and

not contendinge that there was any Chriſtian Religion in theſe Archbiſhops & their cleargie, but either the maſſinge Religion, or their proteſtant profeſſion, doe plainely confeſſe, that theſe were maſſinge preiſtes, and not Proteſtant Miniſters, for they with other ātiquities acknowledg, that the greateſt care which theſe two Archbiſhops, their Biſhops, and preiſts had, in thoſe tempeſtuous times, was how to keepe with reuerence, and from irreuerence, the holy relicks of their Saints, & ſo notwithſtanding ſo many daungers, and difficulties, carryed moſt of them vnto theſe places of their reſt, and refuge, ſo farr off, Walles, Cornwaile, and Britanie in Fraunce. (Holinsh. hiſtor. of Engl. Galfrid. Monument. histor. Reg. Brittan. l. 11. cap. 10. Matth. Weſtm. an. gratiae 586.) Tunc Archipraeſulis Theonus Londonienſis & Thadiocus Eboraſcenſis, cum omnes Eccleſias ſibi ſubditas ſolo tenus deſtructas vidiſſent, cum pluribus ordinatis, cum reliquijs Sanctorum in Cambriam diffugerunt, timentes ne Barbarorum irruptione, tot & tantorum ſacra oſſa veterum, à memorijs hominum delerentur, ſi qua imminenti periculo minimè ſubtraxiſſent. Plures etiam Armoricanam Britanniam

petentes. Therefore no proteſtant can, will, or by the grounds of their Religion may ſay, that theſe were Proteſtants, but vndoubtedly Catholicke Papiſts, reuerencers of holy Maſſe, relicks of Saints, & ſuch doctrines, as proteſtancy doth not allow, & thereuppon they plainely call them, ſacrificulos, maſsinge preists. H. Matius Germanorum lib. 5. pag. 39.
                     11. Neither did theſe doctrines and the profeſſion of them ceaſe here with vs, betweene this publick deſolation in the 586. of Chriſt, and the yeare 596. when S. Auguſtine came hither, euen in thoſe parts which the Saxons poſeſſed, but there were diuers Biſhops, and ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts ſtill continuinge in them, and the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe was ſtill, though not ſo generally and publickly as before, continued alſo in this time, and many of the Saxons themſelues, euen from the dayes of Kinge Arthur, when many of them receaued the Chriſtian faith, ſtill continued therein, and this teſtified by proteſtant writers. (Holinshed hiſtor. of Engl. pag. 122.123. l. 5.) teachinge how vppon a great victory of that renowned Kinge againſt them, hee pardoned

al that would and did receue the Chriſtian faith, which were many. And Hardinge with others teſtifieth, that Stanford at this time was a Chriſtian vniuerſitie, though with ſome errors. (Harding histor.) and yet a great part of them muſt needs bee Saxons. And in thoſe very places themſelues where the Pagan Saxons moſte & principally ruled, and reigned, the Chriſtian maſſing ſacrificing Religion was there permitted, and tolerated euen by the Kings allowance, as a proteſtant hiſtorian proueth in theſe words. (Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. pag. 107.) At the ſame time that Conſtantine (the next Kinge to Arthur) was driuen into Wales, there reigned amonge the English men, one Iourmericke the fifth, as Bede ſaith, from Hengist. The ſame Iourmerick though hee were not chriſtened himſelfe, yet hee permitted the Christian faith to bee preached amongst his people, and concludinge a league with the Scottish men and Picts, kept the ſame inuiolate duringe his life time. So likewiſe it was in the kingdome of the Kentiſh Kings, extendinge to Humber, for Kinge Ethelbert had marryed a Chriſtian, & gaue peace to Chriſtians in his dominions, as wee

may alſo gather the like of the kingdome of the eaſt Angles, whoſe Kinge Scebert, was a baptiſed Chriſtian, except a proteſtant hiſtorian is deceued, in the yeare of Chriſt 569. or before, then beginninge his Reigne, and beeing chriſtened in Fraunce in the Regiment of his Brother and predeceſſor Kinge Carpewalde. (Stowe histor. in eaſt Angles in K. Scebert anno. 569.) and in many other places of Loegria, this Englād, the like inſtances may be giuen: for the enimitie between the Saxons and Britans was not principally for Religiō, but who ſhould rule here, and poſſeſſe this kingdome: aſpernebantur vt plurimum Saxones Britonum Sacerdotum tum Gualiam incolētium doctrinam: tametſi veram profiterentur, inuiſae gentis magis quam diſciplinae, de qua multa atque praeclara frequentius audiuerant, odio permoti. (Hect. Boeth. l. 9. Scot. hiſtor. fol. 177.) and they had peaceable commerce, amitie, and correſpondence with all other Chriſtians, round about them, French, Scots, and Picts, as is declared before.
                     12. And to putt all out of doubt in this matter, wee are taught by many credible, and vncontroleable antiquities, that euen

at the coming of S. Auguſtine hither, there were diuers renowned maſſing, ſacrificing Biſhops, here with their maſſinge preiſts, that preached euen to the Saxons, and conuerted many, and that theſe holy Biſhops, and preiſts did in all things agree, with the Apoſtolicke Romane church, and receued miſſion, power, and iuriſdiction from thence. Amonge theſe was S. Kentegern for the Northren and other parts of this kingdome, who preached to the Saxons & proued their Pagan Gods (namly woden) whom principally they worſhipped as cheife God, to haue beene onely a man, a Kinge amonge them, and a damned creature. (S. Aſaph. in vita S. Kentegerni. M. S. antiquit. in vita eius & Capgrau. in eodem.) Quem principalem Deum crediderunt, & praecipue Angli, de quo originem duxerant, cui & qua
                              •…
                           tam feriam conſecrauerant, hominem fuiſſe mortalem aſſeruit, & Regem Saxonum, a quo plures nationes genus duxerant, huius inquit corpore in puluerem reſoluto, anima in inferno ſepulta aeternum ſustinet ignem. And that this holy Biſhop liued vnto this time of S. Gregory, ioyned in Religion with him, and by him was warranted to preach to the Saxons, as

to other nations, we haue the greateſt warrant, wee can deſire in ſuch thinges, both Catholicke and Proteſtant antiquaries, ioyninge in this, that hee was a Biſhop 260. yeares. (M. S. antiq. & Capgrau. ſupr. Bal. l. de ſcript. Britan. cent. 1. in Kenterno. Godwin Catalog of Bishops in Aſaph.) whereby it euidently followeth, that beinge made Biſhop after the beeing of S German, and Lupus here, as appeareth before, he muſt needes bee liuinge at this time, and it is particularly teſtified by the auncient writers of his life, S Aſaph his holy ſcholler and ſucceſſor, Iohn Capgraue, and many auncient Manuſcripts, that hauinge beene ſeuen times at Rome, hee was there in the time of S. Gregory, who approuinge his ſacred callinge ſent him with his Apoſtolicke warrant into theſe parts. Vir Deiſepties Romam adiens Sancto Gregorio ſpeciali Anglorum Apoſtolo totam vitam ſuam, electionem, & conſecrationem, & omnes caſus qui et acciderunt, ſeriatim enodauit. Sanctus vero Papa illum virum Dei & Spiritus Sancti gratia plenum intelligens, in opus ministerij à Spiritu Sancto illi iniuncti deſtinauit.
                     
                     13. In the weſterne parts wee had then

beſides the Biſhops which oppoſed themſelues to S. Auguſtine, commonly recompted ſeuen in number, yet agreeing with him in theſe miſteries, the renowned holy Biſhop S. Aſaph, diſciple, and ſucceſſor to S. Kentegern, in that ſee, when hee forſooke it; This holy maſſinge Biſhop ruler of the colledge of ſo many maſſinge preiſts, as I haue before related, did in all things ioyne himſelfe with the diſciples of S. Gregory the Pope, in ſo much as a Proteſtāt Biſhop writeth of him: A Gregorij Pontificis Romani diſcipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritatem accepit. (Io. Bal. l. de ſcript. Britan. cent. 1. in Aſapho.) he receued authority from the diſciples of Gregorie Pope of Rome, which came into England. And this is hee, who as the ſame Proteſtāt Biſhop writeth, wrote the life of S. Kentegern his Maſter. Therfore this holy Prelate muſt needs bee a maſſinge preiſt, as all the other vnder him were at that time. If we go further to other parts of this nation, wee ſhall finde in the kingdome of the Mercians, or by ſome the eaſte Angles, the renowned & miraculous Archbiſhop S. Iue, a noble Perſian by birth, who beeing ſent thither by the Pope of Rome S.

Gregory or Pelagius the ſeconde his predeceſſor both maſſinge preiſts and Popes, was alſo a maſſing preiſt and Prelate, and dying at the towne, now of his name called S. Iues, in Hontington ſhire, gaue that name vnto it. (Annal. Monaſter. Ramſeiae. M. S. antiq. de vita S. Iuonis. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Iuone Epiſcop. Florent. Wigorn. in Chronic. ad an. 600.) And to teſtifie that hee exerciſed both his maſſing preiſtly, and epiſcopall function there in preachinge to the Saxons, his body was found, buryed in epiſcopall manner, ſepulchro aperto Epiſcopum Pontificalibus indutum cōſpiciunt. This Apoſtolicke doctor of this nation as Florentius Wigornienſis, Capgraue, and the old Manuſcripts of his life 
                           •…
                        ll him, Doctor Apoſtolicus & vere caeli nuntius Ino, dyed here as Wigornienſis writeth in the yeare 600. foure yeares after the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither: and hither alſo came with him, and preached here, ſent from Rome, beſides others not named, S. Sithius, and S. Inthius his aſſociats, maſſinge preiſts. Qui cum Romam perueniſsēt conſilio Papae diſpoſitione Dei, Sanctus Iuo cum Sithio nepote, & Inthio cognato ſuo alijſque quibuſdam, in Britanniam intrauit.
                        
And to ſhew that hee was a true Apoſtle of this nation, ſent by the ſee Apoſtolicke of Rome, coming through Fraunce hither, beeinge honorably entertayned by the Kinge and people of Fraunce, to ſtay there, would by no entreaty conſent, but came as hee was, à Domino destinatus, ordeyned for vs by God, into England Cum Galliam cum ſuis intraſſet, à Rege & populo honorificè ſuſceptus, nec vlla gratia terrena quamuis aſsiduis precibus rogatus, ab ipſis retineri poterat, ſed Britanniam ingrediens.
                     
                     14. And to paſſe into the kingedome of Kent it ſelfe, where S. Auguſtine landed, & ſettled himſelfe, his ſucceſſors, and ſee at Canterbury, there, we had at his cominge, and twenty yeares before, and before the time, that Theonus Archbiſhop of London, and Thadiocus Archbiſhop of Yorke with their maſſinge preiſts, forſooke their ſees, in that kingedome and city itſelfe of Canterburie, a renowned maſſing Biſhop, S. Luithardus, and his maſſing preiſts, vſuallie ſayinge Maſſe, the Queene S. Bertha being preſent in their thē cathedral church, dedicated to S. Martine, as all antiquaries agree, and as I finde in an old Manuſcript

hiſtory, builded in the time of Kinge Lucius. (Bed. hist. gent. Angl. l. 1. cap. 27. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Lethardo Epiſcopo & Confeſſore. M. S. antiq. in eod.) And by the perſuaſion of this holy maſſinge Biſhop S. Luithard, the Kinge and Saint afterward Ethelbert, entertayned S. Auguſtine with all humanitie, and was by him after actuallie conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, in ſo much that this holy Biſhop is called, Ianitor venturi Auguſtini, opener of the dore to S. Auguſtine. (Capgrau. ſupr. in S. Lethard. Gulielm. Malm. l. 1. de geſt. Reg. Anglorum.) And was before S. Auguſtines cominge when he ſtill liued a Pagan, fauourable and gentle vnto Chriſtiās: Benignus erga Christianos in natiua gentilitate fuit. By occaſion whereof, his kingdome extending to Humber, and his ſiſter beeing marryed to Slede Kinge of the eaſt Angles, and her ſonne Sebert, or as Henry of Huntington calleth him Sibrictus, or Siberctus, beeing a Chriſtian Kinge, ſo great parts of this nation were free from perſecution, and ſome of the Saxons, that were conuerted, became maſſing preiſts, longe before S. Auguſtine came hither. (Henric. Hunting. histor. l. 2.) For ſuch

is numbred Godelbertus as a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth, ex quorundam coniecturis genere Angloſaxo, aboue an hūdred yeares before this time an. 498. (Pitſeus historic. Rel. Tom. 1. aetate 5. Bal. l. de ſcript. Britan. cent. 1. in Godelberto Presbytero.) And as Sebaſtiā Munſter & the firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury witnes, S. Offo an Engliſh Kings ſonne in this our Englād, went hence and preached in Germany in the yeare 601. (Munſter. in Coſmograph. in German. Matth. Parker antiq. Brit. pag. 8.) not without other aſſociats of this nation, except we will make, his caſe ſingular from all other Apoſtolick men, & conuerters of contries. And except wee will make a very bold expoſitiō of the Engliſh Author of the booke, de Virginitate, or laude Virginum, of the praiſe of Virgins, commonly aſcribed to our holy learned Biſhop, S. Aldelmus, callinge, S. Gregory the Pope his Master, and Tutor, Praeceptor & Pedagogus noſter Gregorius. (l. de laude Virginum. Bal. cent. 1. in Adel. Pitſeus To. 1. in eod.) wee muſt needs as the rule of correlatiues. Maſter and ſcholler requireth, make him ſcholler to S. Gregorie the great, which liued but few yeares after S. Auguſtines

cominge hither, and being Pope then, likely he was Tutor & Maſter to this aūciēt Engliſh writer, before the time of his papacie, as he was to many others, and not after.
                     15. So I might inſtance of others, but theſe aboundantly ſuffice, to proue, that after the firſt plantinge of the faith of Chriſt in this our Britanie, there neuer wanted in it, either in the time of the Britans, Saxons or whom els ſoeuer, Maſſe, maſſing preiſts, and Biſhops. For euen thoſe Brittiſh preiſts and Biſhops, which moſte oppoſed againſt S. Auguſtine in ſome other things, were as farr engaged in theſe articles, to bee ſound and Orthodoxe as S. Auguſtine was, and ſo both practiſed here in Britanie, as I haue related before, & their moſt learned S. Kelian, Columban, and Gallus, with others going hence into other nations did wholly ſubmit themſelues to the Popes of Rome; and their cheifeſt S. Keliā was made Biſhop of Mitzburgh by the Pope, receuinge power from him to preach. Romam profectus eſt, & officio praedicandi à Papa receptus Epiſcopus, orditus. (Manuſcript antiq. de vita S. Keliani. Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in eodem. Sur. die 8. Iulij.) And that S. Columbanus the man whoſe

authority was moſt obiected againſt S. Auguſtine, about the diuers keeping of Eaſter, was a notorious maſſinge preiſt, as alſo S. Gallus in as high degree, as any Catholicke now is, it is teſtified in their liues, where we find, S. Columban did dedicat a church, and altar, with the relicks of S. Aurelia, & adorninge the altar ſaid Maſſe vpon it. Beatus Columbanus iuſsit aquam afferri, & benedicens illam, adſperſit ea templum: & dum circuirent pſallentes, dedicauit Eccleſiam, deinde inuocato nomine Domini, vnxit altare, & beatae Aureliae reliquias in eo collocauit, veſtitoque altari, miſſas legittimè compleuerunt And in the ſame Authors wee reade, that S. Gallus did ordinarily vſe, Miſſam celebrare, to ſay Maſſe, and beeing vrged both by the Prince, Biſhops, and Cleargie, to accept of the Biſhoprick of Conſtance, hee refuſed it and preferred Iohn his deacon, whome S. Gallus had conuerted vnto the faith of Chriſt. Who in his conſecration was ledd by the Biſhops to the Altar, and ſolemnely conſecrated, and ſaid Maſſe: in which after the ghoſpell, as the maner was, S. Gallus preached. Epiſcopi duxerunt eum ad altare, & ſolemni benedictionts officio ordinauerunt Antistitem,

conſumatoque ſacrae promotionis ministerio, rogauerunt cum ſacrificij ſalutaris celebrare myſteria. Praemiſsis ergo ex more diuinae oblationis initijs, poſt lectionem Euangelij rogauerunt venerabilem Gallum, vt multitudini quae aderat, verbi officio ſacrae instructionis pabulum ministraret. Where wee ſee as much deuotion, and reuerence, vſed by the greateſts oppoſites to S. Auguſtine, to the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificinge preiſthood, holy water, holy oyle, to conſecrate altares, dedication of churches, and ſuch like matters moſte diſliked by proteſtants, as S. Auguſtine vſed, or any learned Catholicke now profeſſeth or defendeth.
                     16. And to remember Maſſes of requiem for the deade, ſo ſoone as S. Gallus heard of the death of Saint Columban, this S. Gallus ſo renowned a man, called his bretheren together, and they prayed and ſaid Maſſes for his ſoule. Audiens mortem S. Columbani collegit fratres., cauſas meroris aperuit. Deinde tanti patris memoriam precibus ſacris, & ſacrificijs ſalutaribus frequentarunt. What forme of Maſſe both theſe, and they which then continued in Britanie, vſed, I haue proued before, from the Brittiſh antiquities, as alſo

how al which here were contrary to S. Auguſtine in ſome ceremonials, I haue demō
                        ſtrated by all kinde of teſtimonies, that in theſe and al other eſſentiall and fundamentall things, and not ceremoniall, or alterable in Religion, they wholly agreed, and without the leaſte difference, conſented with S. Auguſtine, & the church of Rome, and differed in all now controuerſed queſtions, from the preſent proteſtants of this nation, and all others. And ſo Catholicke Romane, or (as proteſtants call it) the papiſts church, as it hath euer ſince to theſe dayes of innouation from then, beene the onely knowne and viſible church, as theſe men freely confeſſe, and acknowledge, all antiquities, writers, and monuments ſo teſtifying; ſo it was in the ſame maner the onlie true, viſible church, in euery age, or hundred yeares from Chriſt, and his Apoſtles vnto that time, no other in any thing resē
                        bling the preſent proteſtants congregation, beeinge knowne, or heard of, at home, or abrode, by their owne confeſſions, and all Arguments, in any one of thoſe ages, of the primatiue church of Chriſt. And ſo I end this hiſtorie.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
                  
                     THE I. CHAPTER.
                     
                        WHERIN ſacrificinge and Maſſinge Preiſthood, Preiſts, and the ſacrifice of Maſſe, are proued by learned Proteſtants, & other teſtimonies, from the hiſtory of Melchiſedech. Gen. 14. pag. 8.
                        Chap. 2. The ſame proued with like allowance and approbation of Proteſtants, out of the booke of Exodus. pag. 30.
                        Chap. 3. The ſame proued with allowance and conſent of Proteſtants out of the booke of Leuiticus. pag. 43.
                        Chap. 5. Wherin the ſame holy doctrines are ſo alſo proued out of the Prouerbs of Salomon. cap. 9. pag. 72.
                        Chap. 6. Wherin the ſame myſteries are proued by the ſame maner out of the Prophet

Eſay, and others. pag. 78.
                        Chap. 7. Wherin the ſame is proued at large by all expoſitions and teſtimonies, euen by our Proteſtants themſelues, out of the Prophet Malachy. pag. 89.
                        Chap. 8. Wherin is proued by all kinds of teſtimonies, Catholicks, Proteſtants, and whatſoeuer, that Chriſt the true Meſſias, as his calling and dignitie required, in abrogatinge the preiſthood and ſacrifices of Moſes lawe, inſtituted an other more perfect ſacrificinge preiſthood, and ſacrifice of his ſacred body, and blood in Maſſe. pag. 106.
                        Chap. 9. Shewinge how the Apoſtles in generall, beeing by Chriſt ordeyned ſacrificinge preiſts, did accordinge to that power and commaundement giuen vnto them, offer the ſacrifice of Chriſts body & blood in Maſſe, and ordered other preiſts to that end. pag. 121.
                        Chap. 10. Wherin is particularly proued of all the holy Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, that they were ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and did both practiſe and teach the ſame doctrines. And firſt the 4. Euangeliſts and S. Paule, who haue remembred theſe miſteries in holy ſcriptures. pag. 130.
                        
                           Chap. 10. How all the reſt of the, Apoſtles in particular S. Andrew, Iames the great, Thomas, Iames the leſſe, Philip, Bartholomew, Symon, Thaddaeus, and Matthias, were ſacrificinge Preiſts, and Apoſtles, and vſually offered the ſacrifice of Maſſe. pag. 174.
                        Chap 11. How S. Peter the cheife Apoſtle, & firſt founder of the church of Chriſt in this our kingedome, was a ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſt, deliuered a forme of Maſſe to the church, conſecrated many maſſing preiſts in this part of the worlde nere vnto vs, and ſome of this kingdome. pag. 189.
                        Chap. 12. Wherein is proued euen by proteſtants, that whatſoeuer Apoſtle, or other, firſt preached Chriſt in Britanie, brought ſacrificinge preiſthood hither: and S. Peter firſt founded here our eccleſiaſtical Hierarchie, of ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops. pag. 219.
                        Chap. 13. Wherin is proued, how after the death of S· Peter, in the time following commonly aſcribed to S· Linus and Cletus in the ſee of Rome, and to Marius Kinge in Britanie, the Britans both at home and abroade vſed the ſacrificing preiſthood, preiſtes

and Maſſe. pag. 242.
                        Chap. 14. How duringe the time of S. Clement his papacy, and all this firſt hundred yeares of Chriſt, our Chriſtian Britans, together with all other, continued theſe holy doctrines and offices of ſacrificinge preiſthood, preiſts, and the ſacrifice of the bleſſed body and blood of Chriſt in Maſſe. pag. 252.
                        Chap. 15. Wherein demonſtration is made, both by proteſtants and other antiquaries, that ſacrificinge maſſinge preiſts, and Biſhops, and ſacrifice of Maſſe, continued and were honored in this kingdome of Britanie from the beginning of this hundred yeares, vntill Kinge Lucius time, when it was wholly cōuerted to that faith. pag. 278.
                        Chap. 16. Wherin is proued by teſtimonies of proteſtants, & others that this kingdome in the time of Kinge Lucius, was cō
                           uerted by maſſing Preiſts, and Biſhops, and the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, and ſuch maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops, continued here in honor all this age. pag. 310.
                        Chap. 17. How notwithſtandinge the manifold tumults, and perſecution of Chriſtian

Religion, in this kingdome of Britanie, in this third hundred yeares, yet the holie ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificinge and maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops, ſtill here continued, without any totall diſcontinuance. pag. 323.
                        Chap. 18. How the holy ſacrifice of Maſſe, ſacrificing and maſſing preiſthood, preiſts and Biſhops continued in this kingdome of great Britanie in all this age, without any interruption or diſcontinuance. pag. 338.
                        Chap. 19. Wherin is manifeſtly proued, that all this fift age, the ſacrifice of Maſſe, maſſinge preiſts and Biſhops, did continue in honor in this our Britanie. pag. 366.
                        Chap. 20. Wherein is proued by proteſtants and others, that the church of Britanie & Rome, accorded in this age in theſe miſteries: and how all the Popes being maſſinge preiſts and Popes, yet no one of them made any materiall alteration in this ſacrifice. pag. 388.
                        Chap. 21. Wherein being confeſſed by our proteſtant writers, that all the Popes of Rome vnto S. Gregory were maſſing preiſtes, and Popes, yet not any one of them by

theſe proteſtants confeſſion, made any the leaſt materiall chaunge, or alteratiō in theſe miſteries. pag. 403.
                        Chap. 22. Wherein euident demonſtration is made, euen by theſe proteſtāts them ſelues, that neither S. Gregory the great, which ſent S. Auguſtine, with many other holy learned men into England, did make any materiall addition, or alteratiō in theſe miſteries. But the Religion which thoſe his diſciples preached here, was in all points by all teſtimonies both of God and man, Britans themſelues, and Saxons, Catholicks and Proteſtants, auncient and late writers, the true Religion of Chriſt, and in all thinges wherin they differed from the Britans, more pure then that which they then profeſſed. pag. 414.
                        Chap. 23. Wherein demonſtration is made both by proteſtants, and other teſtimonies, that duringe all this age and hundred of yeares, vntill and after the cominge of S. Auguſtine, this kingdome had many holy maſſing preiſts and Biſhops, agreeing in theſe, and all other articles of Religion with the church of Rome. pag. 437.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Errata.
                  PAg. 38. line 1. members, Numbers. Pag. 197. line 23. Martianus, Martinus. There are two cyphers X. (Pag. 130. & 174.) in the chapters, in steed of X. and XI. and ſo conſequenter, which should haue made the 23. chapters, to haue bene 24.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  AN ECCLESIASTICAL PROTESTANT HISTORIE, OF THE HIGH PASTORAL AND FATHERLY CHARGE and care of the Popes f Rome, ouer the church of Britanie.
                  
                     From the first plantinge of the Chriſtian faith there, by S. Peter the Apostle, and his Diſciples: continued in euery age, and hundred of yeares, by holy Bishops, and cleargie men, ſent hither and conſecrated by them, his Succeſsors in the See Apostolicke.
                  
                  Euidently deduced and proued by hiſtoricall narration, from the publiſhed and priuiledged writings (to appeaſe all proteſtants) of the moſt learned and allowed Engliſh proteſtant pretended Biſhops, Doctors, Antiquaries, and others of that Religion.
                  
                     Mementote praepoſitorum vestrorum, qui vobis locati ſunt verbum Dei. Obedite praepoſitis vestris, & ſubiac
                           •…
                        te eis, ipſi enim peruigilant, quaſi rationem pro animabus veſtris reddituri. Hebr. 13.
                  With licence, 16
                        •…
                     5.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE GENERAL ARGVMENTS OF THE ENSVINGE HISTORIE: SERVINGE ALSO FOR A PREFACE, to the Reader, to declare the ſcope of the Author, and contents of the worke.
                  
                     THE Catholick Author well acquainted with the proceedings of Proteſtants, in theſe times, and the controuerſies of them, to accept and allowe of nothing, but what is liked and allowed by them ſelues; and yet to make the world beleeue, they are Reuerencers of antiquitie, and would willingly embrace, and followe that, which was our firſt faith in any queſtion deliuered by the Apoſtles, & thence continued from them: the greateſt of all

beeing that who planted here firſt the holy faith, and ſince had cheifeſt commanding power in ſuch things: Hee ſetteth hiſtorically downe from the beſt Antiquaries, and learned proteſtant writers of this contry, & other antiquities approued by them, the meanes and maner of our firſt conuerſion vnto Chriſt, and by what ſpirituall cheife ruling authority this nation hath euer beene gouerned in ſuch thinges, ſince then, vntill the conuerſions of the Saxons by S. Auguſtine, and his aſſociats ſent hither by Saint, and pope Gregory, the firſt, after which tyme now aboue 1000. yeares, our proteſtants put it out of Queſtion, and agree, that the power of the popes of Rome abſolutely ruled here in ſuch matters.
                  Therfore this hiſtorie of the firſt ſixe hundred yeares, is diuided into ſixe Centuries or ages, euery one conteyninge one hundred yeares. In the firſt, hee ſheweth from thoſe proteſtant Authors, and Antiquaries, how S. Peter that greate Apoſtle of Chriſt, both immediately by himſelfe, and mediately by his holy diſciples, firſt preached here, founded our church, conſecrated for vs Biſhops, preiſts, and other cleargie men, and ordeyned

all thinges thereto belonging: and how from this firſt inſtitution by him, we euer had a continued ſucceſſion of ſuch conſecrated parſons, vnto the more generall conuerſion by pope Eleutherius in the daies of kinge Lucius after which time there can bee no queſtion of ſuch a ſucceſſion of Biſhops here. And how after the death of S. Peter vnto the end of the firſt hundred yeares, ſpirituall matters were ordered here by authoritie and direction from the ſee of Rome, and ſucceſſors of S. Peter there.
                  In the ſecond hundred of yeares, is proued by the ſame proteſtant authors, and their antiquities, how from the beginninge of that age, to the end thereof, all ſpirituall things were likewiſe managed here, by that ſee Apoſtolicke, more or leſſe, as the times then permitted. And in the generall conuerſion of kinge Lucius, and his kingdome, all eccleſiaſticall buſineſſes were done, and ſettled by iuriſdiction of the popes of Rome, and their legats, directed hither by their authoritie, exerciſing here as ample iuriſdiction ſpirituall, to the greate honor of this kingdome, as any pope of Rome may clayme.
                  
                     Such was the eſtate of ſpirituall power, and proceedings here in the third, fourth, fift, and ſixte age, or hundred of yeares alſo: in the later end whereof, S. Auguſtine was ſent hither to conuert our aunceſtors the Saxons. In all which ages, and Centenaries of yeares, both the Kings, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and others, both Rulers, and Ruled in this kingdome, gaue as much priuiledge, and prerogatiue to the popes of Rome, as Catholicks now may doe, by their catholick Roman Religion.
                  In which tyme alſo, amonge all thoſe chriſtians which then liued here, thoſe Biſhops of Scotland, and Walles, who, as our proteſtants tell vs, and commend them for it, did onely or moſt oppoſe againſt the pope, his legates, and authoritie here, were thoſe alſoe, by the ſame proteſtants, which did much more intermeddle in princes affaires, then any popes, their legats, or ſuch as were moſt obedient vnto, or Ruled by them. Which proceedings the Author doth in all places leaue to proteſtants relation, and medleth not with them otherwiſe at all. But ſoe much as with probabilitie in hiſtorie, hee may, mitigateth ſuch matters, as

ſome proteſtants, euen with publick allowance of the proteſtant ſtate of Englād, haue boldly publiſhed to the world in that kinde: freely and before God proteſting, as hee neuer hitherto had any intermedlinge with the temporall affaires of Princes, but euer to his vttermoſt, did yeeld and render all dutie vnto them, praying for the ſafety, honor and preſeruation of his Soueraigne, and this kingdome, ſoe hee will euer continue the ſame moſte humble and dutifull affection.
                  Other particular Queſtions in Religion depend vppon this. Becauſe whoſoeuer in anie Religion hath the cheife chardge and cure, the particulars depend vpon his proceedings, whether it bee Pope, Prince, Superintendents, Presbyteries, or whatſoeuer, and ſoe beeing proued that from the beginninge of chriſtianitie in this kingdome, the Pope of Rome euer had cheife cōmaund & direction in Religious things. It muſt needs followe, that which proteſtants name papiſtrie, euer raigned here. But I vnderſtand there is a generall controuerſiall hiſtorie to bee ſhortly publiſhed, of all ſuch things in particular, from the firſt preaching of

the Goſpell in this kingdome, which will giue, full a
                        •…
                      ample ſatisfaction, in all ſuch Queſtions.
                  
                     THE FIRST CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED OF YEARES.
                     
                        
                           THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is briefly made demonſtration by the best learned proteſtant Antiquaries, and others of England, that Saint Peter the Apostle firſt preached the faith, and founded the Church of Christ in this our Britanie.
                        TO bringe vs vnto a more certayne, and vndoubted knowledge, of the firſt preachers of chriſtian Religion, in this kingdome, the beſt learned proteſtant Antiquaries wee haue, preſcribe certayne Rules, and ſquares, to bee directed by to come vnto them, in their iudgment. Matth. Parker. antiq. Britan. pag. 1. Godw. Conuerſ. of Brit. Holinsh.

hist. of Engl. Maſon. l. 2· c. 2. pag. 51. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. firſt they affirme, that the Britans receaued the faith, ſoone after the Aſcenſion of our bleſſed Sauiour, in the time of Tiberius, Caius Caligula, or Claudius Emperor: and they build this their aſſertion cheifely vppon the words of S. Gildas. l. de Excid. & conq. Britan. c· 5.6. Who ſpeaking of things done here in Britanie, either in the time of Caius, or Claudius, addeth: Interea glaciali frigore rigent Inſulae, indulget ſua praecepta Chriſtus. In the meane time while theſe things were doinge, Christ doth afford his precepts to this frozen Iland. In which place, hee rather meaneth the time of Claudius, then any other, as may eaſely appeare, to all iudiciall and equall readers of that auncient Author in the place alleadged, needles to bee inſiſted vppon, if wee will bee guided by our proteſtant directors, becauſe in their next Rules they ſhall make it euident.
                        It muſt needes in their opinion bee ſoe vnderſtood. For they deliuer for a ſecond Maxime, that this nation embraced, and was taught the Religion of Chriſt, by ſome one of the Apoſtles. Soe ſay their

Archbiſhop Parker. in antiq. Britan. Bal. in act. Pontif. Rom. in Gregor. 1. Cambd. in Brit. Fulke Answ. to a Romish. cath. pag. 40. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giral. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Eng. c. 21. pag. 102. Stowe histor. in Agricola. Stow. ſupr. Godwyn ſupr. their Biſhops Bale, Godwyn, their doctors and Antiquaries, Cambden, Fulke, Powel, Holinshed. Stowe, the Theater writers and others, inclining to this opinion, and ſome of them plainely teaching, with diuers of the auntient fathers, that the 12. Apoſtles deuided the world amongſt them, to preach the ghoſpell in, aſſure vs, that to ſpeake in their wordes, The holy Apoſtles beeing diſperſed throughout the whole earth, did diuide the prouinces amongst them, to preach the ghoſpell in; and it is deliuered plainely by ſundry auntient writers, that Britanie fell in diuiſion, amongſt the Apoſtles.
                        
                        The third and laſte generall Rule which theſe men aſſigne vnto vs, is, that mention is not made of any Apoſtle in any antiquitie to haue preached here, but onely of S. Peter S. Paul, and S. Symon Zelotes, none of all theſe alleadged proteſtants or any other, I reade doth ſpeake of any other, and amonge

theſe one a proteſtant Biſhop and Antiquarie writeth in theſe termes. Godwyn Conuerſ. of Britanie. cap. 1. pag. 2. I finde mention of three onely of the Apostles to haue beene in our Britanie, to wit, Peter and Paul, and Simon Chananaeus, called alſo Zelotes. For although ſome haue written that S. Iames preached in Ireland, and S. Philip in this next adioyninge Gallia Fraunce (which I haue at lardge refuted in other places) yett noe one hiſtorian to my remembrance, and reading, doth teach, that either of thoſe twoe, or any of the reſt, except thoſe three before ſett downe, were at any time in this Iland.
                        Theſe Rules of Proteſtants thus ſuppoſed, and allowed, it will with a ſmall labour, euidently appeare vnto vs, by theſe men, and all antiquities, that the moſte glorious Apoſtle Saint Peter was our firſt father, and teacher in Chriſt. For firſt concerning S. Paul, hee himſelfe, and other ſcriptures, and theſe proteſtants alſoe confeſſe, hee was none of the 12. Apoſtles, by whō the world was ſoe diuided, and though miraculouſly called by god before, yett not properly an Apoſtle vntill in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles, v. 2. hee was ſoe ordeyned:

as our engliſh proteſtants by their conference of the firſt chapter and verſe of S. Paules Epiſtle to the Romans. Rom. cap. 1. v. 1. are Interpretors hereof, when the other Apoſtles had preached longe before, and otherwiſe alſoe executed their Apoſtolicke function.
                        Secondly it is euident by the ſame holy ſcriptures. Rom. 1. c. 1. act. cap. 27.28. many Antiquities, and theſe proteſtants themſelues, ſoe clearely cōfeſſinge (Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Godw. Conuers. Parker. antiq. Britan.) that S. Paul came not to Rome, nor any part neare Britanie, or theſe weſterne nations, vntill many yeares after S. Peter was both come to Rome, and this kingdome of Britanie had receaued the faith of Chriſt, at the lateſt in the time of Claudius according to theſe proteſtants by ſome Apoſtle as before, the firſt coming of S. Paul to any of theſe weſterne Regions, beeing longe after in the time of Nero, to whome hee appealed from the Iewes, and Feſtus, and ſoe was brought priſoner to Rome and ſoe continued two yeares, not going from thence to any other place. Actor. c. 25. v. 10.11.12. cap. 27. & 28. v. 30.
                        
                           That S. Symon Zelotes ſhould bee the firſt Apoſtle that preached here, or was here at all, it is as vnprobable, or rather vnpoſſible by theſe proteſtants: for firſt diuers of them diſable him euer to haue beene here, Stowe and Howes histor. in Agricola Holinsh. hiſt. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. rather thinkinge, the place Britānia, where ſome haue thought hee preached to bee miſtaken, and not to bee vnderſtood of this nation, or that Simon which is ſuppoſed to haue beene here, was not S. Simō the Apoſtle, but ſome other of that name, as S. Simon Leproſus, or Nathaniel, alſo by ſome named Simon, which preached in theſe weſterne parts, namely in Fraunce, and not vnprobably here.
                        Secondly theſe proteſtants which would haue vs thinke S. Simon the Apoſtle preached here (Menologie. Graec. in Nathan. Bar. in martyrol. Rom. 28. octob. Guliel. Eiſengr. centurie· 1. & alij.) refer his beeing here vntil the coming of S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, coniecturinge that hee came with him, who came not hither vntil the yeare of Chriſt 63. when they graunt that Britanie had receaued the ghoſpell by an Apoſtle ſoe longe before, as is alreadie declared from them. Parker

Antiquit. pag. 3. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie pag. 10. Thirdly (to make all ſure) Such as haue taught that one S. Symon did preach in a place called Britannia; Doroth. in Synopſ. Maenolog. Graec. 6. Id. Maij. doe alſoe affirme, that the ſame S. Symon ſuffered martyrdome, and was crucified in the ſame place, and they keepe the feaſt of his martyrdome vpon the tenth day of May. When concerning S. Symon Zelōtes the Apoſtle, not onely the whole latine church, and all catholicks in the world, but Proteſtants alſo, both of England, and all other nations, in their moſt publicke ſeruice bookes, and kalenders of their churches, receaued and allowed by their parlaments, and higheſt Rules in their Religion, which all of them ar bownde to obey, and followe, doe celebrate the feſtiuitie of S. Symon Zelotes the Apoſtle, vpon the 28. day of October, aboue fiue moneths after, and all iointly agree, in the hiſtorie of his life, and death, teaching hee neuer preached in any part of Europe, or neare our Britanye, and was martyred in Perſia, diuers thouſands of myles frō hence. Martyrolog. Rom. die 28. Octobr. Breuiar. & Miſſ. Rom. eod. die. Bed. in Martyr. eod. die.

Vſuard. & Ado eod. die. Protestant com. Booke and all their kalenders with their Bibles 28. of Octob.
                        
                        Now there is noe other left to bee our firſt Apoſtle and Father in Chriſt but S. Peter, except ſome ignorant or willfull man, will alledge S. Ioſeph of Aramathia, who though hee was noe Apoſtle, yett as ſome ſay, hee was ſent hither out of Fraunce, by S. Philip one of the Apoſtles, and ſoe mediately the ſame S. Philip. though neuer here in parſon, might bee our Apoſtle. I anſwere as before, that wee contend for the firſt Apoſtle, that either immediately by himſelfe, or mediatly by his diſciples, preached here, and founded our church, and not to exclude all Apoſtles in after times, from this kingdome, for I wil at leaſte probably ſhew, that S. Paul was here, a little before his death in an other place; and there alſoe giue his due to S. Ioſeph, and his holy company, in a far more honorable degree, then any proteſtant, or other one writer yet to my reading hath performed towards them; But S. Ioſeph from whomſoeuer hee was ſent, cominge hither but in the 63. of Chriſt, almoſt twenty yeares (as before) after this kingdome had receaued

the faith of Chriſt, neyther S. Ioſeph, nor any of that holy fraternitie could bee the firſt preacher here.
                        And ſoe farr vnprobable or impoſſible it is, that by the Iudgment of our Engliſh proteſtants, or others, S. Philip the Apoſtle ſhould bee then in Fraunce to ſend S. Ioſeph hither, that hee was many yares before crucified, & ſoe dead by martyrdome in Phrygia at Hierapolis there, in Aſia, as the common conſent of antiquities, the whole-church of God, and the proteſtants of England, in the Rituall of their Religion, generally vſed and allowed by them, and all other proteſtants doe wittneſſe, and therfore keepe his feſtiuitie accordingly vppon the firſt day of May, in or about the 54. or 55. yeare of Chriſt, longe before S. Ioſephs cominge into this part of the world. Bre. Rom. 1. Maij. Martyrolog. Rom. Bed. Vſuara. Ado 1. Maij. Chryſost. hom. de 12. Apost. Abd. lib. 10. Metaphrastes 14. Nou. Euſeb. l. 4. c. 24. Niceph. lib. 1. ca. 39. Pet. de Natal. l. 4. c. 107. Antō. part. 1. tit. 6. ca. 11. Eiſengr. contra. 1. Prot. Com. Booke and kalend. 1. Maij. Therfore of neceſſitie, both Catholiks and proteſtants muſt needs acknowledge, that S. Peter the

moſt worthie and bleſſed Apoſtle, was our firſt moſt happy father & maſter in Chriſt, which I haue made lardge demonſtration of in other places, and will for particulars bee more euident in the next chapter, and this whole hiſtory: an hiſtoricall truth ſoe teſtified by many authors, that Syr William Cambden, whome others therein followe, the beſt antiquary of this nation, writeth in many editions, Quid ni crederemus? why should wee not beleeue them. Cambden in Britania in diuerſe editionis Andree Cheſnee l 3. hiſt. d' Angleterre. Budley pag. 171. Makinge S. Peters preachinge and foundinge the church of Chriſt here in Britanie a thinge ſoe certayne, that hee meruayleth any man of Iudgment can make doubt thereof. Therfore I may boldly vſe theſe wordes (and affirme them true) of a proteſtant Biſhop in the name of the reſt: Wee should accompt it a greate glory to deriue the pedigree of our ſpirituall linage, from ſoe noble, and excellent a father as Saint Peter. Godwyn Conuerſ. of Britanie pag. 6.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           THE II. CHAPTER. Where both the former is more manifeſtly declared, and in particular farther proued by theſe protestants, & antiquities by them allowed, what highest ſpirituall offices the ſame glorious Apoſtle, and his diſciples performed here.
                        TO proue more amply what hath beene ſaid of S. Peters beeing and preachinge here, and to ſhewe what hee did for the firſt foundinge of our church: A proteſtant Archbiſhop from diuers authorities writeth: Whit gifts Answ. to the Admonition pag. 65. ſect. 1. and def. of the Answ. pag. 318. The Apoſtle Peter did in euery prouince appoint one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the ſame prouince should obey. An other with great priuiledge ſaith (Sutcliffe Subuerſ. pag. 3.) Peter preached in 
                                 •…
                              e place, but hee there ordeyned Bishops and teachers and founded churches. And to ſhew that all theſe and ſuch benefits came to vs firſt from S. Peter and his holy ſee of Rome, among other Marcus Antonius de Dominis, now by the greate mercy of

God a penitent in the catholicke church, when hee was in profeſſion a proteſtant in England (Marcus Anton, de Domin. de Repub. chriſtian. l. 4. cap. 10. with publick priuiledg in England) and a choſen champion for that Religion againſt the Pope by cheifeſt proteſtant authoritie in England, then teſtifieth: Est caput Roma quatenus ab ea diffuſum eſt euangelium in reliquas totius occidentis eccleſias, & in multas orientis, atque in barbaras etiam extra Romanum Imperium nationes. Rome is the head of the church, in ſo much as from it the ghoſpell was diffuſed into the other churches of all the Weſt, and into many of the Eaſt, and into barbarous nations alſo without the Romane Empire. And our. Soueraigne kings ſpeach in parlam. 1. publickly proteſted of this church of Rome: It is our mother church: and conſequently that it firſt brought vs forthe in ſpirituall chriſtian birth, as mothers doe their natural children to the world and that wee, except wee will turne baſtardly vnnaturall and diſobedient children, doe owe and muſt performe all dutie and obedience vnto it, our moſt holy mother in Chriſt. And to further this our bounden dutie, the proteſtants

of England in their Theater. of the Emp. of greate Britante pag. 203 l. 6. c. 9. num. 5. will helpe vs foreward whoe write in this maner: That S. Peter the Apoſtle preached the word of life, in this Iland, as to other gentiles hee did, for whome God had choſen him, that from his mouth they might heare the ghoſpell, as himſelfe alleadgeth, and that hee here founded churches, and ordeined preiſts and deacons, which is reported by Simon Metaphraſtes out of the greek Antiquities, and Gulielmus Eiſingrenius in the firſt of his Centuries. Therfore this beeing written by ſoe learned and holy a man as S. Simon Metaphraſtes was, and ſoe auntient aboue 700. yeares ſince, and out of ſuch monuments and Authorities of the Gretians, as in his time were honored with the Title of Antiquities, this alone might content vs in this matter, as it hath already the beſt learned proteſtant Antiquaries of this nation.
                        But becauſe allowance is giuen to the authoritie which cannot be denyed, becauſe it is the maner of Proteſtants to mynce authorities, I will cite that holy auntient Father and Saint. S. Sim. Metaphr. 29. die Iunij. in his owne wordes which bee theſe. Romā redijt,

ex qua venit Mediolanum, & Photicen quae ſunt ciuitates in Continente. In quibus cum conſtituiſſet Epiſcopos & Presbyteros, venit in Britanniam. Quo in loco cum longo tempore fuiſſet moratus, & multas gentes non nominatas attraxiſſet ad fidem Christi, angelicam aſpexit viſionem, quae dicebat: Petre, instat tempus tua reſolutionts, & oportet te ire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem ſustinueris, recipies mercedem Iustitiae. Cum ergo propterea Deum glorificaſſet, & egiſſet gratias, & apud Britannos manſiſset dies aliquot, & verbo gratiae multos illuminaſſet, & eccleſias constituiſſet, epiſcopoſque & presbyteros & diaconos ordinaſſet, duodecimo anno Caeſaris Neronis rurſus Romam reuertitur. S. Peter by reuelation came to Hieruſalem, at the death of the mother of God, then returning into Egipt, by Africk came againe to Rome. From whence hee came to Milane and Photice, which bee cities in the continēt: in which when hee had conſtituted Biſhops, and preiſts, hee came into Britanie, where when hee had ſtayed a longe time, and drawne many nations not named, to the faith of Chriſt, hee had an Angelicall viſion, which ſaide: ô Peter, the time of thy Reſolution is at hande,

                              and thou muſt goe to Rome, in which when thou haſt ſuffered death by the croſſe, thou ſhalt receaue the reward of luſtice. Therfore when hee had glorified God and giuen thankes for it, and remayned ſome dayes with the Britans and illuminated manie with the word of grace, and founded churches, & ordeyned both Biſhops, prieſts, and deacons, hee returned againe to Rome in the twelueth years of the Emperor Nero.
                        
                        Hitherto the very words of this learned Saint, ſoe preciſely and particularly deſcribeing the tyme and comming of that glorious Apoſtle into this Iland, & ſtaying here, with his returne to Rome againe, that as noe man except an infidell will or can deny it, no Author of antiquitie or credit auouching halfe ſo much for either S Paul or any other Apoſtle to haue beene here at all: ſoe except wee of Englād wil ſhew our ſelues the moſt vngratefull, & diſobedient to that our firſt, and moſt glorious Paſtor, and parent, of all nations in the world except Hieruſalē, Antioch and Rome, wee ar moſt engaged to honor and reuerence this moſt glorious Apoſtle & his Succeſſors in his holy Sec: for neither

Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Aſia, or Bythinia, which hee himſelfe particularly remembreth, 1. Pet. 1. v. 1. nor any other kingdome or nation mentioned in any Author of credit and Antiquitie, and to bee paralelled with him whom I haue cited, approued euen in this point with all Catholicks, and the moſte iudicious indifferently mynded and beſt learned proteſtants, can conſtantly affirme and proue, that they had receaued ſuch benefites and bleſſings from S. Peter, as this our Britanie, which to viſitt hee went ſoe farr, ſtayed therein ſoe longe, and enritched as with ſoe many and vnanſweareable graces and fauors: continuinge them ſoe longe, vntill he was admoniſhed from heauē to returne from hence to Rome, as before his cominge thither, hee alſo was as Metaphraſtes, die 29. Iunij. S. Leo ſerm. de Apostol. with others write, directed to come helpe vs in the weſt. And if wee will follow the Roman tradition. (Baron. annotat. in 9. Maij in Pudente. that) Domus Pudentis erat primum hoſpitium S. Petri Romae, the houſe of Pudens was the firſt lodging of S. Peter of Rome, wee are more ſtrictly bound to Rome and Rome to vs, that beeinge the houſe of

our renowned chriſtian contrywoman Lady Claudia, as our proteſtant writers tell vs. Matth. Parker antiq. Britan. pag. 2.3. Godwyn Conuerſ. of Britanie. Cambd. in Britan. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Now lett vs enquire and ſett downe in particular, ſoe neare as ſuch a deſolation and loſſe of Antiquities as England hath often ſuffered, will giue vs leaue, of this Archbiſhop and Biſhops in particular, which S. Peter conſecrated for vs, to found and begin the firſt hierarchicall order and Succeſſion in our primatiue church of Britanie.
                        Many Authors both auntient and later writers and of theſe late times, both catholicks and proteſtants, ar witneſſes that S. Ariſtobulus, one of the ſeauentie and two diſciples of Chriſt our Lord, was Biſhop of this our kingdome of Britanie. Dorothaeus Biſhop of Tyrus. (Dorothaeus lib. de ſeptuaginta duobus diſcipulis in Aristobulo.) And the Maenologe of the Greekes are plainely of this minde. The firſt in his booke intituled de ſeptuaginta duobus diſcipulis, of the ſeauentie two diſciples, writeth: Aristobulus ab Apostolo ad Romanos commemoratos Epiſcopus Britannia factus

est: Ariſtobulus one of the ſeauentie two diſciples, of whom S Paul ſpeaketh in his epiſtle to the Romans, was made Biſhop of Britanie. And to putt vs out of doubt that hee did not miſtake, naminge Britania for Bythinia, as a proteſtant writer would ſeeme to expounde him, when hee writeth: Dorotheus ſaith, Aristobulus, whome the Apoſtle to the Romans remembreth, was made Biſhop in Britanie, or Bithania. Stowe histor. titul. the Romans. in Agricola. I thinke this man will hardly finde any Bythania in the world: wee reade of Bethania often in the Goſpels, and S. Iohn ſaith. cap. 11. v. 18. Bethany was nigh vnto Hieruſalem about fifteene farlongs off, as our protestants tranſlate and their note there vpon is: that is about towe miles. protest. annot. marginal. in c. 11.11. Io. v. 18. Which was too neare to Hieruſalem, to bee a Biſhops ſee, and the old prouinciall maketh mention of noe ſuch. And if by Bythania, hee ment the country Bythinia the Region of leſſer Aſia, againſt Thracia, and next Troas, which was alſo ſomtime called Bebrycia, after Mygdonia, and by S. Peter Bythinia in the Apoſtles time, and after, it is euident that Dorothaeus

ment it not, for in the next name which is S. Tyticus, hee ſaith, that hee was made. Biſhop of Chalcedonia of Bith
                              •…
                           nia. Tyticus meminit & huius Paulus, primus Epiſcopus Chalcedoniae fuit, quae in Bithynia est. Doroth. ſupra in Tyticho. Therefore of neceſſitie by this Author and the reſt foe affirming it, without doubt, or any exception, S. Ariſtobulus needs muſt bee Biſhop of this our kingdome of Britanie, noe other place then of that name fitt for a Biſhop in the knowne world to apply it vnto.
                        And thus teſtifieth the auntient Maenologe of the greekes, with others, both catholicks and proteſtants of whome I haue here noted ſome. Maenolog. Graecor. die 15. martij: Baron. annot. in martyrol. Rom. eod. die. Arnold. Mirman in Theatr. Conuerſ. gent. Auth. of the Exam. of the Calend. praefat. and in the 3. Conuerſ. Syr. Ed. Hoby counterf. pag. 48. Thom. Rogers vpon the Articles of Relig. articul. 36. pag. 197. Protest. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Cambden Belg. That this holy Biſhop was either conſecrated here, or ſent hither by S. Peter, wee may not queſtion, beeing ſoe generally confeſſed by proteſtants before, that noe other Apoſtle did, or then could performe

that office. And if the Identitie of the name deceaueth vs not, this our holy Biſhop or Archbiſhop, was Father in lawe to S. Peter, his wyues Father, and Brother to S Barnabas the Apoſtle, ſent into theſe weſt parts by S. Peter: for as Simon Metaphraſtes writeth. (S. Simon Metaphr. die 26. Iunij.) Accepit Petrus filiam Aristobuli fratris Barnabae Apoſtoli, ex ea genuit filium vnum & vnam filiam. Peter maryed the daughter of Ariſtobulus Brother of Barnabas the Apoſtle, and had by her one ſonne, and one daughter. Martyrolog. Rom. 15. Martij. Godw. And beeing called in the Romane Martyrologe as a proteſtant Biſhop truely telleth. Apoſtolorum diſcipulus the diſciple of the Apoſtles. Conuerſ. of Brit. It wholy diſableth him from beeing diſciple to S. Paul, whoe alone of the Apoſtles beſides S. Peter was in this kingdome, for the ſcriptures themſelues are wittnes. Actor. cap. 13. v. 2.3.4. that S. Paul was not an Apoſtle, vntill in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles, before which time by the proteſtants before, Britanie had receaued the faith, and probably S. Ariſtobulus was then a Biſhop, as many others of the 27. Diſciples were. And many ar called the diſciples

of the Apoſtles which were peculiarly the diſciples of S. Peter, the cheife Apoſtle, as appeareth in diuers places of the ſame Authority. S. Ariſto. Arch. of this our Britanie.
                        
                        And that this holy diſciple of S. Peter, was not onely our Biſhop, but Archbiſhop alſoe in Britanie, I haue warrant both of Catholicks and proteſtants to auouche it; Firſt if wee examine either by Dorotheus or any whomſoeuer writing of the reſidēcies of the 72. diſciples of Chriſt, wee ſhall hardly finde any amonge them, which had not the dignity of that high callinge, yea hee relateth S. Ariſtobulus as a cheife amongſt thē, & then beeing ſent to this kingdome of Britanie ſoe greate & ample. And where as in other ſuch kingdomes our proteſtants before aſſure vs, S. Peter ordeined an Archbiſhop, wee cānot doubt but in particular it was this his moſte worthy diſciple, as alſo the diſciple of Chriſt, which firſt exerciſed by S. Peters aſſignement that Archie, and cheife pontificall order in this Iland.
                        Secondly, becauſe wee reade it confidētly written, and from more auncient authoritie, that this holy diſciple of S. Peter was not only our firſt Apoſtle, but here began and firſt

founded the hierarchical order, of our Brittiſh church, a thinge proper to that higheſt ſpiritual callinge. Arnold. mirac. Theatro conuerſ. gentium in Britan. & Ariſtobulo. Britānia Straboni à Britone Rege nuncupata, primum Aristobulum, ſiue illū cuius meminit S. Paulus, quod Dorothaeo probatur, ſiue aliū vnū certe ex 72. diſcipulorum claſſe Apoſtolū est nata. Deinde Fugariū & Damianū, qui ordinem Hierarchicè Eccleſiae istic fundatae ab illo inchoatum constituerunt ſanxerunt
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               more nimirum Apoſtolico. Britania ſo named by Strabo of Kinge Brito or Brutus, had for the firſt Apoſtle therof Ariſtobulus, either him, whome S. Paule remē
                           breth, which Dorotheus approueth, or an other, ſurely one of the order of the 72. diſciples, after that Fugarius (Fugatius by others) and Damianus, whoe conſtituted & confirmed by Apoſtolick maner the Hierarchical order begun by him of the church founded there. Where wee ſee S. Ariſtobulus, the firſt founder of the Hierarchicall order in this church of Britanie: a thinge which as al proteſtāts againſt the puritans, maketh the peculiar office of an Archbiſh. Whitgift answ. to the admonit. Bridges eccleſ. gouern. Bilſon againſt the purit. Couel, Downam, Barlowe &c.
                        
                        
                           Thirdly, Theſe proteſtants of England, eſpecially the vniuerſitie of Cambridge by their choſen champion Mr. Thomas Rogers for defence of their Articles of Religion of Proteſtants, writing (to vſe his wordes) by the lawfull authoritie of the church of England, allowed to bee publicke. Thom. Rogers booke of the faith of England pag. 1. doe playnely ſaie, that S. Ariſtobulus, was Archbiſhop in this our Britanie. Thus hee writeth in the name of Engliſh proteſtants and by their warrant. Rogers ſupra artic. 36.

                              pag. Albeit the Termes and Titles of Archbiſhops we finde not, yet the ſuperioritie which they enioye, and authoritie which Biſhops and Archbiſhops doe exerciſe, in orderinge and conſecratinge of Biſhops, and eccleſiaſticall miniſters, is grounded vppon the word of God: for wee finde, that in the Apoſtles daies, how themſelues both were in dignitie aboue the Euangeliſts, and the 70. diſciples, and for authoritie both in and ouer the church, as twelue patriarches, ſaith Beza, and alſoe eſtabliſhed an eccleſiaſticall heerarchie. Hence came it, that biſhop was of Hieruſalem Iames; of Antioch Peter; of the Aſian churches, Iohn; of Alexandria

marke; of Epheſus and all Aſia, Timothie: of all Creete, Titus; of Philippos Epaphraditus; of Corinth and Achaia, Apollos; of Athe
                                 •…
                              s Dioniſius: of Fraunce Creſcens; of Britanie Ariſtobulus. Beza in act. Apost. 1.2.
                           D. Chriſosto. in Act. Homil. 33.2. Hieron. in Gal. Euſeb. D. Hieron. ad Euagr. D. Hier. in 2. Tim. 1. Theod. arg. in epist. ad Tit. Theod. in epist. ad Phil. Euſeb. lib. 2. Dorotheus in Apostol. Synopſ. Where we ſee S. Ariſtobulus not onely ioyned in ranke, and dignitie of ſpirituall preeminence, with the Euangeliſts, and Apoſtles themſelues, but with the generall authoritie of the proteſtant church of England, plainely declared to bee the firſt founder of eccleſiaſticall hierarchie, and Archbiſhop of this our Britanie. And to giue euident teſtimonie, that in their iudgement this nation of the weſt, both deriued the ſucceſſion of the Biſhops thereof from S. Peter and Ariſtobulus, and neuer wanted by ſuch vntil theſe dayes, they thus conclude in this matter, ſupra pag. 197.198.
Finally from the Apoſtles dayes hetherto neuer wanted a ſucceſſion of Biſhops neither in the Eaſt, nor Weſte churches, ſoe prouidēt hath the almightie beene for the augmentation
                           
of his glorie, and people, by this kinde, and callinge of men. And thus much for the firſt Archbiſhop of Britany ordeyned by Saint Peter.
                        Now to come to ſpeake of the Biſhops hee conſecrated and ordeyned for vs, although it is preciſely proued before, that ſuch there were: Epiſcopos ordinauit. S. Peter ordeyned Biſhops here in Britanie for vs, and euery Archbiſhop which is cheife of Biſhops, ſuch as S. Ariſtobulus was vnto vs, doth neceſſarily inferr, and proue ſome Biſhops ſubordinate, and vnder, els hee could not bee the cheife, and principall; for euery Archbiſhop inferreth neceſſarily ſome Biſhops or Biſhop vnder him their cheife in that callinge. Diuers Antiquities of Glaſtenbury, apud Capgrau. in S. Ioſeph, affirme, that one of the holy company of Saint Ioſeph of Aramathia, namly his ſonne Ioſephe was a Biſhop, which if ſo it was, hee muſt needes bee ſubordinate to S. Ariſtobulus. And yett if I would ſett downe vncertayne thinges, I might place our holy Biſhoppe and marty S. Angulus, in or neare this time, with much more probabilitie then ſome without any authoritie I can finde, referr him to the dayes of Diocletian

his perſecution: or ſay that S. Martine, to whome the chriſtian Romans, builded & dedicated the church at Canterbury, was a Britiſh Biſhop, and in this time; for that ſuch a S. Martyne a Biſhop there was about thoſe dayes, there bee many teſtimonies, and that hee was conſecrated by Romane authoritie; and ſoe aunciently to proue it probable, hee was a Britanie, that the auntient Manuſcript of Radulphus de Diceto deane of London, or whoſoeuer Author of Abbreuiatio chronicorum, ſaith, that it was builded in the time of kinge Lucius, for ſpeaking of the time of that our firſt chriſtian kinge, hee affirmeth. (Abbreuiatio chronicorum in Lucio. M. S) Tunc conſtructa est extra Cantuariam eccleſia Sancti Martini: then the church without Canterbury dedicated to S. Martyne, was builded. As diuers alſo were to S. Peter, our moſte glorious Apoſtle. One I finde conſecrated by S. Peter or his ſucceſſor at Rome, which was both a Britanne, and liued and died a Biſhop here in the time of S. Ariſtobulus, a Germane writer calleth him Achates, but I take not that to bee his name, hee was one of the happy companions of S. Beatus our noble contryman conſecrated at Rome, of

whome I will ſpeake more when I come to that glorious man, when I haue firſt entreated of the conſecration of S. Manſuetus a renowned Biſhop, borne in this Iland, conſecrated by S. Peter himſelfe.
                        This man, as many antiquities ſay, was natione Scotus, by contry a Scot, of the north part of this kingedome, made Biſhop by S. Peter, whoſe diſciple hee was before, and ſent into theſe parts, or conſecrated by him here, and made Biſhop of Tullū in Lorrayne. Tullenſes habuere Apostolū, ſuaeque in Chriſtum fidei primū Antistitem S. Manſuetum S. Petri Apoſtoli diſcipulum, S. Clementis Collegā origine Scotū, (Arnold. Merman. in Theatro Conuerſ. gentiū in Metenſib.) The inhabitants of Tullum (ſaith Arnoldus Mermannius) bad for their Apoſtle and firſt Biſhopp of their faith in Chriſt, S. Manſuetus a diſciple of S. Peter the Apoſtle, the fellowe of S. Clement, a Scot by birth. An other citinge alſoe for Authors Antonius Democarez, and Petrus de Natalibus, ſaith. (Guliel. Eiſeng. centenar. 1. part. 1. dist. 3. pag. 56. Petrus de Natal. l. 11. c. vlt. Anton. Monchiacen. Democh. l. 2. de Miſſ. contr. Caluin. c. 33.) S. Manſuetus, natione Scotus, ex nobili prognatus familia Simonis Barion
                                 •…
                              
                              
Apoſtolorum Coryphaei diſcipulus, ſocius B. Clementis Epiſcopi Mettenſis, à Petro Leucorum in vrbe Tullenſi primus Antistes conſecratus eſt anno Christi 49. Tiberio Claudio Caeſare Auguſto. In the 49. yeare of Chriſt in the Empire of Claudius S. Manſuetus a Scot by contry, borne of a noble family, diſciple of S Peter cheife of the Apoſtles, companiō of S. Clement Biſhop of Metz, was By Peter conſecrated the firſt Biſhop in the citie of Tullum.
                        Mermennius, before cited ſaith, (in Theatro conuerſ. gentium.) that Saint Clement whoſe companion this our contrye man Saint Manſuetus was, was Biſhop of Metz in, or about the 40. yeare of Christ, in the 
                                 •…
                              yme of Caius Caligula Emperor: Metenſibus fidei Religioniſque Antistes fuit S. Clemens Romanus, anno & quod excurrit 40. Caio Galigula Imperatore, S. Petro pontifice maximo. But to admitt, that S. Manſuetus was not made Biſhop by S. Peter vntill the 49. yeare of Chriſt, and was noe Biſhop, but an aſſiſtant of S. Clement, at his firſt ſendeing by S. Peter of him to Metz, yett to haue a Biſhop of our nation, and conſecrated and ſent to forreyne parts by the cheife Apoſtle, is an

inuincible argument, that both S. Peter was the firſt founder and father of the Brittans birth and life in Chriſt, diſpoſed of all ſpirituall affaires here, longe before the cominge of any other Apoſtle, either into this kingedome or part of the world to conuert it, and left at that time diuers Biſhops in this contrie, or fitt for that moſte holy order: otherwiſe hee would not haue ſent S. Manſuetus of this contrie forth of Britanie, to execute that high dignitie in a ſtraunge nation, ſuch as Lorrayne, where Tullum is, then was, and ſtill is, to this Iland. And this I may more boldly write, by a conſequent and concluded leaue, and warrant from our Proteſtant Biſhops, and other ſuch Antiquaries, whoe in their greate Theater of Britanie giue vs diuers graunts, and Rules to leade vs, both to ſoe tymely a beeing of Saint Peter in this kingedome, & his diſciples preaching here, & both claiming & exerciſing ſuch powerable iuriſdiction and authoritie here, as I haue related from others. Firſt they write in theſe words. (Theater of greate Britanie lib. 6. cap. 9. §. 5)
                        
                           If Peter were here at all (which they graunted and is demonſtrated by them before)

it was before euer he went to Rome, and the ghoſpell was preached here, before it was in Rome, if Peter were the firſt, as ſome hold, that preached there, both which may bee more probable. Againe thus they write (§ 7.) It hath paſſed with allowance amonge the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when Claudius began to banniſh and perſecute the Chriſtians in Rome (which they think to bee before this time of S. Manſuetus beeing Biſhop of Tullum) many Romans and Britans beeing conuerted to the faith, fled thence into theſe remote parts of the earth where they might & did, more freely enioy the libertie of their profeſſions. And from this Sanctuarie of ſaluation, the ſad lamenting Lady Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plantius, the firſt Lord lieutenant of Britanie brought that Religion, whereof ſhe was accuſed and ſtood indited vppon life and deathe, which was noe other then the Chriſtian
profeſſion. And to interpret themſelues more clearlye where (as they hould) this greate Lady the Lord Lieutenants wife was conuerted, thus they ſett downe their marginall direction concerning this matter.

                           Aulus Plantius his wife became a chriſtian in Britanie.
                        
                        Now to aſſure vs how ſoone it was, that S. Peter and his diſciples had made ſoe happie an entrance, and wrought ſoe glorious effects in this our kingdome, theſe very Proteſtants tell vs. That Aulus Plantius was ſent hither out of germany, with an army the ſecond yeare of Claudius, which was (as ſome Proteſtants write) in the 44. yeare of Chriſt, by others the 45. and ſtayed here but a ſhort time, returninge to Rome and triumphing there, for his victories ouer the Britans, in the yeare of Chriſt 49. and then in the yeare 50. Publius Oſtorius Scapula was Propraetor here. (Theater ſupr. lib. 6. c. 6. pag. 193. Protestants in Festis Regum an. Dom. 44. Claudij 3. Stowe and Howes hiſtor. an. D. 45) By which accompt of theſe Proteſtants themſelues, this lamentinge Lady Pomponia Graemia, by them here conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, and all her chriſtian company, as chaunceth in ſuch caſes at ſoe greate parſonadges conuerſion, and many other chriſtians of the Britans, which they ſay were then conuerted by thoſe diſciples of S. Peter, or by himſelfe, (noe others then beeing here) muſt needes

bee conuerted before, or in the 49 yeare of the Incarnation of our Sauiour, in which as I proued before, our contryman S. Manſuetus, was ordeyned Biſhop of Tullum by S. Peter, which was 14. yeares before the cominge of S Ioſeph of Aramathia hither, by all antiquities, and diuers by the ſcriptures themſelues, before S. Paul came to Rome or any weſterne nation.
                        And if wee may beleeue the Proteſtant writers of the Theater, they make the coming of S. Paul to Rome, longe after, writing in theſe wordes. (Theater of greate Britanie ſupr. l. 6. §. 7.) Paule came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero. When both by them and the ſcriptures, hee was a priſoner two yeares, and could not depart from Rome. Which maketh theſe Proteſtants reckoning 16. or 17. yeares after the conuerſion of ſoe many in Britanie, and conſecration of S. Manſuetus that holy Biſhop by S. Peter. And to proue further vnto vs, not onely that theſe firſt chriſtians of Britany were conuerted by S. Peter, but that others of this our nation, were euen at this time, conſecrated preiſts, and Biſhops alſoe by S. Peter, theſe Proteſtant Biſhops and others, hauing immediatly

ſpoken before of the conuerſion of Lady Pomponia Graecina herein Britany in or before the 49. yeare of Chriſt, they proceede in theſe wordes. (Theater of the Empire of great Britanie l. 6.8.9. B. Rhenan. in history
                              of Germany. Pantaleon.) And much about theſe times, as B. Rhenanus in his hiſtory of Germany, Pantaleon, and others doe reporte, one Suetonius a noble mans ſonne in Britanie, conuerted to the faith by the firſt planters of the ghoſpell in this Iland, and after his Baptiſme called Beatus, was ſent by the bretheren from hence, vnto Rome to bee better inſtructed, and further directed by Saint Peter himſelfe. And returninge through Suitcerland, found ſuch willingnes and flockinge of the people to heare, and receaue the doctrine of Chriſt, that hee there ſtayed, and built an oratory not far from the bake Thun, & neare the Towne called Vnderfewen, where in preachinge and prayers, hee employed his time to the day of his death, which happened in the yeare of grace 110.
                        
                        Hitherto the words of our engliſh Proteſtants, of this glorious and renowned man, far exceeding that which they giue him here:

for as their Author Henricus Pantaleon. (de viris Illuſtr. Germaniae part. 1 p. 114 a German Proteſtant writeth plainely of him, that hee was, the Apostle of Heluetians. S. Beatus Heluetiorum Apostolus. Which Title and name none but puritans of anie Religion will giue to any but Biſhops, and none but ſuch which onely haue power to conſecrate preiſts, (without which a true church cannot bee) can either bee, or truely called their Apoſtle. And that this holy Biſhop of Britanie though hee ſtaied moſt in Heluetia, yet that hee was principally ſent to bee a Biſhopp in Britanie by Saint Peter, it is euident by theſe Proteſtants before, teſtifyinge that hee was returning into Britanie, and ſoe cheifely directed by Saint Peter: (Pantal. ſupra Stamph. lib. 7. de Sanct.) Which Pantaleon with Stamphius and others doe more plainely witneſſe, ſaying. S. Beatus ille nobilibus parentibus natus ex Britannia, in patriam rediens &c. S. Beatus borne of noble parents in Britanie, returninge into his contry: and adding of him, omnia bona pauperibus diſtribuit: hee diſtributed all his goods to the pore: muſt needes bee in Britanie, where of theſe his goods he was to

make diſtributor of them. And theſe Germā hiſtorians tel vs, that hee had an other companion ſent and directed with him, from Rome by S. Peter or his authoritie there, and beeinge alſoe a Britaine returned hither, beeing conſecrated Preiſt or Biſhop by the ſame authoritie, and at the ſame time.
                        So that wee ſee by theſe Proteſtants themſelues, that ſoe longe as S. Peter liued, the Biſhops and Preiſts of Britanie were conſecrated by him in this contry, and in his abſence hence went vnto Rome for their conſecration, and to bee directed by him. This other companion of S. Beatus, borne in this kingdome, and conſecrated at Rome by S. Peter, and returninge hither, where for any thinge wee reade otherwiſe in hiſtories, hee continued in preaching all his life, and died here, ſome Germane writers haue named Achates. (Anonymus apud Beat. Rhenan. de Reb. German. l. 3. pag. 172. Rhen. ſupr.) Whether that was his true name or noe, it is not materiall to my purpoſe to queſtion here: the hiſtorie it ſelfe in germany beeing ſoe certainely and generally receaued, that it is, and aunciently was published, printed, and painted in their churches there. Hac

hiſtoria non ſolum picta eſt in templis ac ſcripta, ſed etiam typis expreſſa: of this hiſtorie mention is made, eſpecially of S. Beatus in the Romane Martyrologe, S. Beda, Vſuardus, Molanus, Gulielmus Eiſengrenius, the Antiquities of Heluetia, and expreſſely in the auncient monuments of the church of Conſtance, and others. (Martyrolog. Rom. 9. die Maij. Beda Vſuard. & Mol. ab. Guliel. Eiſ. centur. 2. part. 5. Annal. Helu Momment. Eccle-Conſtant. Baron annot. in Mart. Rom. 9. Maij.) neyther can wee thinke that theſe two holy Biſhops or preiſts of this kingedome of our Britanie were ſingular in this, but that wee had more ſo conſecrated, and directed from Rome beſides them, and needed not Biſhops and paſtors here, otherwiſe S. Beatus would not haue ſtayed moſte of his time in Heluetia, forth of his contry, nor S. Peter his conſercator and director, & our Apoſtle by theſe Proteſtants before, giuen allowāce vnto it.
                        Neyther had S. Beatus beene ſent (the words of our Proteſtants and Pantaleon alſoe) by the brethren from hence vnto Rome to bee better inſtructed and further directed by S. Peter himſelfe. (Theater, and Pantal. ſupr.)
                           
But that the Brethren and Chriſtians here depended of Saint Peter, and accompted it both their dutie, and honor to this nation, to haue their ſpirituall Guides, Biſhops, and Preiſts conſecrated and directed by him, and his Apoſtolicque ſupreame power and commaunde, in Religious thinges.
                        Now lett vs returne to S. Peters beeinge here in Britanie; whereof I haue ſpoken before, how to ſupply all ſpiritual wants of this kingedome, and founde our church, in Britannia longe tempore fuit moratus, he ſtayed in Britanie a longe time, as the greeke antiquities remembred vnto vs by our Proteſtāts haue told vs: and to expreſſe his greate lo
                              •…
                           e, & care, to this & other weſtern natiōs, more particularly comended to his chardge, this longe time was ſoe longe, and his loue to vs ſo greate, that as both S. Simō Metaphraſtes, and Euſebius Pamphili in ſome booke not now, but in the time of Metaphraſtes extāt, and by him conſtantly cited, ſay: S. Peter ſtayed at Rome, and in Britanie, and the cities of the west, three and twentie yeares. Euſebius Pamphili dicit Petrum viginti tres annos trāſeg
                                 •…
                              ſſe Romae, & in Britannia, & in ciuitatibus quae ſunt in occidente. (Simon Metaphrastes

die 29. Iunij. Euſebius Pamph. apud eund. ſupr. Surius 29. Iunij.) allotinge onely as it ſeemeth the reſt of the 25. yeares which is commonlie ſaid, the time of his beeing at Rome and theſe parts, to his Iorney in the eaſt, at the time of the migration of the B. Virgin our Lady forth of this world. Which is confirmed by ſome of our Proteſtant antiquaries of England in theſe words. This yeare 70. beinge the fourteenth yeare of Nero Baſſus and Tuſcus, beeing then Romane Conſuls, the holy Apostle S. Peter hauinge accompliſhed his preachinge, in the west parts, returned to Rome, where hee preached agayne, as hee did before. (Ioh. Stow and Ed. Howes hiſtor. titul. Romans in Iulius Agricola.)
                        
                        And before his departure hence, as I haue allready remembred, beſides S. Manſuetus, S. Beatus and ſuch as hee conſecrated Biſhops of our nation in forreyn places, or for them out of Britanie, hee ordeyned here, and for this kingedome Biſhops, Preiſts & Deacons. Apud Britannos Epiſcopos, presbyteros & diaconos ordinauit. Who theſe Biſhops in particular were, I reade noe man preciſely to ſett them downe, yett if wee will followe the antiquities of Glaſtenbury

ſaying that S. Ioſophe the ſonne of S. Ioſeph of Aramathia was a Biſhop, as both Catholicks and Proteſtants allowe them in other things: I craue pardon probably to write, that he was one of them which S. Peter conſecrated here.
                        Firſt, becauſe as is graunted, before S. Ariſtobulus our Archbiſhop, vnto whom S. Ioſeph, whether Biſhop or noe, was ſubiect, was ordeyned by S. Peter. Secondly becauſe S. Ioſeph is named a Biſhop, and yet in probable iudgmēt none when hee came hither, with his Father S. Ioſeph, for by the ſame and all other antiquities and hiſtories of that matter, S. Ioſeph his Father noe Biſhop, was the Abbot or Superior of all that company, yet neither Catholick nor Proteſtant will eaſily inſtance that Biſhops, by order and Sacrament Superiors, were or might bee Inferiors or ſubiects to any of Inferior degree.
                        Secondlie there is noe poſſibilitie by any authoritie, that I finde at all, to ſurmiſe that S. Ioſeph was a Biſhop before his cominge hither, but the wordes of the antiquitie which ſay of him: that Ieſus conſecrated him Bishop before in the citie Sarath: Quem Dominus Ieſus prius in ciuitate Sarath, in Epiſcopum

conſecrauit. (Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Ioſeph ab Aramathia.) Which noe Proteſtant will or may by their Religion ſay, was a true and reall conſecration, but rather propheticall, what ſhould bee done, by orderly conſecration after. For this viſion was longe after Chriſts Aſcenſion into heauen, where all Proteſtants of England euer ſince, impriſon him to keepe him from being preſent in the B. Sacrament of the altar.
                        Thirdlie they and all others generally denie ſuch extraordinary proceedings, where an ordinary and vniuerſall order, as in this caſe is appointed by Chriſt himſelfe. Wherfore S. Paul himſelfe that veſſell of Election, and extraordinary Apoſtle, though miraculouſly conuerted, choſen, and called, yett bee neither was actually a chriſtian without externall baptiſme, nor a Biſhop but by Impoſition of hands, and ordinary conſecration. And wee reade of S. Sampſon, our holy Archbiſhop of yorke, that before hee was a Biſhop, S. Peter, S. Iames, and S. Iohn appeared vnto him ſaying: (Io. Capgrau. in S. Sampſone Epiſc. & Confeſſore.) Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath choſen thee for a Bishop, and ſent vs to conſecrate thee: whom when they had

conſecrated with benediction, they diſappeared out of his ſight. Nocte quadam vidit ſe denſiſsimis candidatorum turmis circundari: & tres Epiſcopos veſtibus aureis ornatos, cum illo eccleſiam ingredientes orare, cuius vnus illorum ab ipſo inquiſitus, qui eſſet, ait. Ego ſum Petrus Christi Apostolus, & hic frater Domini Iacobus, & Euangelista Ioannes. Dominus Ieſus Chriſtus te ſibi in praeſulem elegit, & te conſecrare nos miſit. Quē cùm benedictione conſecraſſent, ab eius oculis elapſiſunt. And yett neither S. Sampſon nor any other tooke this for a reall conſecration, but onely figuratiue of that which was after to bee done by the holie externall rite of the church of Chriſt; vntill as wee reade in the ſame hiſtory, our holy Archbiſhop S. Dubricius vpon the apparition and meſſage of an Angell did truely and really, externally conſecrate him a Biſhop: nec multo post Angelus Domini beato Dubricio apparens, Sampſonem ordinari Epiſcopum praecepit. (Capgr. ſupr.) Soe I might exemplifie in many ſuch caſes, only propheticall and figuratiue, what ſhould afterward bee done, and not what was then effected.
                        Therfore if S. Ioſeph was a Biſhop as that antiquitie perſuadeth, by that figuratiue viſion,

& not cōſecrated before hee came into Britanie, as is ſhewed before, & wee reade of no other which at that time made, & conſecrated Biſhops but S Peter, I may probably at the leaſte affirme, that S. Ioſephe was one of them which S. Peter at his departure hēce, (S. Ioſephe beeing certainely here at that time) was conſecrated Biſhop by Saint Peter here in Britanie. And when I finde both Catholicks and Proteſtants affirme, (Martyrol. Angl. 7. die Februarij. Drekin Almin. an. 1620. 7. Feb. with others.) that S. Angulus was our Biſhop of London & martyr, and yet noe hiſtoriā, Catholick or Proteſtāt, putteth him in the nūber of them which were Biſhops there after the time of K. Lucius, but quite leaue him out of that catalogue, as appeareth by our Proteſtants Harriſon, Godwyne, Stowe & others which with al diligēce they could, haue collected the auncient Biſhops of London, I muſt needs drawe him to an higher time then that of kinge Lucius was, before which noe conſecration of Biſhops in Britany was, or is ſo memorable as this by S. Peter the Apoſtle (Harriſ. de ſcript. of Brit Godw. Catalog. of Biſhop in London 1. Stowe and Howe. l. hiſt. Lucius Iocelin of Furnes l. de Epiſc. Brit.
                        
                        
                           And to end here the Relation of S. Peters proceedings in Britanie, wee haue clearly, deduced, with the allowance of our beſt Engliſh Proteſtant Antiquaries, and other Authors by them approued; That S. Peter Prince of the Apoſtles, was our firſt Father in Chriſt, and renowned Apoſtle, both immediately by himſelfe, and his holy diſciples; That hee performed here all cheife and eminent paſtorall duties and offices, when our Emperors with our Lieutenants here, as alſo all our Kings were pagan Infidels; That hee ordeyned and conſecrated for vs Biſhops, preiſts, and other clergie men, and founded churches to the honor & Religion of Chriſt, and the honor of his bleſſed Mother S. Mary the Virgin, (few other chriſtian Saints then deceaſed) as that of Glaſtenbury not ſoe dedicated without his approbation, beeing cheife in ſuch affaires. Hee conſecrated other Britans out of this nation, exemptinge them from the pagan ſeruice of thoſe ſuch remembred princes, hee ſent them by authoritie to preach the ghoſpell, in other contries, hee or his diſciples conuerted Pomponia Graecina the Lord Lieutenants wife of Britanie, as theſe Proteſtants haue proued, and

many in the like caſe, their husbands continuing in their infidelitie, and contradiction, and many husbands and children, the wiues and parents not allowinge, as ſeruants in reſpect of their Lords and maſters, and Subiects in regard of ſoueraignes.
                        I, a Catholick Preiſt, now demaund of the beſt learned Proteſtāts Biſhops of England, whether theſe proceedings and prerogatiues in that moſte glorious Apoſtle, and his worthie diſciples, our firſt Maſters in Chriſt, were not as greate and ample, as the renowned Preiſts and Catholicks of this kingedome now attribute, and giue to the Popes of Rome his Apoſtolicke Succeſſors? Wee whoe haue reade moſte, and ſuffered much for this cauſe, cannot ſee the difference, or finde inſtance of diſparitie, except in number of parſons, leſſe or greater quantities of groundes, and ſome improportions in ſuch thinges, which make noe eſſentiall diuerſitie, for otherwiſe wee haue beene told by the beſt learned Proteſtants with others, that S. Peter and his diſciples did manifeſtlie and directly transfer and chaunge thoſe parſons, places, and propertie of thinges of this our Britanie from a temporall, to al ſpirituall

vſe, from the commande (except in temporall dutie) of the preſent Emperors, Lieutenants, Kings and Soueraignes alienated from Chriſtiā Religion, to the cōmande of Chriſt, his Religion, our moſte holy Apoſtle and his diſciples, by his authoritie ſoe directinge.
                     
                     
                        
                           THE III. CHAPTER. How in the reſt of this first Hundred yeares of Chriſt after Saint Peter, The Apostolicke See of Rome, still continued and exerciſed this ſupreame ſpirituall power in Britanie.
                        IT is a queſtion, not onely amonge Catholicks (but ſome Proteſtants alſo) whether S. Linus & Cletus were Popes after S. Peter, or onely Suffragan Biſhops, as ſoe ordeyned by him at the firſt. And Pope Leo the ſecond an holy Saint, with there nowned of our Hiſtorians to omitt others, S. Marianus & Florentius Wigornienſis, ſay plainely: Si Petrus Apostolorum princeps adiutoris ſibi aſciuit Linum & Cletum, non tamen pontificij potestatem cis tradidit, ſed Clementi ſucceſſori ſuo. If Peter

Prince of the Apoſtles, did take Linus and Cletus to bee his Adiutors, yett hee gaue not them the Papall power, but to Clement his ſucceſſor. And Linus and Cletus did nothinge by their owne Lawes and power as popes, but only ſoe much as was commaunded them by S. Peter. (S. Leo 2. in epist. decretal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. Florent. Wigor. in Siluan. & Otho Conſul. Robert. Barns in vit. Port. Rom. in Linum.) Therfore to omitt doubtfull and vncertaine thinges, and to come next to S. Clement whoe moſte certainely by all Cathololicks and Proteſtants was Pope of Rome nominated by S. Peter: (though Baronius and others whom he alleageth are of opinion that S. Clement yeelded his right, and did not exerciſe the office of ſupreame paſtour til after Linus and Cletus, yet who in S. Peters life him were his Coadiutors & after his death his ſucceſſors before S. Clemēt, (to 1. Annal. p. 742.743.744.745.) before any other: by this Pope, Doctors were ſent into the west (as our Proteſtants tell vs (Margin. annot. vppon Matth. Weſtin. an. 94. Matth. Weſtm ſupr.) in greate numbers, as S. Denis, Nicaſius, Taurinus, Trophimus, Paulus Narbonenſis, Saturninus, Martialis, Gratianus,
                           
Iulianus, Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus all Biſhops, & they add S. Regulus. Whome although they ſetle thē with their Biſhopricks in Fraunce, yett it proueth the power & ſpirituall commaund of that holy pope, to haue extended it ſelfe aſwell to this kingdome, one and the ſame reaſon beeing for, and againſt them both.
                        But wee finde diuers Authorities both late and auncient to induce vs, to conſent that ſome of theſe named holy Biſhops, ſent at this time, by S. Clement, were ſent by him into this kingdome of Britanie, namely S. Taurinus and S. Nicaſius: and that S. Taurinus was Archbiſhop or Biſhop of yorke. Amonge others, William Harriſon a Proteſtant hiſtorian. (In deſcript. of Britanie. pag. 23. Chronolog. ibid. an. 141.) produceth an Antiquitie that ſoe affirmeth: whereuppon hee writeth in this maner: Whether Taurinus Bishop ouer the congregation at yorke, were one of the nyne ſchollers of Grantha Cambridge ſpoken of in the chronicles of Burton, I doe not certainely finde. But certayne it is, that Walterus Rollewink in his hiſtory faſciculus temporum. (an. 94.) ſaith. S. Taurinus was Epiſcopus Eboracenſis, Bishop of yorke, which is here

in Britanie: and ſoe not Ebroicenſis in Fraunce, where the ſame or an other of that name was Biſhop about the ſame time And an other late writer. (Harris Theatrum. l. 1.) in his manuſcript hiſtory, alleadging both S. Antoninus and diuers others, ſaith: diuers haue written that both S. Nicaſius and Taurinus were here in Britanie, and for S. Taurinus, S. Antoninus ſaith, that S. Taurinus: filiam Lucij Regis Britanniae à morte ſuſcitauit. S. Taurinus did raiſe from death the daughter of Lucius, Kinge of Britanie. (S. Antonin. hist. part. 1. titul. 6. cap.) Which directly proueth, that S. Taurinus was here in out Britanie, & this Kinge Lucius for certaine, was eyther hee that liued to receaue the faith of Chriſt publickly in the time of Pope Eleutherius, beginning his reigne in the yeare of Chriſt 124 (Matt. Westm. an. 124.) or Lucius Antenous the Romane praefect in Britanie called there vppon. Rex Britanniae, Kinge of Britanie, as well hee might, preſcribinge lawes vnto vs in Britanie as Hector Boethius. (Scetor. hiſt. l. 5. fol. 76.77.78.) with others wittneſſe: and was reſident at yorke in the time of the Emperor Adrian, when and where S. Taurinus is ſuppoſed to haue beene Biſhop

and wrought this miracle. For S. Anacaſius beeing ſent hither by S. Clement, they which teach ſoe. (Harris ſupr.) produce the french hiſtories that hee preached to the Britans, which in that time were onely thoſe of this kingdome, the little Britanie in Fraunce then and longe after named Armorica, and not Britannia.
                        And yett to omitt others, Arnoldus Mermannus in his Theater of the conuerſion of nations, (§. Britones.) ſaith, that amonge other people, S. Anacaſius beeing delegated thither an Apoſtle by S. Clement, did instruct and informe in the faith the Britans, and all the waste of the Ocean Sea. Britones, Normandos, Rhotomagenſes, Picardos, omnemque Maris Oceani tractum instruxit, formauitque fide S. Nicaſius à S. Clemente illuc Apostolus delegatus. And to putt vs out of doubt, that S. Clement did take vppon him the ſpirituall chardge of this our Britanie, as well as of Fraunce and other places, the ſame Author from others teſtifieth, that our Archbiſhop S Ariſtobulus whoe as Eiſingrenius ſaith, had beene a Biſhop from anno Chriſti the 39 the 39 yeare of Chriſt, was yett our Apoſtle in Britanie aliue in the yeare of

Chriſt 99. S. Clement then Pope. Et quod excurrit 99. Clemente Pontifice Maximo, Domitiano Imperatore. (Guliel. Eiſ
                                 •…
                              ng. centen. 1. part. 1. diſt. 7. fol. 67. Arnold. Mermman. Theater conuerſ. gent. in Albione) And wee haue vett in England an old manuſcript, a ſhort hiſtoricall relation. (M. S. antiq. pr. Stores in Exordium) Of the publicke Maſſe, and church ſeruice, of the Britans, and French men, from the Apoſtles time, written before the vnion of the Britans with S. Auguſtines miſſion, by S. Gregorie, and written by a Brittiſh Author, teſtifying that the publicke church ſeruice and Maſſe, both of the french and Brittans was carried vp to Rome to S. Clement, to bee examined and approued by him then Pope, which hee accordingly performed by his papall power, & this Maſſe was euer after vſed both in Fraū
                           ce, and this our kingedome of Britanie.
                        Soe that moſte euident it is, by thoſe few Antiquities left vnto vs, that in the time of S. Clement whoe was Pope in the later end of the firſt, & beginninge of the ſecond hundred yeare of Chriſt, this our church of Britanie was wholly in ſpiritual thinges, dependant and ſubordinate to the church and

Popes of Rome: and thus much of the firſt age and hundred yeare, from the birth of Chriſt. When here and of this nation there were yett liuinge many Biſhops conſecrated by S. Peter, and the Romane Papall authoritie: S. Aristobulus, Manſuetus, Beatus, and probably S. Ioſephe, Taurinus, Nicaſius, Angulus, and others: for to add to the former, S. Anacletus ſaith in his Epiſtle, approued by our Proteſtants of England, our contryman S. Marianus and others. (Rob. Barns in vita pont. Rom. in Anacl. Mar. Scot. l. 2. de aetat. 6. col. 250. Florent. Wigorn. in Domit.) that the prouinces where Archbiſhops were, were diuided by the Apostles and S. Clement his predeceſſor, ab Apoſtolis & Beato Clemente praeceſſore noſtro, ipſa Prouincia diuiſio renouata est. (Some do make Clitus and Anaclitus alone, and make him praedeceſſour to S. Clement ſee. Baro. to. 1.) Therefore moſt euident it is that S. Clement tooke vppon him and exerciſed, this ſupreame Papall and ſpirituall power in this kingedome.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SECOND CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE.
                     
                        
                           THE IV. CHAPTER. Shewing by theſe Proteſtants, how the popes of Rome in this ſecond Century of yeares claymed, had, and exerciſed ſupreame ſpirituall Iuriſdiction and power in Britanie.
                        TO begin with the ſecond age, and hundred yeare, Saint and Pope Anacletus offereth him ſelfe firſt, beeing the next and immediate Succeſſor to S. Clement, and as hee himſelfe wittneſſeth. (Epiſt. decretal. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 250. Florentius Wigorn. in Domitiano. Matth. Westin. an. 102.) Both inſtructed, and taught and made preist by S. Peter cheife of the Apoſtles: vt à beato Petro principe ſumus instructi, à quo & presbyter ſum ordinatus. This holy Pope S. Peters diſciple beginning his papacy in the 102. yeare of Chriſt as our Proteſtants of England enforme vs. (Rob. Barns. in vit. pontif. Rom. in Anacleto. Ormerod. pict. of Pap. pag. 78.) Thought that the primacy ouer all churches

was graūted to the church of Rome by our Lord himſelfe, and ouer all Christian people. Ab ipſo Domino primatum Romanae Eccleſiae ſuper omnes Eccleſias, vniuerſumque Christiani nomine populum conceſſum eſſe aſſeruit. And they tell vs further, how according to this ſupreamacie graunted by Chriſt to the Sea of Rome, ouer all churches and Chriſtian people, hee executed the ſame in makinge his general decrees, bindinge all Biſhops, Prieſts and others, both concerninge the moſt bleſſed ſacrifice of the Maſſe, and Iuriſdiction.
                        Amonge other thinges, to ſpeake in Proteſtant words. (Rob. Barns ſupra.) Epiſcopos officio pares, ordine duplici distinxit: eos primates, ſiue patriarchas appellari voluit, qui in illis ciuitatibus praeeſsent, in quibus olim primarij Flamines ſederunt: in alijs metropolitanis vrbibus, Epiſcopos Metropolitanos vel Archiepiſcopos nominandos eſſe cenſuit. Hee diſtinguiſhed Biſhops equall in order, into two degrees: cauſinge them to bee named Primates, or Patriarkes, which ruled in thoſe cities, in which of olde the Archflamens did ſitt: in other Metropolitane cities, hee would haue them named Metropolitans

or Archbiſhops, and hee calleth this not his owne decree, but the decree of S. Clement his predeceſſor, and Saint Peter alſoe. (Anacl. ſupr. & apud Mar. Scot. & Flor. Wigorn. ſupr.) And ſetteth downe in a certayne Tome, what cytes were to haue primates, both accordinge to his owne, S. Clements, and the Apoſtles order.
                        And this decree of Sainct Anacletus, in this higheſt queſtion of Iuriſdiction, was ſoe vniuerſall and generall in it ſelfe, ſoe embraced of all, and includinge, that as not onely Giraldus Cambrenſis, and auncient authorities of this nation, (Lib. 2. de Iure Metropol. eccleſ. Meneuen. ad Innocent. 3.) but the cheife Proteſtant Antiquaries themſelues, as Mathew Parker the firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterburie, (Lib. antiquit. Britannic. pag. 24.) and Syr Iohn Priſe, (Io. Priſ. defenſ. histor. Britan. pag. 73.) doe plainelie acknowledge, that by that Tome of Saint Anacletus Pope, it was conteyned and decreed, how manie and which were the places throughout all this Iland euen as it conteyned England, Scotland, and Wales. And thereupon this Proteſtant Archbiſhopp, doth in expreſſe

termes call the diuiſion of Britanie in that reſpect: Ex Anacleto huius Inſulae diuiſionem. The diuiſion of this Iland according to the decree of Pope Anacletus: And though this diuiſion was not actually made at that time for ſetting Archbiſhops in thoſe prouinces at that time, but was deferred vntill in after when the faith was recreaued here in more publicke maner, when perſecution ceaſed, or was mitigated; yett by theſe authorities there is noe doubt, but this holy Pope both claymed, and exerciſed the ſame higheſt ſpirituall Iuriſdiction, as well in this, as all other nations, that decree beeing generall, and without limitation for all nations, as it is allowed by theſe Proteſtants, and making all prouinces in the knowne world, ſubſtitute and ſubordinate to the church of Rome in ſuch affaires, and none exempted.
                        And as this decree alone will witnes, hee ſent as opportunitie and the cauſe required, Biſhops and preiſts into other contries, ſoe he did the like to this, to encreaſe and continue that happy buildinge, which his predeceſſors had founded here before. Soe wee muſt ſay of his immediate Succeſſor Saint Euariſtus, except wee will reiect the authoritie

of one, of our moſte auntient and approued hiſtorians, Nennius, who in his manuſcript auntient hiſtory, written if wee may beleeue the Proteſtant Biſhop Bale. (l. de ſcriptor. cent. 1. in Nennio.) A thowſand yeares ſince, confidently affirmeth that, Britannicus Rex, A kinge of Britanie receaued an ambaſſadge from Euariſtus Pope of Rome, to receaue the faith of Christ, miſſa legatione à Papae Romano Euariſto; (Mennius hist. M. S.) who yett ſayth with others, that the generall cō
                           uerſion of this land, was not vntill the yeare of Chriſt 167. others making it later.
                        This holy Pope began his papacie in the yeare 111. and liued therein vntil 120. before which time our kinge Coillus, brought vp at Rome, was ſoe well diſpoſed to Chriſtian Religion, that as our Proteſtants and the antiquities of Glaſtenbury tell vs, hee confirmed the twelue hides of land to the religious Eremitage of Glaſtenbury. (Antiquitat. glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Ioſeph and others.) And therefore cominge from Rome into Britanie to bee kinge (his Father kinge Marius beeinge deade) wee cannot thinke but as many of our contrimen his ſubiects then at Rome, were Chriſtians, and in ſoe

greate number, that in one Brittiſh houſe there, the houſe of S. Claudia our Britiſh Lady, and children after her, there were at, or ſoone after this time, in the time of Pope Pius the firſt, 96. chriſtians: (Act. 5 Pudentianae Breuiar. Rom. in vit. eius 19. Maij.) So many of them, and of other nations alſo, and cleargie men, were ſent hither by the Pope of Rome at that time, which many of our Proteſtant hiſtorians will confirme, aſſuringe, that both now and at all times vntill the conuerſion of kinge Lucius, there were many chriſtians which came from Rome, liuinge in this kingdome. (Godwyn Conuerſ. of Britanie pag. Caius l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. Will. Harriſon. deſcript. of Brit. Holinsh. hiſt. of Engl.) Soe doe diuers auntient antiquities of the Annals of Burton, and others of forreine nations.
                        And touchinge the time of Pope Alexander the firſt, next ſucceſſor to S. Euariſtus, hee beinge made Pope in the yeare 120. and continuinge Biſhop of Rome by common opinion 8. yeares, and fiue moneths, in the fourth yeare of the papacie of this bleſſed Saint, as both Matthew of Weſtminſter. (Annal. Burton. an. 141. Catal. Epiſcop. Tungr.)

and the autient Table hanging in the church of S. Peter in Cornehil, in London, then builded in the time of kinge Lucius, wittneſſe, beeinge the 124. yeare of Chriſt. The yeare of our Lord God 124. Lucius was crowned kinge: ſoe the one, & the other ſaith: anno gratiae 124. Coillo Britonum Rege defuncto, Lucius filius eius regni diademate inſignitus eſt. In the yeare of grace 124. Coillus kinge of the Britans beeing deade, Lucius his ſonne was crowned king. Math· Westin. an. 124.
                        This kinge Lucius, although neither hee nor the kingdome were yett ſoe generally conuerted, yet well knowinge that many preachers had beene ſent hither from Rome, and diuers Brittans here were deſirous to embrace the faith of Chriſt, did not onely giue way vnto it, in this beginning of his Reigne, but except Albertus Krantzius a man well acquainted with our Brittiſh antiquities (as a Proteſtant antiquary witneſſeth) doth deceaue vs. (Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig. l. 1. Albert. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) Did write vnto S. Alexander the firſt, Pope of Rome to haue chriſtian Religion preached in this kingedome. Religionem Chriſti Lucius quondam Britanniae Rex, ab Alexandro primo

eius nominis ſummo pontifice, impetrauit in Inſula predicari. Lucius Kinge of Britanie did obteyne of Pope Alexander the firſt, to here Chriſtian Religion preached in that Iland. Which is confirmed by many Authorities, prouening vnto vs, that this Iland at, and immediately after that time, had diuers preachers of the faith of Chriſt, and among them ſome Biſhops, beſides thoſe I named before, to proue that wee had a continuall ſucceſſion of holy Biſhops from Rome, as theſe alſoe were, from our firſt chriſtianity.
                        And that wee had many preachers, and many by them conuerted, may appeare by that is acknowledged before from theſe Proteſtants: to which many of them add, & from antiquities, that many Schollers & Doctors of our Vniuerſities then were conuerted in the yeare 141. nyne in one place of Cambridge. In peruetustis Annalibus Burtonenſibus ſic lego. Anno Domini 141. hic baptizati ſunt nouem ex Doctoribus & Scholaribus Cantabrigiae. I doe reade (ſayth one) in very old Annals of Burtō thus. In the yeare of our Lord 141. here were baptized nyne of the Doctors & Schollers of Cambridge. (Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Cantab. pag. 95. Theater

of greate Brit. lib. 6. Harriſ. deſcript. of Brit.) Like to this haue many other Proteſtants: who aſſure vs, this ſucceſſion could not come from S. Ioſeph of Aramathia and his company, for a Proteſtāt Biſhop, according to the truth of hiſtories writeth: (Godwyn. conuerſ. of Brit. pag. 16. c. 3.) It ſeemeth that Ioſeph and his fellowes preuayled little by their preaching, and therefore gaue themſelues at last vnto a monasticall and ſolitary life in the Iland of Aualon.) And euen their memorie was ſoe much forgotten when kinge Lucius was conuerted, that as our beſt antiquities wee haue of that matter, tel vs, thoſe which S. Eleutherius ſent from Rome, found the beſt information of them at Rome, & their auncient howſe or church was foe deſolat, that it was become, Latibulū Ferarum, a den for wyld beaſts at their cominge hither. (Antiquit. Glaston. apud Capgrau. in S. Ioſeph Aramath. in S Patr.)
                        I finde in hiſtories no others, from whom wee haue the leaſte probabilitie to clayme a continuaunce in Religion, therefore it muſt needs bee from Rome, from whence alſoe wee had amonge theſe holy men, ſome Biſhops to continue a ſucceſſion from thence.

For although S. Beatus was but lately deade liuing vnto this yeare 110. it is not vnlikely but his companion was ſtill liuinge, and except there were twoe of that name, and in thoſe times and the ſame contrie, which no hiſtory doth remember, S. Manſuetus was yet a liue, and longe after vntil wee had manie other Biſhops ſent from Rome, or conſecrated here by the Romane authoritie, in the time of this Kinge Lucius. For wee reade in the Annals and Catalogue of the Archbiſhops of Treuers, neare vnto Tullum, that in the yeare 160. S. Manſuetus was Biſhop there: Manſuetus qui huic nomini & vocationi ſuae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optime reſpondit. The ſeuenth Archbiſhop of Treuers was Manſuetus, whoe by his godly life did excellently answeare this his name to bee meeke, and his vocation in the yeare of Christ 160. (Annales Arch. Treuer. Petrus Merſſaeus Catal. Arch. Treuer.) Which by noe hiſtorye I can finde, was or could bee any other, but Saint Manſuetus our contryman ſpoken of before, both the name, time, and place ſoe neare vnto Tullum, where hee was firſt Biſhopp alloweinge it, and nothinge impugninge it.
                        
                           And amonge thoſe Biſhops here in Britanie, and of our owne nation, I finde two named beinge both conſecrated and ſent hither by the Authoritie of the See of Rome: one of them S. Tymotheus ſonne to our holy contryman, Saint Marcellus, or by ſome Marcellinus a Britanne borne, and a Biſhop here, and after Biſhop of the Tungers, and laſtely, Archbiſhop of Treuers, both which preached here in the time of Kinge Lucius longe before his conuerſion, and at or before this time, and were inſtruments of his happy conuerſion, actually and parſonallye concurringe therto by miſſion and Authoritie from the Popes of Rome: of which I haue made more lardge and ample relation in other places: for this purpoſe ſoe many Authors here cited will ſuffice, both Catholicks and Proteſtants conſentinge that S. Tymothie and S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, preached here in the time of kinge Lucius and before his conuerſion. (Petrus de Natalib. lib. 1. cap. 24. Harris Tom. 2. Magdeb. centur 2. Annal. Eccleſ. Cur. Io Stumph. in Rhetia. Petrus Merſſaeus in catalog. Archiep· Treuer. in Archiep. 20. Anton. Democh. l. 2. de Miſſ. cont. Caluin. Gulielus. Eiſengren. centen. 2. part. 4.

                           distinct. 7. Petr. Merſſ. in Archiep. Treuer.)
                        And that this S. Tymothie could not bee Saint Tymothie Biſhop of Epheſus S. Pauls Scholler, to whome hee wrote the Epiſtles, whoe was martyred many yeares before Kinge Lucius was borne, and S. Oneſimus was his Succeſſor in S. Ignatius time as hee himſelfe is witneſſe: (Epiſt. ad Epheſ.) But onely S. Tymothie our bleſſed contryman by his mother S. Claudia, (Martyrol. Rom. die 20. Iunij) and a child baptized by the Apoſtles, and thereupon called their diſciple, whoe was owner of the houſe in Rome, where S. Peter by the Roman tradition firſt entertayned there, and of S. Tymothie the Lord thereof in his time named Thermae Timothinae, the Bathes of Tymotheus, (Act. 5. Iuſtini Philoſoph. Baron. annot. in 20. Iunij in S. Nouato.) which hee forſooke for the loue of God, and this his nation, ſoe ſoone, that by Pope Pius the firſt, martyred in the yeare 154. his ſaid houſe was cōſecrated a church, hee himſelfe beeing then in all probabilitie preaching in this Iland, as ſo many Authorities cited doe warrant.
                        The hiſtorie of S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, both to haue beene a Britane, a Biſhop,

and to haue preached here longe before S. Linus was conuerted, that hee perſuaded him to bee a Chriſtian, and after went into Germany, and returned from thence into Britanie againe, ſent with others from Pope Eleutherius to conuert kinge Lucius & this kingdome as they did, is an vndoubted veritie, acknowledged by all that write of that matter. And therefore our Proteſtāts of England freely graunt vs in theſe wordes.
Euen from the dayes of thoſe godlie men, whoe firſt taught the Britans the ghoſpell, there remayned amonge the ſame Britans, ſome Chriſtians which ceaſed not to teach and preach the word of God, moſt ſincerely vnto them: But yett noe kinge amongſt thē openly profeſſed that Religion, till at length this Lucius perceauinge not onely ſome of the Roman Lieutenants in Britanie, as Trebellius and Pertinax with others, to haue ſubmitted themſelues to that profeſſion, but alſoe the Emperor himſelfe to begin to bee
fauorable to them that profeſſed it. And then hee ſetteth downe how kinge Lucius ſent to Pope Eleutherius to bee inſtructed in, and receaue the faith of Chriſt: and in like maner is the Relatiō of other Proteſtāts.

(Holinsh. histor. of England lib. 4. cap. 19. Math. Park, Antiquit Britan. pag. 4.5. Ioh. Goſcelius in hiſtor. Manuſcript. Bal. l. 2. de actibus Pontif. in Gregor. 1. & l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in Auguſt Dirnoth. Godwyn Conuerſ. Powel annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. c. 1. Foxe to 2. Act. pag. 463. Fulke Anſ. to count Cath. pag. 40. Middlet. papiſt am pag. 202. Stowe. Holinsh. &c.
                        
                        Then if by theſe men there ſtil continued a ſucceſſion of true preachers in Britanie from the Apoſtles time. (Protestant Articl. of Religion. Bilſ. Whitgift, Barlow, Bridges, Downam, Hookeer, Couel & others against puritans.) Which the puclick Proteſtant Religion denieth to bee without true Biſhops to conſecrate ſuch preiſts and preachers: and the Romane Luietenants themſelues and chriſtians, and ſoe conſequently as the greatnes of their ſtate and neceſſitie of the church here required had Biſhops, and rather from Rome, beeing themſelues Romans; And I haue exemplified in ſoe many Biſhops conſecrated and ſent hither by S. Peter and his holy ſucceſſors Popes of Rome, and not any one Inſtance can bee giuen of any one Biſhop or preiſt in all this time, ſent or conſecrated by any others, wee muſt needes leaue

that prerogatiue to Rome, and honor to Britanie, to haue had the holy Biſhops and paſtors of this church from thence: And that Apoſtolicke See to haue ruled here in ſpirituall things, as theſe Proteſtants haue freely acknowledged in the holy Popes S. Anacletus, Euariſtus and S. Alexander allready. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pontific. in nominibus citat. Downam lib. 1. of Antichriſt. cap. 3. pag. 35.
                        And ſoe they teach, that al the following Popes vnto S. Eleutherius, to witt S. Sixtus the firſt, Teleſphorus, Higinius, Pius and Anicetus the immediate predeceſſor to Eleutherius, tooke vppon them generally the ſupreamacy and higheſt commanding power in all ſpirituall things, and all places without exception or limitation. S. Sixtus gaue authoritie to appeale to the Popes of Rome from all Biſhops. Ab Epiſcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi Ius dedit eccleſiasticis ministris. (Barnes ſupra in Sixto.) Saint. Teleſphorus preſcribed generally the faſt of Lent. (in Teleſphoro.) Publiſhed the maner or order of Maſſe, and made a decree as ſupreame Iudge, howe all ſuites and controuerſies ſhould be tryed, and decided. Saint Higinius made a lawe byndinge

all Biſhops & Metrapolitans, and the whole cleargie, (in Higinio) S. Pius dedicated the howle of our renowned contry womā S. Pudentiana in Rome, to bee a church, (in Pio) made general decrees for the holy ſacrifice of the Maſſe, binding all Prieſts & Biſhops. Declared it to bee ſacriledge in all people whomſoeuer, which cōuerted lāds or goods dedicated to Religion, to prophane vſes Appointed the age of virgins to bee conſecrated. Hee decreed that matters apperteyning to Religion ſhould, bee heard in prouinciall councells of Biſhops, reſeruinge the authoritie of the Pope of Rome and appeales to him. Quae ad Religionem ſpectant à ſuae Synodis audienda eſſe statuit, ſalua tamen pontificiae authoritate. (Idem in vit. Pont. in Aniceto.) S. Anicetus the next before S. Eleutherius, made or renewed the decree, how both Biſhops and Metropolitans were to bee ordeyned. That an Archbiſhop was to bee accuſed before the Pope of Rome. That noe Archbiſhops ſhould bee called primates, except that prerogatiue of name were graunted him from the Pope of Rome. Archiepiſcopos non primates appellandos, niſi iſta praerogatiua nomenclaturae ei à Ro
                              
                                 •…
                              ano Pontifice co
                                 •…
                              e deretur.
                        
                        
                           Wherfore theſe Popes beeing by all Proteſtants holy Saints, and Martyrs, and the church of Rome then by his maieſtie and al other learned men of the Proteſtant profeſſion, our mother church, the true churche, commandinge church, most high Apoſtolicque church, and theſe their decrees vniuerſal and generall comprehending all, and excluding none, either in Britanie, or any other nation, except wee will bee willfully headſtronge in diſobedience, wee muſt needs acknowledge, that this kingdome from S. Peters firſt preachinge here, vnto the generall conuerſion thereof in the time of Pope Eleutherius (of which ſufficiently in the next chapter) euer was, and did acknowledge it ſelfe ſubiect in ſpirituall thinges to the holy Apoſtolicke See of Rome. And this in particular alſoe proued by ſoe many auncient, and approued Authors, hiſtorians and others that entreate of this ſubiect, ſhewinge how often the Popes of Rome in theſe remembred dayes ſent preachers hither, and the Britans likewiſe acknowledginge euer, that See for the cheifeſt and ſupreame, ſent thither though ſoe far diſtant hence, to haue preachers and Inſtructors to bee

ſent hither by the higheſt papall power there.
                        I will inſiſt in Proteſtants relation for this buſines: They tell vs that S. Bede, the old chronicle of Lādaffe, Goceline in the life of S. Auguſtine cap. 31. historiae maioris, the old chronicle called Brutus, Ioannes Nauclerus, an old manuſcript hiſtory which the Proteſtāt Biſhop Godwyn ſaith hee had in latine, ſay that many preachers were ſent hither frō the Pope of Rome in the yeare of Chriſt 156. when S. Pius was Pope: and I haue read a very old manuſcript, teſtifyinge that king Lucius did in that yeare, ſend legats to the Pope of Rome to that purpoſe. An epiſtle written from the Pope of Rome to the kinge of Britanie, dated in the yeare 159. found amonge the old conſtitutions of this lande, and in the old chronicle called Brutus, which the Proteſtant Biſhop Bridges, ſaith hee had ſeene, ſaith there was the like ſendinge, in, or about that time. Mennius, as theſe men tell vs, affirmeth as much of the yeare 164. ſoe doth an other auncient chronicle, which Godwin citeth. William of Malmesbury hath the ſame, of the next yeare 165. S. Edwards lawes ſay

ſoe, of the yeare 167. Henry of Hardford hath the life of the yeare 169. Marianus Scotus publiſhed by our Proteſtāts, ſo writeth of the yeare 177. The Proteſtant Biſhopp Bale hath ſo of the yeare 179. Polydor Vergil the hiſtory of Rocheſter, Matthew of Weſtminſter, and Martinus Polonus by Proteſtāts, ſoe ſay of the yeare 188. Therefore to ſaue the creditt of theſe, and many others ſoe auncient, and allowed by Proteſtants, wee muſt needes by their leaue and allowance ſay alſoe, that this our kingedome in thoſe daies depended vppon the See of Rome in Religious affaires. And thus much of this matter before our generall conuerſion in the time of Kinge Lucius. (Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig. lib. 1. pag. 109.110.111. Godwin. conuerſ. of Britannie. p. 21.22. Holinsh. hiſt. of King. Lucius Theater of Brit. lib. 6. M. S. pr. glorioſi, ac Deo dilecti. in S. Dubritio. Matth. Westm. an. 154. Godwyn. Conuerſ. pa. 29.30. Stow hiſt. in Lucius. Caius ſupr. pag. 100. Godw. Conuerſ. pag. 29.20.22. Maſon booke of conſecrat. in Lucius. Will. Lambard. lib. de leg. Reg. fol. 130. pag. 2. Godwyn. Conuerſ. pag. 22.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           THE V. CHAPTER. How in the generall Conuerſion of this kingedome in the time of Kinge Lucius, all ſpirituall thinges were ordered, ſettled, and confirmed here, by the Popes Authoritie.
                        AT the time when our Kinge Lucius, & this kingedome was generally conuerted, there were, as theſe Proteſtants haue proued, or graunted before, diuers Biſhops and Preiſts in England, wee had many vniuerſities, as Cambrige, Stamford, Greekelade, Belliſium, Oxford, and others, as our Proteſtants contend, and diuers learned men in them, our next and neighbouringe contries, Fraunce, the hither parts of Germany, Lorraine, Heluetia, and all Italie, euen vnto Rome it ſelfe, ſcituated in the further part thereof were full of Biſhops, preiſts, and learned cleargie. (Ioh. Lidgate in Cant. Caius antiq. cont. Brian. Twin. antiquit. Oxon. Harriſon deſcript. of Brit. Cambd. in Britan. Harding. histor. l. 1. c. 15. Ioh. Bal. in praefat. ad l. de ſcriptor. &c.)
                        And yett Kinge Lucius and his nobles,

now reſolued to receaue the faith of Chriſt, could finde noe center, to reſt their holy deſires of ſoe happy a chaunge, vntill they arriued at the Apoſtolicke See, from whence this nation from the firſt originall, of chriſtianitie here, euer receaued inſtructors, and inſtruction. And to obteyne this his ſoe heauenly purpoſe, this Renowned kinge with applauſe of his nobilitie, did not ſend one onely Meſſadge, Ambaſſadge or epiſtle, and at one time to that end, but as our beſt antiquities ſay: Epistolas ſuas Eleutherio Papae direxit: (Epiſt. Eleuther. ad Luc. & leg. S. Eduardi apud Lumb. Calfrid. Monum. l. 5. cap. 19. Pont. Virun. l. 4. Matth. Weſtm. an. 185.186.) hee directed his epiſtles to Pope Eleutherius: diuers Epiſtles, and conſequently diuers Ambaſſadges, ſoe reade the old Brittiſh hiſtorie, Ponticus Virunnius, Matthew Weſtminſter, as they ar publiſhed and allowed by our Proteſtants, and others.
                        And theſe ſoe diuers epiſtles, were onely to become a Chriſtian, & to haue his kingdome inſtructed in the faith of Chriſt, and all things thereto belonginge ordered by his higheſt papall authoritie, petens ab eo, vt christianus efficeretur. And none of theſe

epiſtles was that which our Proteſtants tell vs hee wrote vnto that holy Pope, for lawes to gouerne his kingdome by, which were diſtinct from this, of which I ſhall ſpeake hereafter: Wherby it is euident that this bleſſed kinge & his wiſeſt councell at that time, by ſoe often writinge both to this holy Pope Eleutherius, and ſome others of his predeceſſors before, as appeareth by that I haue written alreadie, did fully and conſtantly informe themſelues, that the higheſt directing power in things religious, was onely reſiding in the Popes of Rome, otherwiſe they were all ſtraungers vnto him, far diſtant, and aboue all Biſhops of the world more perſecuted, all of them before this time and longe after, ſufferinge cruell deathes and Martyrdome for Chriſt. Therefore it was for the due honor, and right belonginge to that holie See, and not temporall glory or countenance, as a Proteſtant Biſhop would gloſſe the matter. (Godwyn Conuerſ. of Britanie c. 3. pag. 36.) but the ſupreamacy of the Roman Biſhops, which theſe Proteſtants haue giuen to all the Popes before.
                        And becauſe, to ſpeake in the words of the firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop in England: The

renowne of the popes of Rome at that time, was most famous in all the world, for their often martyrdome, and conſtancy & ſincere diſcipline of faith: quorum tunc fama crebro martyrio & constantia, ac ſincera fidei diſciplina, per totum Christianum orbem celeberrima fuit. (Matth. Parker, antiquit. Brit. pag 5.) This was that, which moued kinge Lucius, to giue this due honor to the See of Rome, and appeale vnto it for inſtruction: for he ſaw that by that holy See the faith of Chriſt, was dilated into all theſe nations, as the recited Proteſtant Archbiſhop thus witneſſeth. (Parker. ſupr. pag. 4.) Cognouit complures nobiles Romanos candem fidem à pontifice Romano accepiſſe, eorumque exemplo Chriſtianum nomen in ſingulas prouincias ſparſum & diſſeminatum fuiſſe, ſtatuit in eadem fide ſub Eleutherio tunc Romano pontifice inaugurari. When Kinge Lucius knew, that very many noble Romans, had receaued the faith of Chriſt from the Pope of Rome, and by their example, the Chriſtian name was diſperſed and ſowen abrode into all prouinces, hee did reſolue to receaue the ſame faith, from Eleutherius the Pope of Rome Where it is euidently confeſſed, that if kinge Lucius had not acknowledged this

higheſt ſpirituall dignitie in the See of Rome, and haue ſued to haue the Chriſtian Religion ſettled here by that authoritie, hee ſhould haue beene ſingular in that kinde, as our Proteſtants now are, all other prouinces giuing then that honor to Rome, and hauinge their faith in Chriſt eſtabliſhed from thence.
                        And this is euidētly declared, by the maner of the ſending, & writting of this kinge, to that Pope S. Eleutherius, S. Bede ſaith: hiſt. eccl. l. 1. c. 4. that K. Lucius did humbly beſeech Pope Eleutherius by his letters, that by his cō
                              maundement hee might bee made a Christian. Obſecrans vt per eius mandatum Christianus efficeretur. The Roman Tradition ſaith: In the beginninge of the papacy of Eleutherius, there came humble letters vnto him frō Lucius Kinge of the Britans, to receaue him and his ſubiects into the number of Christians. Huic initio pontificatus ſupplices literae venerunt à Lucio Britannorum Rege, vt ſe ac ſuos in Christianorum numerum reciperet. (Breu. Rom. in S. Eleuther. 26. Maij. Baron. hist. Eccl. tom. 2.) A Proteſtant Biſhop readeth: praying that by his direction, and appointment, hee might bee made a Chriſtian. (Godwyn. conuerſ. p. 20.) An

other Proteſtant antiquary ſaith: Deſiring Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to ſend ſome deuout and learned men, by whoſe instruction hee and his people might bee taught the faith, and Religion of Christ. The old chronicle of Lādaffe is: implorans vt iuxta eius ammonitionem chriſtianus fiat. Humbly entreatinge, that by his appointment hee might bee made a chriſtian. (Annal. Landaf. apud com. antiq. Cantab. l. 1. pag. 98. thus our Proteſtants alleadge that Antiquitie. Others of them ſay. Lucius ſent an Ambaſsadge to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome by Eluanus, and Meduinus Britans, intreating Eleutherius by them, that hee would open a paſſadge by himſelfe and his ministers, for the foſteringe and cheriſhinge of christian Religion in Britanie. Frauncis Maſon. l. 2. p. 52. ca. 3.
                        Like is the teſtimony of other hiſtorians, both Catholicks and Proteſtants, that kinge Lucius proceeded in this humble, and ſubmiſſiue maner in his writings, and Ambaſſadges to the Pope of Rome at that time, & in theſe affayres. The which higheſt authoritie ſpirituall in the Pope of Rome, theſe our Proteſtants further confirme, in that they teach generally, that theſe two Ambaſſadors

of Kinge Lucius, Eluanus and Meduinus, receaued all the authoritie they had, to preach here in Britanie, from Pope Eleutherius, whoe conſecrated the one Eluanus a Biſhop, and made the other a Doctor to preach the ghoſpell. (Theater of great. Brit. l. 6. Stow. hist. in Lucius, Godwyn conuerſ. of Brit. Maſon l. 2. c. 3. Bal. cent. 1. in Eluan.) And the preſent Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Doctor George Abbot, director of Maſter Maſon as hee proteſteth, and his directed Scribe ar of this opinion, that all the Biſhops of Britanie after this, deriued conſecration and ſucceſſion epiſcopal, from this one onelie Bishop Eluanus, conſecrated and authorized by Pope Eleutherius. (Frauncis Maſon conſecrat. of Biſh. l. 2. c. 3. p. 55.56.) Which, and more, is approued by an other a Proteſtant Bishop, by whome Pope Eleutherius euen in this great buſines is termed. Paterfamilias, the Master of this ſpirituall howſe and familie of Britanie. (Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Rom. l. 1. in Eleuther.) and this kingedome was conſequently of his family, and vnder his rule and commaund, and thereupon as a good Master and Gouernour of this familie, did confirme and ſolidate the Brittans, and the

whole kingedome in the faith receaued by the Apostles. Eleutherius, vt bonus paterfamilias de theſauro ſuo noua cum veteribus proferens, effecit, vt confirmatis & conſolidatis Britannis, in ſuſcepta prius ab Apoſtolis doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius fidei verba iuraret.
                        
                        And to make moſte euident demonſtration further, euen by theſe Proteſtants, aſwel as by al other Antiquities, that the ſupreame power ſpirituall in all proceedinges in this kingedome at that time was wholly, and vndeniably in Pope Eleutherius, and thoſe his twoe Legats, which hee ſent hither, Damianus and Fugatianus, as they are commonly called. The Proteſtant Archbiſhop and his Maſon tell vs, in theſe words. (Maſon l. 2. e. 3. p. 55 56.) From Rome there came two, Fugatius and Damianus, but wee cannot learne that eyther of them was a Biſhop. This is the conſtant writinge of theſe Proteſtants: yett to deale plainely, theſe men knew not all thinges, or elſe they might eaſelye haue knowne, that both the Brittish hiſtorie, Ponticus Virunnius, and Matthew of Weſtminſter, as they are published by Proteſtants, call them Antiſtites, Bishops:

and a Proteſtant Biſhop produceth an old Manuſcript Author, teſtifying that the firſt church of Winceſter was hallowed and dedicated to the honor of our Sauiour, October 29. 189. by Fuganus and Damianus Biſhops. (Galfrid. monum. l. 4. hist. c. 20. Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine, Godwyn. Catal. in Winchest. Matth. Westm. an. 186.)
                        And if they were noe Biſhops, it ſoe much more aduaunceth the Popes power, in this kingedome, for theſe Proteſtants with others ſhall teſtifie, that by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius, they exerciſed more and greater Iuriſdiction ſpirituall here, then any Biſhop, or Archbiſhop of that time. And if they were Biſhops, as thoſe Authors affirme, yett I finde none to write that either of them was an Archbiſhop: yett as before, and ſhall immediately bee proued, they by their delegate power from Pope Eleutherius, executed here greater Iuriſdiction ſpirituall and more ample, then any Biſhop, Archbiſhop, prince, kinge or whoſoeuer, the Pope himſelfe excepted, could lawfully doe Which theſe Proteſtants and other vndeniable antiquities doe, thus demonſtrate vnto vs.
                        
                           The firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterburye (Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 5.) writeth from diuers wittneſſes, that theſe two Religious men were, aſsigned by Pope Eleutherius as cheife worke men, tanto operi praeficiundo, in gouerninge ſoe greate a worke, and establiſhinge the diſcipline of chriſtian Religion. In ſancienda christianae religionis diſciplina, and 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               cooperarij adhibiti in administranda eccleſia periti. Ioined by Pope Eleutherius with the Biſhops in gouerninge the church, beeings killfull therein. Which muſt needes bee, by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius. Martianus Polonius. (In Eleutherio Papa col. 49.) publiſhed by Proteſtants, and dedicated by them to Queene Elizabeth, ſaith: Papa Eleutherius miſit duos Religioſos viros Fuganum & Damianum qui Regem praedictum & populum baptizarent, erant tunc in Britannia viginti octo Pontifices Idolorum, quos Flamines vocabant: Inter quos tres Archiflamines erant, ſed praedicti Sancti, de mandato Apoſtolico, vbi erant Flamines, instituerunt Epiſcopos, vbi Archiflamines, Archiepiſcopos. Pope Eleutherius ſent two Religious men Fuganus and Damianus, who baptized the ſaid Kinge Lucius and his people.

There were then in Britanie 28. high preiſts of the Idols, whome they called Flamins, amonge which there were three Archflamins, but the ſaid holy men by the commaundement of the Pope, did inſtitute Biſhops, where there were Flamins, and Archbiſhops where there were Archflamins.
                        This is confirmed, not onely by all Antiquities of theſe things, but the cheife Proteſtant writers, amonge which the Proteſtant Archbiſhop Whitgift, and his frend Foxe write in this maner. (Whitg. defence of the Answ. pag. 323. Foxe tom. 1. fol. 146.) Eleutherius
the good Biſhop, hearinge the requeſt of the kinge, and glad to ſee the godly towardnes, of his well diſpoſed minde, ſendeth him certaine teachers and preachers, called Fugatius, or by ſome Fuganus, and Damianus, or Dimianus, which conuerted firſt the kinge and people of Britanie, and baptiſed them. The temples of Idolatrie and other monuments of gentility they ſubuerted, conuertinge the people from their diuers and many gods, to ſerue one liuinge God. Thus true Religion with ſincere faith increaſing, ſuperſtition decayed with all rites of Idolatrie.

There were then in Britanie 28. Head preiſts, which they called Flamins, and three Archpreiſts amonge them, which were called Achiflamins, hauinge the ouerſight of their maners, as Iudges ouer the reſt. Theſe 28. Flamines they turned to 28. Biſhops, and the three Archiflamines to three Archbiſhops, hauinge their ſeates in the three principall cities of the Realme: That is, in London, in Yorke, and in Glamorgantia, videlicet in vrbe Legionum,
                            by Wales.
                        Thus far theſe Proteſtants, and one of them named the Archbiſhop telleth vs, that the conſtitutinge of Archbiſhops, in the places of the gentiles Archflamines, by theſe Legats of Pope Eleutherius, was to followe the example, and order of S. Peter himſelfe, whoe did ſoe, as S. Paul likewiſe, and 
                              •…
                           eth this reaſon. (Whitgift def of the An
                                 •…
                              w. pag. 320.321. Which might bee done in reſpect of the citie and place, and not in reſpect of the Idolatrous preiſts; for Archiflamines were in greate cyties, which being conuerted vnto Christ, might haue in the place of their Archiflamines, godly and learned Archbishops, to ouerſee and direst

the reſt of the Biſhops and preachers, that vnitie and order might bee obſerued. Thus Paul did at Epheſus and Creta. And why might not Peter doe it in other places likewiſe? Maſter Iohn Selden, a greate Proteſtant antiquary, and lawier, writinge of theſe two holy Legats, ſpeaketh thus. (Io. Selden Analect. c. 6.) Beat
                                 •…
                               doctores cum per totam ferè Ieruſalem paganitatem deleuiſſent, Templa quae in honore plurimorum deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo eiuſque Sanctis dea
                                 •…
                              cauerunt, diuerſisque ordinatorum coetibus repleuerunt. When the bleſſed Doctors had blotted out paganiſme allmoſt throughout the Iland, the temples which were founded in honor of manye gods, they dedicated to one God, and his Saints, and repleniſhed them with diuers companies of cleargie men. The very ſame bee the words of Matthew of Weſtminſter, as hee is publiſhed by E
                              •…
                           ſh Proteſtants. Matth. Weſtm. an. Dom. 18
                              •…
                           
                        
                        And this preſent Proteſtant, Antiquarie refutinge the ridiculous and ignorant, or verie willfull ſingularitie of Godwyn the Proteſtant Biſhop, ſingularlie and onely as hee himſelfe writeth. (Godw. conuerſ. of Britanie p. 26.) excepting Sutcliffe, denying Archflamines

in this Iland, citing for authors Pomponius Laetus, and Feneſtella, thus addeth. (Pompn laet. de Sacerdot. Rom. ca. 7. Fenestell. de Sacerd. Rom. c. 5.) Quemadmodum autem Epiſcopis apud nos Archiepiſcopi, ſic Flaminibus Archiflamines praeponebatur. Horum poteſtati caeteri Iudices in Inſula ſubijciebantur. Hos autom ex praecepto Apostoli Idolatriae eripuerunt, & vbi erant Flamines Epiſcopos, vbi erant Archiflamines Archiepiſcopos poſuerunt. Sedes autem Archiflaminum in tribus nobilioribus ciuitatibus ſuerunt, Londonijs videlicet, Eboraco, & in vrbe legionum. His tribus euacuata ſuperſtitione, octo & viginti Epiſcopi ſubduntur, diuiſiſque parochijs, ſubiacuit Metropolitano Eboracenſi Deira & Albania, quas magnum flumen Humbri à Loegria ſecernit. Eboracenſis autem Archicpiſcopis in omnes Scotiae praeſules, ac Antiſtites iure primatis olim fungebatur. Quod & reſaucitum erat ſub Henrico ſecundo & Hugone Legato Pontificio celebrato concilio. As Archbiſhops with vs Chriſtians, are in power ouer Biſhops, ſoe were Archflamines ouer Flamines. In this Iland the other Iudges were ſubiect to their power, theſe by the the cōmandement of the Apoſtle (and Pope) they deliuered from Idolatry, and where

there were Flamines they placed Bishops, and Archbishops where there were Archflamines. And the Seats of the Archflamines, were in the three more noble cyties, in London to witt, in Yorke, and the cytie of the Legions. To theſe three, ſuperſtition beeing taken away, eight and twentie Bishops are ſubiected, and the parishes or dioceſſes beeinge diuided, Yorkeshire & Scotland (which the great riuer of Humber doth diuide from Loegria England) was made ſubiect to the Metropolitane of yorke. And the Archbishop of Yorke, did of old time enioy the Right of Primate ouer all the prelates, and Bishops of Scotland. Which was againe decreed in a cowncell held vnder kinge Henry the ſecond, and Hughe the Popes Legate.
                        The like to this haue all our Antiquaries, Catholicks or Proteſtants writinge of this matter. The Author of the old Brittish hiſtorie, the booke of Landaffe, the Antiquities of Glaſtenbury, S. Bede, Ponticus Virunnius, Radulphus de Diceto, Aſſerus, Capgraue, Will: of Malmesbury with other auncients, and our preſent Proteſtant Antiquaries conſentinge, as Cambden, Hō
                           linshed,

Harriſon, Stowe, Howes, the Theater writers and others two many to bee recited, and needles, their workes commonly extant and to bee ſeene of all, onely I will alleadge Bicetes, becauſe his manuſcript is rare, and hee much commended, both for Antiquitie and Authoritie by the Proteſtāt Authors of the greate Theater, Thus hee writeth: Eleuther Papa ad quem Lucius Rex Britanniae miſſa epiſtola ſe fieri Chriſtianum impetrat. Eleuther ergo miſit Faganum & Dinuanum, qui Regem Lucium baptizauerunt. Templa etiam quae in honore plurimorum deorum fundata erant, vni Deo dedicauerunt. Erant tunc in Britannia 28. Flamines, & tres Archiflammines, & vbi erant Flamines, Epiſcopos, vbi autem Archiſtamines, Archiepiſcopos poſuerunt. Londonenſi ſubiacuit Loegria & Cornubia. Eboracenſi Diera & Albania, vrbi autem legionum Kambria. Eleuther Pope of whome Lucius kinge of Britanie obteyned by an epiſtle hee ſent vnto him, to bee made a Chriſtian, ſent Faganus and Dimianus, which baptized Kinge Lucius. The Temples which were founded in honor of manie gods, they dedicated to one God.

There were then in Britanie 28. Flamines, and three Archiflamines, and where there were Flamines they placed Biſhops, and where there were Archflamines they placed Archbiſhops. To the Archbiſhop of London, England and Cornwall were ſubiect. To the Archbishopp of Yorke, were ſubiect Diera, the North of England and Scotland, and Wales to the Archbishop of Caerlegion. (Galfrid. Monum. l. 4. c. 19.20. Chronic. eccl. Lond. apud Cam. l. 1. antiq. cantabrig. Antiq. Glaſt. apud Capgra. in S. Patric. Bed. l. 1. hiſt. c 4. Pontic. Virun. l. 4. Radulph. de Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Guliel. Malmeſ. de antiq. caenob. Glast. Camb. in Brig. Holinsh. hiſt. of Engl. in Lucius. Harriſ. deſcript. of Brit. Stow & Howes in Lucius. Theat. of greate Brit. lib. 6. Hector Boeth. l. 5. fol 86.85. with others.
                        
                        Thus wee ſee by all hiſtorians, olde and late, Catholicks, and Proteſtants, that in this general plantinge of the faith in this nation, all Religious matters were wholly ordered by theſe Legats of the Pope, & his ſupreame direction, all Iuriſdiction ſpirituall of Archbiſhops and Biſhops, with their peculiar dioceſſes and gouernements, aſſigned and diſtinguiſhed by this higheſt papall authoritie

of the Pope of Rome by his legats here. And to aſſure vs, that nothing was then thought by the kinge himſelfe, or any chriſtians here, to bee firme and validate in this kinde, without the confirmation of the Pope himſelfe, when theſe Archbiſhops, and Biſhops with their Iuriſdictions were ſettled, many churches dedicated to God, and his holy Saints, vniuerſities or colledges for chriſtian learninge and education aſſigned, all orders of cleargie men inſtituted, with all other neceſſary things in ſuch a cauſe remembred in our hiſtories, which I haue at lardge related in an other place, theſe holy Legates returned to Rome againe, to obtaine the Popes confirmation of all theſe their holy ordinances, & conſtitutions, which was orderly performed, as both Catholick antiquities, and Proteſtant hiſtorians doe thus vndoubtedly aſſure vs herein.
                        Firſt Ponticus Virunnius in his Brittiſh hiſtorie, l. 4. as it is warranred by Proteſtants, ſaith of theſe Legates, ſent by Pope Eleutherius: Romam redierunt, & cuncta quae fecerant, a Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione facta, cum pluribus alijs redierunt in Britanniam. They returned to Rome, and

obteyned to haue all things they had done, to bee confirmed by the Pope, and the confirmation beeing made, they returned into Britanie with other. The Author of the old Birttiſh hiſtory, publiſhed with the ſelfe ſame Proteſtant approbation. (Galfrid. Monument. l. 4. histor. Britan. cap. 20.) ſaith. Denique restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romam: & que fecerunt à beatiſsimo Papa confirmari impetrauerunt, confirmatione vero facta, reuerſi ſunt in Britanniam compluribus alijs comitati. At laſte when the Biſhops (ſoe Virunnius alſo termeth thoſe Legats) had reſtored all things they returned to Rome, and obteyned to haue thoſe things they had done to bee confirmed by the moſt bleſſed Pope, and the confirmation beeing made, they returned againe into Britanie, accompanied with many others. Like bee the words of Matthew of Weſtminſter, warranted by theſe Proteſtants in this maner. (Matth. Westm. an. 186.) Anno gratiae 186. beati Antistites Faganus & Deruuianus Romam reuerſi, quae fecerāt impetrauerunt à Papa beatiſsimo confirmari. In the yeare of grace 186. The bleſſed Biſhops Fuganus and Deruuianus returned to Rome, and obteyned thoſe things, which

they had done to bee confirmed by the moſte bleſſed Pope. Which beeing finiſhed, the ſaid doctors with many others, returned into Britanie.
                        And our Engliſh Proteſtants in their Annotation vpon this place thus, approue it. (Protest. annot. Merginal. in Matth. West. ſupr. ad an. 186. (Fides Christi in Britannia confirmatur. The faith of Chriſt is confirmed in Britanie. All things of this nature were here confirmed by the Popes Authoritie. De mandato Apostolico, by the Popes commaundement, as Martinus Polonus turned Proteteſtant, by theſe men in their publishinge of him. De mandato Apoſtolico, ex praecepto Apostoli, by the commaundement of the Apoſtle or Pope, as readeth the Proteſtant Antiquarie Maſter Selden. (Martin. Pol. in Eleutherio col. 49. Selden ſupr. in Anaclet. c. 6.) And ſoe all Proteſtants doe, or ought to confeſſe, approuinge thoſe Authors I haue cited before, and fetchinge the greateſt euidence they haue of theſe things and tymes, from them, ſoe particularly as before, regiſtringe both the neceſſitie of the Popes approbation and confirmation to bee ſuch, that the Legates themſelues were enforced to go frō hence to

Rome to procure it, and returned not hither for a finall ſettlinge of all things, vntill the Pope had confirmed and approued them at Rome.
                        And 
                              •…
                           his illimitated and ſupereminent Power, both claimed and exerciſed by this holy Pope, was not confined in and with his proceedinges with this kingedome, ſoe happily conuerted to the faith by him, but to ſhew himſelfe by theſe Proteſtants, as his his holy predeceſſors before haue beene proued by the ſame allowance, to bee the ſupreame and higheſt commaunder, and gouernor of the church of Chriſt in all places on earthe, hee generally proceeded accordingly, makinge and ordeyninge decrees, for all parſons and places, and times, as theſe Proteſtants thus aſſure vs. (Robert Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Eleutherio.) Hoc tempore Lucius Britanniae Rex, Chriſtiano caetui cum ſuis ſubditis adiungi, à Po
                                 •…
                              fice petijt per literas. In this time of Pope Eleutherius, Lucius Kinge of Britanie deſired of the Pope by his letters, that hee and his ſubiects, might bee ioyned to the Chriſtian companie: as though S. Eleutherius then Pope, by power of that nam & place had ſuch power ouer the whole

company of Chriſtians, that none that is a kinge or greate prince, on whoſe publick conuerſion together with his people, ſo manie matters requiring the conſent and confirmation of the higheſt Paſtor, & ſupreame Iuriſdiction depended, might bee admitted to bee a Chriſtian, without the Popes Approbation.
                        And to confirme this higheſt power ſpirituall in him, as in his predeceſſors before, they further tell vs. (Rob. Barns. ſupr.) That generally in the caſes of Biſhops, which is the greateſt, hee decreed that nothing ſhould bee defined in their caſes, but by the Pope himſelfe. Accuſationem contra Epiſcopos intentatam, Epiſcopos audire permiſit: ſed vt nihil, niſi apud Pontificem definiretur, cauet. And againe that any preiſt might appeale from his Biſhop to the Pope of Rome, if the ſinceritie of the other iudge his Biſhops was ſuſpected. Vt nemo Clericum accuſatores, pertraheret ad alterius dioeceſis Epiſcopum, ſed accuſaret eū apud ſuum Epiſcopum: Sivero Iudex Glerico ſuſpectus eſſet, appellandi facultatem dedit Reo. Where hee euidently by theſe Proteſtants maketh himſelfe & his Succeſſors in the See Apoſtolick of Rome, ſupreame Iudge in ſpiritual thinges,

and reſerueth appeales to them in ſuch affaires from all other Iudges.
                     
                     
                        
                           THE VI. CHAPTER. How this moſte renowned Pope Eleutherius, did by theſe Proteſtants, and antiquities allovved by them, clayme, exerciſe, and ſettle here, for him, and his Succeſsors, as ample prerogatiue, and Iuriſdiction, as Catholicke Scholes doe, and Catholicques may giue to Popes.
                        ANd becauſe there is greate difference betweene Catholicks and Proteſtants, concerninge ſome priuiledges which the former commonly yeeld, and the ſecond as vſually in England denye vnto him, and eyther of them would bee thought to reuerence and embrace the opinion, and practiſe of that bleſſed Pope Eleutherius, and thoſe vnſpotted times, eſpecially as they are interpreted by themſelues, lett vs now take counſaile and aduiſe of theſe Proteſtāts their perſecutors in this kinde, whether this moſte bleſſed Pope Eleutherius,

whoe ſoe conuerted this nation, and was ſoe bleſſed, and worthie a Saint with theſe men, was not by their Iudgements, and teſtimonies, as far ingaged in this matter, as Pope Gregorie, the fifteenth of that name, now is; or Kinge Lucius that holy kinge and Saint, the holy Biſhops, and cleargie, and all the Chriſtians of this land, at that tyme did not giue to the Popes of Rome then, as much in this kinde, as anie Engliſh preiſt, or Catholicke now doth, and by the preſent Roman Religion may giue, and allowe to this preſent Pope, or any other.
                        This is euidently proued, and inuincibly made manifeſt vnto vs before, not onely by ſoe many our beſt Antiquities, but generallie by the beſt learned Engliſh Proteſtant hiſtorians, iointly and with an vniforme conſent, agreeing in this, that at the ſettlinge of manie Archbiſhops, and Biſhops in this Iland, by the higheſt Papall power of Saint Eleutherius, by the ſame alſoe the whole kingedome of Scotland, with the Northern Ilands, were made ſubiect to the Archbiſhopp of Yorke, in ſpirituall thinges, as I haue proued before

by the beſt hiſtorians, Catholicks & Proteſtants which haue written of this matter. Which alſoe agree, that theſe kingedomes were at that time, longe before, and vntill the vnion of them by our preſent Soueraigne kinge Iames, not onely diſtinct, and diuers kingedomes, vnder diuers kinges, lawes, and gouernments, but ordinarily, as then they were, at open warres, and hoſtilitie in ciuill and temporall reſpects; Therfore it was neyther Kinge Lucius, whoe to vſe the words of Hector Boethius. (Scator. hiſtor. l. 5 fol. 83. Godwyn conuerſ. of Britanie pag. 22.23) aggreing with our Engliſh Proteſtants, and others in this, was but a kinge by curteſie of the Romane Emperors and their Authoritie. Lucius Britonibus Caeſaris beneuolentia & authoritate imperitabat. Therefore hee neyther had, nor poſſibly could haue his power, and principalitie extended further, then that of the Romans was, which went noe further then the wall of Adrian, which diuided the kingedomes, makinge Scotland a diſtinct kingedome, and neuer ſubiect to the Roman Emperors. Which could not allowe to kinge Lucius more, then they were Lords and Maſters of themſelues, for accordinge

to that lawe maxime, vſed by manie Proteſtants, and a grownde in the lawe, and light of nature it ſelfe; Nemo poteſt plus Iuris in alium transferre, quàm ipſe habet: Noe man can giue more power to another, then hee himſelfe hath. For ſoe hee ſhould giue that which hee hath noe right or power to giue, beeinge a thinge vnpoſſible.
                        Therefore kinge Lucius, nor the Roman Emperors, hauinge any power, or right at all ſpirituall, or temporall, ouer the Scots or Britans, or any people then dwellinge beyond that Wall, in the kingedome now called Scotland, they could not by any poſſibilitie giue ſuch ſpirituall power, to the Archbiſhop of Yorke to commaund in that contrie, nor commaund the inhabitants of Scotland, in noe reſpect ſubiect vnto them, to bee ſubiect to the Biſhop of Yorke, their ſubiect in temporall reſpects. Neither did, would or could the kings of Scotland, then pagans ſubiect, and ſubmitt their people and contry to the Archbiſhop of yorke of an other kingdome, now enemy to them, both in ſpirituall and temporall reſpects. And it is directly againſt all Proteſtants profeſſions, confeſſions, or churches, that any Proteſtant Prince

or other whoſoeuer clayminge or pretending ſupreame ſpirituall Iuriſdiction among them, ſhould challendge or preſume to extend it further, then their temporall ditions and Gouernments, as is euident in all places where the new Religion is admitted, as England, the Lowe contries, the cantons of Switſerland and the reſt, where the ſpirituall Iuriſdiction which they claime, is limited and confined within the circuites of their temporall Dominions, without any further progreſſe. Parlam. 1. Elizab. 1. Iacob. Scotic. Confeſsiones Heluet. Gallic. Saxonia. Belgic.
                        
                        Therefore this higheſt ſupreame directing ſpirituall power (which eſtabliſhed at that time, and longe after, the ſubordination and ſubiection of Scotland and the Ilands to the Archbiſhop of Yorke) muſt needs by theſe Proteſtants, and all Antiquities, bee onely peculiar to the Pope of Rome, whoe and that alone effected theſe things: as ſoe manie Proteſtants and others haue proued before, and others from our beſt antiquities affirme, that all eccleſiaſticall thinges were ordered here, according to the commaundment of Pope Eleutherius that bleſſed man. Secundum iuſſum beati Eleutherij Papae. (Annal. Landaf.

apud Io. Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. p. 90.) Which is an euident demonſtration, that this holy Pope had this ſupreame ſpirituall power ouer all this Iland at that time; for without ſuch a power, theſe things could not haue beene performed. And demonſtrateth alſoe, that noe other power on earth, could haue duely performed it, eſpecially any temporall Kinge, Prince, Emperour or Lieutenant whatſoeuer, for ſoe, contrarie to the names, offices, and powers of ſuch Rulers, they ſhould bee Emperors, Kinges, Rulers, Regents and the like where they haue noe Empire, Kingedome, Rule, Regiment, ſoueraigntie or any ſubiects, a thinge in the light of nature of it ſelfe, imployinge contradiction, and impoſſible.
                        And lett noe man ſay, that accordinge vnto ſome, as namely Giraldus Cambrenſis, this Iland was diuided into fiue prouinces, Britannia prima, Britannia ſecunda, Flauia, Maxima, and Valentia, which now is Scotland, and that there was an Archbiſhop there. (Girald. Cambr. l. de Iure Metropol. eccl. Meneu. apud Park. antiq. Britan. pag. 24. & Io. Priſ. def. hist. Brit.)

For I anſweare, this diuiſion was made longe after this, as the twoe laſte prouinces Maximia & Valentia proue in their owne names. For the ſame Author ſaith, that Maximia was ſoe named, of Maximus the Emperour, Maximia. Ab Imperatore Maximo vocata, and Valentia now Scotland, was ſoe called of Valens the Emperour. Valentia à Valente Imperacore ſic dicta eſt. (Girald. Cambr. Parker. & Priſ. ſup.) Both which Emperors Maximus and Valens, were longe after this time, and Scotland not vnder the Romans, to bee made a prouince by them, and beſides ſoe many Proteſtant Authors and Antiquities before, that there were but onely three Archbiſhops here at this time, nor after diuers hundreds of yeares, the Scottiſh hiſtories, and all Proteſtants agree, that Scotland had neyther Archbiſhops nor Biſhops, perhaps longe after this time.
                        The teſtimonies of theſe things ar to manie to bee produced, therefore I will onely inſtance in the preſent Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury and his deputy, in writinge the booke, Intituled of the Conſecration of the Bishops of the church of England, who ſpeake in this maner: (Frāc. Maſon epiſt.

dedicat. and l. 2. c. 3. pag. 54.) The Romans before this time of Kinge Lucius his receauinge the faith, had diuided Britanie into three Prouinces, one of them was called Maxima Caeſarienſis, the Metropolis whereof was Yorke. An other, Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof was London: the third Britannia ſecunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegion. And prouinge, beſides ſoe many other Authorities before cited; both by Aſſeruius Meneuenſis ſchole-master to Kinge Alfred, Ptolomeus Lucenſis in the life of Eleutherius, William Reade, (De vit. Pont. in Eleuther. pag. 3.) and Iohn Leland, (M. S. Leland. in aſſert. Arthur. fol. 36.) that the Archbiſhops of this Iland, were onlie ſeated in thoſe three Metropolitane cyties, of London, Yorke, called alſo Maximia or that prouince, wherof it was Metropolis, and Caerlegion. To anſweare fully this obiection thus they add: Georg. Abb. & Fraunc. Maſon ſupr. pag. 54.
                        
                           Although Britanie was after the Nicen. councell diuided into fiue Prouinces, Valentia and Flauia Caeſarienſis beeinge added to the former: yett there were noe new Archbiſhopricks erected. The reaſon whereof was, becauſe thoſe two new Prouinces.

(Notitia Prouinc. Occid. pag. 117.) were taken out of the former; and conſequentlie could not haue Biſhopricks, without the diminiſhinge of the authoritie of the former, in whoſe Iuriſdiction originally they were, which was not ſufferable, becauſe it was againſt the canon of the Nicen councell (Can. 6.) decreeinge, that in Antioche and in other Prouinces, the dignities, prerogatiues, and authorities of churches ſhould bee maintayned.
And for S. Andrewes in Scotland to haue beene alwayes ſubiect to Yorke, or when Yorke had noe Archbiſhop, as at the cominge of the pagan Saxons hither, and driuinge the Archbiſhop from thence, to the Pope himſelfe, immediately theſe Proteſtants proue vnto vs, by the auncient Antiquitie called Notitia Prouinciarum, which they cited before: for in that thus wee reade: S. Andrea Epiſcopatus eſt Domini papae. The Biſhoprick of S. Andrewes belōgeth to the pope of Rome, where the Annotation is: olim in Scotia nullas erat Archiepiſcopatus, adeoque Epiſcopatus Scotiae Domino Papae in ſpiritualibus immediatè ſuberant, vt in manuſcriptis exemplaribus noſtris notatur. In auncient tyme there was

noe Archbiſhopps See in Scotland, but the Biſhops of Scotland in ſpirituall thinges, were immediatelie ſubiect to our Maſter the Pope, as is noted in our manuſcript copies. Notat. Epiſcopat. in Scotia edit. per Aubert. Miraeum. Aubert. Miraus in annot. in illum locum.
                        
                        Which firſt immediate ſubiection to the Pope, and not the Archbiſhop of Yorke, did begin but in the time of Kinge William of Scotland, as Roger Houeden and others proue, ſetting downe the Popes decretall letters thereof at lardge, but had continued vnder the Iuriſdiction of Yorke, by the firſt inſtitution of Pope Eleutherius a thouſand yeares, and beſides the teſtimonies of many Authors both late and auntient, Catholicks and Proteſtants, ſettinge downe the whole proceedinges at lardge, how Pope Clemēt did onely exempt it from the See of Yorke, and ſubiected it immediately to the See of Rome, becauſe of the continuall, all moſte, wars betweene theſe twoe nations. This matter is publicklie confeſſed and acknowledged by Kinge William of Scotland, and Dauid his Brother, Richard Biſhop of S. Andrewes,

with others in their publick Charter, in publick councell in the church of S. Peter at Yorke, as Houeden and others ſett downe at lardge. Epiſtol. Clementis Papae ad Guliel Scotorum Regem apud Roger. Houed. part. histor. in Henric. 2. & epist Papae Caelestini apud eundin Richard. 1. & Thom. Walſing. in Eduard. 1. Polydor. Vergil. Angl. histor. l. 13. l. 9. l. 24. Guliel. Malmesb. l. 3. de Regib. Godwyn Catalog. in Yorke in George Neuill. Roger Houede
                                 •…
                               Annal. part. postr. in Henric. 2.
                        And when Scotland after a thouſand yeares ſubiectiō vnto the Archbiſhop of Yorke by the Popes ordinance, neither was nor could, notwithſtandinge ſoe many diſſentions betweene theſe kings, and nations, bee exempted from that obedience, but by the Pope himſelfe, and yet with this reſeruation, to bee immediately ſubiect to the Pope of Rome, as the words of the Popes decree thus teſtifie. (Epistol. Clement. Papae apud Rog. Houed. ſupr.) Clemens Epiſcopus ſeruus ſeruorū Dei, Chariſsimo in Chriſto filio Willielmo illuſtri Scotorum Regi praeſentis ſcriptis pagina duximus staſtuendum, vt Scotticana eccleſia Apostolicae ſedi, nullo mediante debeat ſubiacere. Clement to his moſt beloued ſonne in Chriſt

William the Renowned kinge of Scots. Wee haue thought good to decree by this our preſent writinge, that the church of Scotland, ſhall bee immediatly ſubiect to the See Apoſtolicke. Soe that it is moſt euident by all teſtimonies, that this kingedome of Britanie, was from the firſt conuerſion thereof to Chriſt, euer ſubiect to the See of Rome in ſpirituall things, as farr as the Pope of Rome now requireth, or Catholicks attribute vnto him.
                        Which theſe our Proteſtants of England, and from Authenticall Antiquities, as they ſay, will more Amply proue vnto vs, and in the higheſt degree of papall priuiledges. For they tell vs, that kinge Lucius did not onely receaue the Chriſtian faith, Iuridicall direction, and ſettling of all ſpirituall and meerlie Religious affaires, by the authoritie of the Pope of Rome, but the ſame holy Pope, not onely with the good likinge and conſent of Kinge Lucius, but by his ſuite and petition interpoſed himſelfe, in the ordeyninge alteringe, or correctinge and ſettlinge, the very temporal lawes thēſelues in this kingedome, to gouerne Rule and direct it, euen in ciuill and meerely humane thinges, as is manifeſt

in a certaine Epiſtle which theſe Proteſtants, with generall conſent aſſcribe to S. Eleutherius himſelfe, written to kinge Lucius, as reſponſory, and ſatisfactory to ſome letters, which this kinge had written vnto him to ſuch purpoſe, to haue temporall lawes from him to gouerne this kingdome by: Petiſtis à nobis leges Romanos, & Caeſaris vobis tranſmitti. You require of vs (writeth this holy Pope to king Lucius) the Romane Lawes, and the Emperors, to bee ſent ouer vnto you, vvhich you vvould practiſe, and put in vre, vvithin your Realme: the Romane Lawes and the Emperors, vvee may euer reproue, but the Lawe of God vvee may not; you haue receaued of late through gods mercy, in the kingedome of Britanie, the Lawe and faith of Christ. You haue vvith you vvithin the Realme, both parts of the ſcriptures, out of them by gods grace vvith the councell of your Realme, take you a Lawe, and by that Lavve by gods ſufferance, rule your kingedome of Britanie, for you bee gods vicar in your kingedome. Epist. Eleutherij Papae ad Lucium Reg. Britan. apud Foxe to. 1. Iuel contra Hard. Franc. Maſon l. 2. Godwyn. Conuerſ. of Brit. pag. 38. Lambert. in leg. S. Vſuardi. Stow in Lucio.
                        
                        
                           Thus theſe Proteſtants tranſlate that part of that Popes Epiſtle. Whereby firſt it is manifeſt, That Kinge Lucius now a Chriſtian did not, and in conſcience coulde not, write for, or abſolutely deſire the Imperiall Lawes, the Emperors then beeing pagans, and their Lawes accordingely mayntaining the Idolatries of the gentiles, but as they ſhould bee moderated and corrected by the Lawes of Chriſt, which noe man could with more authoritie and better performe, then the holy Pope, hauing then the ſupreame place in the church of God. For otherwiſe he ſhould haue beene an enemy to Chriſt, & his lawe which hee now profeſſed: and beeing in ſoe high grace, and fauour with the Emperor, and Roman Senate, as theſe Proteſtants and other antiquities tell vs, hee might & ſhould with farr more honor, loue and likeinge, haue receaued theſe Lawes from the Emperor himſelfe, the Senate of Rome, or manie Romans here in Britanie, whoe then liued accordinge to thoſe Roman and Imperiall Lawes, then from Pope Eleutherius, whoe liued not as thoſe Lawes commaunded, but ſoe farr otherwiſe, that hee and all the Popes of Rome before, and many after him,

were both perſecuted, and putt to death for chriſtian Religion by thoſe lawes.
                        Therefore kinge Lucius requeſtinge ſuch Lawes from Pope Eleutherius, muſt needs hereby acknowledge, that as by ſendinge ſoe farr vnto him, to be inſtructed in the fa
                              •…
                           th of Chriſt, and all ſuch matters ſpirituall to bee ſettled and ordered here by his higheſt power: ſoe in his temporall proceedings which to bee iuſt, & holy muſt needs haue a ſubordination vnto ſpirituall, and the iudgement ouer Lawes. Whether they ar holy iuſt and ſuch as Chriſtians in conſcience and Religion ought to vſe, and bee directed by, is to bee made by them cheifly, whoe haue the greateſt knowledged, and commaunde in ſuch caſes, and iudgements, which bee the gouernors and Biſhops of the church of God, hee thought noe Lawes to bee vncontrolably warrantable, but ſuch as the cheife paſtor of the church of Chriſt, the Pope of Rome ſhould giue validitie vnto, by his confirmation and allowance. For amonge ſoe many Lawes, as ſoe ample, and greate a kingedome was to bee ruled and gouerned by, there muſt needs bee many, which of neceſſitie were thus to bee examined

by the Lawe of God, and cheifeſt interpreters thereof. Which Saint Eleutherius warned Kinge Lucius of, when hee preſcribed vnto him, to haue his Lawes warranted by the ſcriptures, and taken forth of them by the councell of the Realme, and by that Lawe to Rule the kingedome: where it is euident, that hee appointeth the Lawe of Britanie to be conformable to the Lawe of God, and to bee ſecure it ſhould bee ſuch, it to bee enacted and concluded by the beſt councell of his Realme in ſuch things, which were the Biſhops, cleargie and learned diuines, cheifely which S. Eleutherius had ſettled here, for they were the onely or principall Interpreters of holy ſcriptures here at that time: and others in a maner, concerninge ſuch things, Catechumenes, to bee inſtructed themſelues, and not to drawe Lawes out of ſcriptures, to inſtruct, and direct others. And ſo a Proteſtant Biſhop with ſuch publick warrant expoundeth it in theſe wordes: By the aduiſe of the cleargie of their dominion. Bridges def. l. 16. pag. 1355.
                        And S. Eleutherius takinge vppon himſelfe, as Pope of Rome, the ſupreamacy ouer the whole church, as theſe Proteſtants haue

told vs, cannot by any but careleſſe or ignorāt of truth bee interpreted, to giue any ſuch preeminence to a newly become Chriſtian temporal prince, but calleth him onely the Vicar, or Vicegerent of God, as all princes Chriſtians and others ar, or ſhould bee to ſee iuſtice performed to all within their dominions, which is ſufficiently expreſſed in this very epiſtle it ſelfe, where that holy Pope telleth Kinge Lucius, what is the dutie and office of a king, the wordes by Proteſtant trāſlation ar: The people and nations of the kingedome of Britanie is yours, ſuch as ar diuided, you ſhould gather them together to the Lavve of Christ, his holy church to peace and concord: & cheriſh, maintayne protect, gouerne and defend them from the iniurious malicious, and their enemies. A kinge hath his name of gouerninge, and not of his kingedome, ſoe longe you shall bee a kinge, as you rule well, otherwiſe you shall not bee ſoe named, and looſe that name vvhich God forbid. God graunt that you may ſoe rule your Realme of Britanie, that you may Reigne vvith him euerlastingely, whoſe Vicar you ar in the ſaid kingedome. Epiſtol. Eleuther. apud Godwyn. Conuerſ. pag. 23. Foxe tom. 1. Stowe and Hovves histor. in Lucius. Bridg. def. p. 1355.

                           Ieuel. ag. Hard. Lambard. de legib. Theater of Brit. and others.
                        
                        Where wee ſee, in what ſence this holie Pope called Kinge Lucius the Vicar, or Vicegerent in his kingdome, to ſee iuſtice miniſtred, the church of Chriſt to bee defended from wronge, and the priuiledges thereof to bee kept inuiolable. Which this holy king moſte chriſtianly performed, for when all eccleſiaſticall matters were ſettled here by the Popes authoritie, and theſe Lawes here appointed for this kingedome, firſt here cō
                           cluded, and then with the reſt confirmed by the Pope: cuncta quae fecerant à Pontifice confirmari impetrauerunt: Then this kinge accordinge to the direction and inſtructions of the holy Pope to ſpeake in Proteſtants owne, words: endowed the churches of Britanie with liberties, Lucius Rex, eccleſias Britanniae libertatibus muniuit. Which ar to many to bee related, and ar ſett downe in the Brittiſh hiſtorie, Matthew of Weſtminſter and others. (Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine. Galf. Mon. lib. 4. histor. Reg. Britan. cap. 20. Matth. Weſtm. an. 186. Proteſt. Annot. vppon Matth. West. an. 187. Galfrid. Monum. ſup. l. 4. Matth. West. an. 187.) And in this ſence our beſt Brittiſh and

chriſtian Saxon kings, who were moſt obedient euer to the church of Rome, were from that time, and by vertue of that donation, of Pope Eleutherius, giuinge Lucius the Title of the vicar or vicegerent of God in his kingdome, ſoe called and enioyed that Title as a Proteſtant Lawier, and Antiquarie thus deduceth. (Selden Analect. l. 1. pag 4
                              •…
                           ) Ex quo non ſolum Britannorum, ſed etiam Anglorum ſubſequentes Reges, hoc nomine vicarij Dei ſunt potiti. From which time, or the graunt of Pope Eleutherius, the kings that followed, not onely of the Britans, but Engliſh alſoe obteyned this name of the vicars of God: and citeth the auntient Lawyer Henry Bracton, for the ſame. But wee neede not demurre vppon the authorities of priuate Lawyers, or Antiquaries for this matter. For wee haue Lawes themſelues of good kinge Edward, which William the Bastard afterward confirmed (a Proteſtant Lawyers or rather the words of the Lawe, to confirme & warrāt this: Where the very words of the Lawe thus auntient and confirmed, are theſe. Leges S. Eduardi apud Gul. Lamb. fol. 126. pag. 2. leg. 1. cap. 17. & leg. 77.
                        
                           Rex autem quia Vicarius ſummi Regis est,

ad hoc est conſtitutus, vt regnum terrenum & populum Domini, & ſuper omnia ſanctum veneretur Eccleſiam eius, & regat & ab iniurioſis defendat, & maleficos ab ea euellat, & destruat & penitus diſperdat. Quod niſi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, verum testante Papa Iohanne nomen Regis perdit. The kinge becauſe hee is the Vicar of the higheſt king, is conſtituted for this to rule the terrene kingedome and people of God, and aboue all things hee ought to reuerence his holy church, and defend it from iniurious people, and to pull from it, and deſtroy and wholly ouerthrowe euill doers. Which except hee performeth, the name of a Kinge ſhall not bee appearinge in him, but as Pope Iohn doth wittnes, he loſeth the name of a kinge, or Ruler. Where wee ſee by the publicke Lawes themſelues, that the Kinge is not called the Vicar or Vicegerent of God in reſpect of ſpirituall but temporall affaires, to reuerence and defend it, and ſuffer noe wronge to bee done vnto it, or priuiledges taken from it; which is more plainely expreſſed in the ſame Lawe in this maner: (leg. S. Vſuardi ſupr.) Debet Sanctam Eccleſiā regni ſui cum omni integritate, & libertate iuxta

constitutiones patrum & praedeceſſorem ſeruare, fouere, manutenere, a kinge ought to keepe, foſter, & maintayne the holy church of his kingedome, with all integritie, and libertie, accordinge to the conſtitutions of the Fathers, and predeceſſors. Which a kinge ought to ſweare in proper parſon vppon the ghoſpels and relicks of Saints before the laietie, preiſts, and clergie, before hee is crowned by the Archbiſhops & Biſhops of the kingdom: hither to this holy law of our auntiēt kings.
                        I haue inſiſted vpon this Epiſtle of Pope Eleutherius the longer, becauſe with Proteſtants it is in ſoe high eſteeme, ſoe auntient and certaine, that a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth: Wee haue ſeene the Biſhop of Romes owne letter to kinge Lucius, that is reputed to bee the first christian kinge of Britanie. (Iohn Bridges def. of the gouernm. in the church of Engl. l. 16. pag. 1355.) The Theater writers ſay, it is in the cuſtody of Syr Robert Cotton Baronet of Conington in Huntington ſhire, (Theater of greate, Brit. l. 6. c. 19.) Others ſay it is likewiſe founde, in the old hiſtorie called Brutus. (Caius antiquit. Cantab. l. 1.) Stowe writeth: I finde the ſame entered in a booke intituled, Constitutions, pertayninge to the

Guilde hall of London. (Stovve hiſtor. in Kinge Lucius.) And it is founde alſoe amonge the old Lawes of Saint Edward our kinge and others before him, and placed & receaued as a part of our Lawe, both by our Saxon kinges, and Norman alſoe, as namely kinge William the firſt, as the Proteſtant publiſher of them himſelfe, a lawyer and antiquarie is witneſſe, vvith all moste all writers, plaeri
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſcriptores omnes, as hee teſtifieth: (Williel. Lambard. lib. de Priſcis Anglorum legib. fol. 1. ante praef. fol. 126.131.) Therefore I may boldely terme Pope Eleutherius the firſt Chriſtian Lawe maker, and firſt director, and confirmer of Lawes in this kingedome. Which how it can ſtand to bee iuſtly done, as all theſe our kinges, their nobles, clergies, lawyers and theſe Proteſtants auouche, without as greate a preeminent power as the Popes of theſe times doe clayme, or commonly Catholicks aſcribe vnto them, I leaue to the quickeſt ſighted Proteſtants to diſtinguiſh.
                        And yet this ſchole of Proteſtant antiquaries, doe reade a leſſon vnto vs, to clymbe a ſtepp higher in ſuch affayres. For they aſſure, from the ſame publick lawes of our

auncient Saxon and other kinges, and from the ſame Pope Eleutherius his owne donation, that hee declared to be annexed to the crowne of this kingedome, all the Ilands betweene vs and Norway, and that our kings ſhould haue care thereupon, to enioye them. The words of that auncient Lawe by Proteſtant publiſhing, and allowance publick ar theſe: (Leges Ed
                                 •…
                              wardi Regis c. 17. apud Lumbard. ſupr. fol. 130 pag. 2.) Debet de iure Rex omnes terras & honores, omnes dignitates & iura & libertates coronae regni huius in integrum cum omni integritate, & ſine diminutione obſeruare, & defendere, diſperſa & dilapidata, & amiſſa regni iura in priſtinum ſtatum, & debitum viribus omnibus reuocare. Vniuerſa vero terra & tota, & Inſulae omnes vſque Norwegiam & vſque Dariam pertinent ad coronam regni eius, & ſunt de appendicijs, & dignitatibus Regis, & vna est Monarchia, & vnum eſt regnum, & vocabatur quondam Regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum Anglorum, tales enim metas & fines, & praedictae ſunt, constituit & impoſuit coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa ſententia ſua, qui primo deſtinauit coronam benedictam Britanniae, & christianitatem Deo inſpirante Lucio

Regi Britonum. The kinge of right ought with all integritie and without diminution obſerue, and defende all lands, and honors, all dignities, and Rights, and liberties of the crowne of this kingedome, wholly, and call backe againe al the Rights of the kingdome that bee diſperſed, dilapidated, & loſte, with all his power vnto their auncient and due ſtate. And the whole and all the Land, and the Ilands euen to Norway, and Denmarke doe belonge to the crowne of his kingdome, and at of the Appendicies, and dignities of the kinge, and it is one monarchie and one kingedome, and it was anciently called the kingedome of Britanie, & now is called the kingedome of the Engliſh men, for our Lord the Pope Eleutherius did by his ſentence cō
                           ſtitute, and appointe ſuch limites, and boundes to the crowne of the kingedome, firſt ſending by the inſpiration of God, a hallowed crowne and Chriſtianitie to Britanie to Kinge Lucius. Hitherto this ſoe auncient & publicke authoritie and antiquitie, now, ſeeing all writers, Catholicks and Proteſtāts agree, that both S. Eleutherius, which made this declaration and confirmation of ſoe manie Ilands and Rights, and Kinge Lucius

which accepted it, was in the like degree, and all our kings ſoe many hundred yeares after, many of them holy Saints, which by this declaration eſteemed theſe territories to bee their owne, to keepe them all, or any of them, declarer or receauers from horrible and damnable vſurpation, as of neceſſitie by theſe Proteſtants wee muſt doe, what way is there to end this difficultie, except wee allowe, of the Popes Authoritie in ſuch a declaration.
                        But to yeeld a greater, and more auncient honor, and priuiledge, to this kingedome, and the kings thereof, then many Proteſtants, enemies to our Brittiſh Antiquities, will allowe vnto it, not onely to comprehend al theſe Northren Ilands vnto Norway, vnder the name of, Inſulae Britannicae, the Brittiſh or Britons Iland. But that the kingedome of Denmarke was ſubiect and tributary to Britanie, diuers hundreds of yeares before Chriſt, and ſoe conſequently the adiacent Ilands, which by Ius gentium, belonged to the Continent, next adioyninge, wee ſhall by this exempt this kingdome from receauing any thinge by a free donation from Pope Eleutherius in this kinde, claiminge

by this, that hee only adiudged the old Right and Title of Britanie to bee true and lawfull in this caſe, not giuing any new prerogatiue by that confirmation. Yett this will not exempt either kinge Lucius from embracinge, or Pope Eleutherius from aſſigning and confirminge that diuiſion, and preferringe the Title of kinge Lucius before the Scots and others, which by their hiſtories had then enioyed longe time diuers of thoſe Ilands, and ſoe wee muſt ſtill acknowledge that both Eleutherius the Pope, and kinge Lucius, then thought, the deciſion of ſuch things, did in ſome reſpect in conſcience belonge to that See Apoſtolick, otherwiſe neither would the one haue made it, or the other ſought for, or accepted it, in that maner, both of them beeing worthie and renowned Saints in the church of Chriſt. M. S. pr. Regnum Britanniae in Gurguntio. Ioh. Rom. apud Stowe in cod. Stowe and Howes histor. in Gurg. an. ante Chriſt. 375. Ioh. Lydgate in Cantab. Ioh. Harding Chron. c. 34. fol. 29.30. Caius antiq. Cantab. l. 1. Matth. Westm. aetat. 5. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. Giral. Cāb. ap. Stow. ſupr. And into the ſame laborinth we fal, by theſe men denying power in the Pope of Rome, to giue pardōs,

or Indulgences to mitigate, or releaſe the puniſhments of ſinnes, if wee ſhould harken vnto them; for they greately commend vnto vs the Epiſtle aſcribed to S. Patrick the Iriſh Apoſtle in the antiquities of Gaſtenbury, to bee of greate authoritie, and yett in this wee reade. Quod ſanctus Phaganus & Deruuianus ab Eleutherio Papa qui cos miſerat, decē annos Indulgentiae impetrarunt. That S. Phaganus and Deruuianus, obteyned of Pope Eleutherius that ſent them, ten yeares of Indulgence for the pilgryms viſiting that holie place, a greater power in the Pope then the other, by theſe Proteſtants. And thus much of this hundred yeares. Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. Godwyn. Conuerſ. of Britanie cap. 2. pag. 10. Ioh. Leland. in Aſſert. Arthur. Antiquitat. Glaſton in tabula lignea. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Patricio. & M.S. Antiq. in eodem.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE THIRD CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE.
                     
                        
                           THE VII. CHAPTER. How the Popes of Rome in this third Centurie, or hundred of years alſoe, by our Proteſtants and others, ruled and gouerned here in Britante in ſpirituall things, by their ſupreame power therein.
                        NOw hauing ended this ſecond hundred yeare, when there was ſoe generall an acceptance of this higheſt papall Authoritie in Britanie by the kinge, his Nobles, three Archbiſhops, ſoe many other Biſhops, and the noble cleargie and others here, wee may bee more breife in ages followinge: for it is a common conſent of the Proteſtant writers of England, that the ſame faith and Religion in all materiall points (ſuch as this is) continued firme and inuiolable here at the leaſt vntill the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither in the later end of the ſixt hundred yeare. And it is a veritie granted by all, followinge S. Bede, ſuſceptam fidem Britanni vſque in tempora

Diocletiani Principis inuiolatum integrumque quieta in pace ſeruabant. The Britans kept the faith which they receaued in the time, of kinge Lucius, inuiolable and whole in quiet peace vntill the times of Diocletian. (Bed. hiſt. eccleſ. l. 1. c. 4.) Whoe did not begin his Empire, vntill the yeare 285. & his perſecution longe time after about the yeare 296. And no man can thinke, but amōge ſoe many Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and cleargie men, which together, with the whole chriſtian Religion, embraced the papall power, liued, and gouerned the church of Britanie here many yeares in this age, in the ſame maner and order, as it was commended vnto them by the Romane ſupreame ſpirituall Authoritie, of S. Eleutherius and his Apoſtolicke Legates.
                        Therefore to bee breife, the next Pope which was in the beginning of this hundred yeare, Scotland (as hereafter) a greate portion of this Iland, and then a diſtinct greate and inuincible kingedome, vnto the moſt powerable Romane Emperors, was conuerted to the faith of Chriſt. The very name of this holy Pope and Martyr carieth ſpirituall ſupreamacy with it, in all the Chriſtian

world, Aſia, Africk, and Europe, by the mouthes and pennes of all Proteſtants and others. A Proteſtant Biſhop for all ſhall anſwere in theſe words. Pope Victor excommunicated all churches both greeke and latine, which differed from his church, in the obſeruation of Eaſter. (Morton. appeale l. 1. cap. 9.) Which noe man can queſtion, but it was the higheſt act, to haue and exerciſe ſuch power ouer all churches, and yett moſte iuſtly and lawfully, and hee a bleſſed man, which both a Proteſtant Archbiſhopp and his maieſtie kinge Iames ſhal teſtifie for all. The church of Rome was then a Rule to all, ſaith our Kinge. (Kinge Iames in parlam.) The other ſaith: Victor was a godly Biſhop, and a martyr, and the church at that time was in greate puritie, not beeinge longe after the Apostles times. (Whitgift Answ. to the admonition p. 80. ſect. 4.) Wherfore Kinge Donalde of Scotland now moued by the example of Kinge Lucius, his neighbouring Sociate in terrene principalitie, and his whole kingedome, and beeing aſſured by this ſupreame power ſpirituall exerciſed by S. Victor ouer all churches, that it was his right, and the ſureſt waye in time of controuerſies (as that was in the obſeruation

of Eaſter) to adhere vnto the cheife and commandinge church of Rome, hee ſent to this holy Pope, to bee inſtructed in the faith of Chriſt, a longe, paineful & troubleſome iorney & labour on both ſides, ſoe many Biſhops now beeing in Britanie, Fraunce, and in all places betweene Scotland and Rome, if kinges & kingedomes could haue beene conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, and matters of the church with them ordered, without his direction or confirmation. For as truely write the Scottiſh hiſtorians. Pope Victor ſent preiſts, in extremam Albionem, to the vttermoste part of Albion, or the vttermoste Albion, to preach the doctrine of Chriſt. (Hector Boeth. l. 5. Scot. histor. fol. 89. p. 2. Boeth. ſupr. p. 1. Buchan. Rer. Scotic l. 4. Reg. 27. Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. in Donald. Ed. Grymſt. p. 20. in Scotl. §. 17.) the narration whereof is this.
                        
                           Talem dederat Donaldo Regi animum, pacis Princeps & author Chriſtus Dominus quod verae pietati, aſpernato malorum demonum cultu, ſeſe paulò ante addixerat. Nam Seuero Imperante Romanis, apud Victorem Pontificem maximum qui quintusdecimus post Petrum Eccleſiae praefuit, per legatos obtinuit, vt viri, doctrina & Religione inſignes, in Scotiam ab eo

miſsi, ſe cum liberis & coniuge Chriſti nomen profitentes, baptiſmate inſignirent. Regis exempla Scotica nobilitas ſequuta, auerſata impietatem, Christique Religionem complexa, ſacro fonte est abluta. Fuit annus ille quo Scoti ad lumen verae pietatis, Dei Optimi Maximi benignitate vocati ſunt, & recepti; ab eo qui primus fuit humanae ſalutis tertius ſupra ducēte ſimum: à Scotorum Regni institutione quingenteſimus triceſimus tertius. Chriſt our Lord prince, and Author of peace, gaue ſuch minde to kinge Donald, that caſtinge aſide the worſhip of wicked deuils, hee had a litle before addicted himſelfe to true pietie. For when Seuerus was the Romane Emperor, hee obteyned of Pope Victor the fifteenth after S. Peter, that ruled the church, that men renowned for learninge and Religion, ſent from him into Scotland, might baptiſe him, with his wife and children, profeſſinge Chriſt. The Scottiſh nobilitie followeinge the example of the kinge, forſakinge impiety, and embracing the Religiō of Chriſt, was baptized. This was in the yeare of the Incarnation of Chriſt, two hundred and three, and from the beginninge of the kingdome of the Scots, fiue hundred thirtie and three.
                        
                           And a little after ſpeakinge of the renowned leardned Chriſtians, of that time, hee addeth. Incipere & nostri tum primum, ſacras colere literas, Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus ad Christi dogma propalandum, in extremam miſerat Albionem. At that time our Scottiſh men firſt began to ſtudy diuinitie, hauinge for their Tutors, thoſe preiſts which Pope Victor ſent to teach the Religion of Chriſt in Albion, the vttermoſt country in this part of the world. And againe: nostri qua fide & pietate instituti ſemel fuerunt, hactenus erroribus aſpernatis, perſeuerant. Our contrimen (of Scotlād) perſeuer at this day (it was written in the yeare 1526.) in the faith and pietie wherein they were then inſtructed. (Hector Boeth. in fine praefat. Bal. centur 5. in Hector Boeth.) And a Proteſtant of England in the yeare 1615. writteh: Scotland receyued the faith in the time of Pope Victor the first, in the yeare 203. Celestin the first ſent Palladius thither, to roote out the Pelagian hereſie, which began to increaſe there, vnder Eugenius the ſecond, whoe died in the yeare 460. ſince this time the Realme continued longe in the profeſsion of the Romish church, vntill theſe

later dayes. (Edward. Grimſton. Booke of Eſtates pag. 20. cap. 17.) Hee meaneth the dayes of this our Soueraigne kinge Iames the firſt of England, and ſixt of that kingedome. Therfore it is a thinge without queſtion, that this holy Pope, ſoe earneſt for the ſpirituall ſupreamacie of his Apoſtolicke See, ſettled it with other doctrines in this Iland, where with the reſt it ſtill continued vntill theſe times, as theſe Proteſtants haue declared. Which is euident by all hiſtories, not any one affirminge, but rather denyinge, that hee altered anie thinge of that conſtitution of Pope Eleutherius, ſubmittinge the whole nation of Scotlande, to the Archbiſhopp of Yorke in ſpirituall affaires. And if kinge Donald and the nobilitie of Scotland then had not beene aſſured, that this ſupreame ſpirituall power, in diſpoſinge and orderinge church matters, in ſuch caſes, had belonged onely to the Popes of Rome, of all people and places in the world, they would not haue appealed to Rome, for thoſe thinges at that time in the Empire of Seuerus, when aboue all others, there was the greateſt enmytie and warrs betweene

the Romans and Scots, that euer were teſtified by all their hiſtories. Bed l. 1. histor. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. lib. 5. Scot. hiſt. Bucan. Rer. Scotic. l 4. Holinsh. hist. of Scotl. in Seuerus.
                        
                        In an other point alſoe wee are aſſured, that S. Victor whoe had by his higheſt authoritie excōmunicated ſoe many churches, both greeke and latine, as theſe Proteſtants haue told vs before, for their wronge keepinge of Eaſter, ſettled the right obſeruatiō thereof in Scotland at this time. For to ſpeake in Proteſtants wordes of this Pope: Hee confirmed the ordinance of Pius, touching the celebration of Easter vppon the Sonday. Soe did Pope Eleutherius before him, and ſoe conſequently alſoe amonge other Chriſtian doctrines, by his legates taught and deliuered it here in Britanie. And wee are taught by theſe learned Proteſtants, that in the firſt generall councell of Nice: De obſeruatione Paſchae antiquus canon ſancitus eſt, ne porro in hac re Eccleſiae variarent: The old canon of the obſeruation of Eaſter was decreed, leaſt the churches ſhould afterward differ, about it. (Ed. Grymstonp· 436. in Victor. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pont. Rom. in Victor. Bal. lib. 1. de act. prat. in eod. Magdeburg. centur.
                           
3. & in Eleuther. Damaſ. in Eleuther. Barns iu Siluestro. Magdeburg. cent. 4.) And that wee had Brittiſh Biſhops there, which conſented to this decree, and receaued it for Britany, they teſtifie in theſe termes. (Theater of greate Britanie l 6. cap. 9 pag. 206 n. 19.) The Britannes continued conſtant in chriſtianitie, and the cenſures of their Bishops, for the greate estimation of their constancie, pietie and learninge, were required, and approued in greate points of doctrine, amonge the aſſemblies, of ſome generall councells, as that of Sardis (where appeales to the Pope were decreed) and Nyce, in the tyme of greate Conſtantine, vvee had our Bishops preſent. And all men of readinge are aſſured of this, both Conſtantine the Emperor in his epiſtle to the churches, and S. Athanaſius in his Apologie write plainely, that this our Britanie receaued the councell of Nice. Epiſt. Constāt. apud Theodoret. Athanaſ Apolog.
                        
                        Therefore it is a very idle and ignorant coniecture, or rather malitious error of ſome Proteſtants, to ſeeme to write as though Britany had receaued the faith frō ſome of the Aſiatical churches, becauſe ſome of the later Scots and Britans die erre in that obſeruation,

but this error of the Britans as diuers haue proued allready was quite differēt from that of ſome part of Aſia & greeke. And the firſt gretian that came hither, except ſome ſent by Roman Authoritie, that I finde was S. Regulus Albutus borne in Achaia, whoe came into Scotland, when Auguſtinus was kinge, allmoſt two hundred yeares after this, and longe after the controuerſie of keepinge Eaſter was ended, and brought thither holy relicks of S. Andrew the Apostle, vvhoe coming into Pictland, and the fame of this knowne, very many came to reuerence the holy relicques of the Apoſtle, and made offerings there, and the kinge of the picts Hirgustus receaued by him with proceſsion and lyinge vppon the grounde, vvith much reuerence, kiſſed the holy relicques, and after maſſe ended hee bequeathed his palace to Saint Andrew, and to Regulus and the Preists to ſerue God in. Huius rei fama per Pictorum regiones delata permultorum animos ad viſendas venerandaſque ſacras Apostoli reliquias attendit. Confluxerunt ergo illuc vndique donaria Christi Apoſtolo pretioſa afferentes. Affuit & Heirgastus Rex eorum, quae fama ad eum detulerat, viſendi cupidas. Venientem ad ſe Regulus

cum ſociijs pio apparatu cum Sacerdotum ac Monachorum religioſa deductione in hymnis & canticis excepit. Rex humi procumbens, ſacras reliquias multa veneratione oſculatus, vbi ſacra Chriſtiano more, cuius ipſe Heirgustus erat obſeruantiſsimus, erant peracta, regium palatium amplis ſtructuris ornatum diuo Andreae, Regulo, ac Sacerdotibus ibidem deinceps Optimo Maximo Deo famulaturis, liberè erogauit, struxit & haud procul à palatio, ſacram aedem diuo Apostolo dicatam: and builded an other church not far from the palace, dedicated to the holy Apostle. And thus much of S. Victor.
                        Next to him ſucceeded Pope and S. Zepherinus, whoe to proue hee ſtill maintayned this Romane ſupreamacie, as his predeceſſors before, ouer all Biſhopes, Primates, Patriarckes, and whomſoeuer, or whereſoeuer of the cleargie, or others, did generally decree as theſe Proteſtants tel vs. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Zepherin. hee calleth him Seuerus.) Sine Romani Pontificis authoritate accuſatum Epiſcopum, nec à Primate, nec à Patriarcha, nec à Metropolitano, in Iudicio condemnandum eſſe. That a Biſhop

                           accuſed, should not bee condemned, neyther by the Primate, nor Patriarcke, nor Metropolitane, without the authoritie of the Pope of Rome. By which is euident, that euen the Archbiſhops themſelues of Britanie, to whome all others were ſubordinate in thinges ſpirituall, were ſubiect to the Pope of Rome at this time.
                        Pope Calixtus ſucceeded next, and to ſpeake in a Proteſtant Doctors wordes: (Powel l. 1. of Antichriſt. pag. 130.131.) Calixtus Pope defined, that all Bishops though gathered in a generall councell, shall fulfill the vvill of the church of Rome. They which doe not this are pronounced to keepe a conciliable, & not a councell. And to bee ſhort in this matter, the Proteſtants of England proue vnto vs, that this buſines of the ſpirituall power of that See ouer all other churches, is the cheife ſcope of many of their Epiſtles decretall. (Rob. Barns in vit. Vrbani, Antheri. & Dovvnam. lib. 1. Antichristi. cap. 3. pag. 35.) And to giue ſome particular inſtances hereof more in Britanie, in this age: wee finde in hiſtories. (Matth. Weſt. an. 257.258.) that Pope Stephē about the yeare of Chriſt 257.258. or 259. When S. Mellon, then noe Chriſtian, was ſent from hence by publick

authoritie to Rome, about the temporall affaires of this kingedome, conuerted him to the faith of Chriſt, made him preiſt, and ſoone after Biſhop, exempting him from his ciuill imployments of this his country, and by his Apoſtolicke power ſent him Archbiſhop to Rhoan in Normandie. (Petr. de Nat. de vit. 51. Vincent. in. Specul. l. 11. c. 74. Martyrol. Rom. 22. Octob. Ioh. Capgr. in 5. Mel. M. S. antiq. in eod. & Catal. Epiſcop. Rothmag. Matt. West.) And amonge others our glorious men and martyrs here in this age, it is the common opinion, that S. Amphibalus whoe conuerted S. Alban. (Matth. Paris p. 178.179. Lidg. in vit. cius. Engl. Martyrol. 25. Iun.) both was a Britan borne, and conſecrated at Rome, ſome ſay by Pope & Saint Zepherinus, what and how glorious his hiſtorie is, for his preaching and martyrdome with vs, all hiſtories of that time are full: and how renowned hee and others of his holy company, ſent by that Apoſtolicke See were at the ſame time in Scotland, namely Modocus, Priſcus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and Carnonus, both Scottiſh and Engliſh hiſtories wil witneſſe. Where S. Amphibalus was the firſt Bishop they had, and in Mona the

Iland: Amphibalus Brito vir inſigni pietate primus Antiſtes ibi creatus. Hector Boethius Scotor. hiſtor. lib. 6. fol. 102. Bal. centur. 1. in Amphib. Holinsh. hist. of Scotland in Chrakint. Veremund. apud Boeth. ſupr.
                        
                        And ſoe honored was he of that moſt worthie Kinge of Scotland Chrathlintus, that to ſhew the honor hee yeelded to this holie Legate, and his companions, and ſomewhat to behold the Religiō of that time, the Scottiſh hiſtorie thus ſpeaketh vnto vs. (Hector Boeth. ſupr Holinsh. hiſt. of Scotlād in Chrah.) Chrathlintus Rex ſacram Antiſtitis aedem muneribus ornauit ampliſsimis, calicihus, patenis candelabris, alijſque ſimilibus ad ſacrorum vſum commodis, ex argento, auroque fabrefactis, altarique cupro & are clauſo: prouentus ad ea ex agris in ſacrae aedis vicini constituit. Fuit id templum omnium primum, Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex ſacerque magistratus ſedem haberet primariam, inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere ſcriptores dedicatum. Kinge Chrathlint did adorne the Holy Howſe, of the Biſhop Amphibalus, with moſt honorable guifts, chalices, patens, candleſticks, and others ſeruinge for the vſe of Maſſe made of ſyluer, and gold, and an Altare,

incloſed with copper and braſſe, and appointed reuenewes for them out of the country adioyninge. That was the firſt Chriſtian church where a Biſhop and holy magiſtrate had his cheife See, amonge the Scots, that is remembred by our writers. Thus were the Biſhops and preiſts conſecrated at, and ſent from Rome, honored in this nation at that time. When wee reade further the See of Rome to haue beene here in ſuch high honor, that the Brittiſh writer, and witneſſe of S. Albans life, liuinge then, writeth. (Compilator vitae S. Albani apud Capgrau. & M.S. antiq. in vit. eiuſd.) Romam proficiſcor, vt illic veniam merear delictorum, libellum quoque iſtum offeram Examini Romanorum: vt ſi quid in eo ſecus quàm debuit fortè prolatum fuerit, hoc per eos dignetur in melius commutare. I goe to Rome, that there I may deſerue forgiuenes of my ſinnes: and I will offer this booke to the Examination of the Romans, that if any thinge be vttered therein otherwiſe then it ſhould, it may bee amended.
                        And that all ſpirituall power and iuriſdiction then in Britanie, was ſubordinate

vnto, & dependinge of the Popes of Rome, in that time, the Antiquities and Antiquaries, Proteſtants and others, both of Cambridge and other places doe plainely teſtifie, whoe amonge other euidences for this matter, produce vnto vs the auntient Bull of Pope Honorius, dated at Rome the 20. day of Februarij in the yeare 624. (Bulla Honorij 1. Papae an. 624.20. Februar. apud Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. Accad. p. 75.76.77.) Wherein hee affirmeth that hee followeth the example of Pope Eleutherius, of whome I haue ſpoken before: Pope Fabian who liued in this age, and others who beeinge likewiſe holy Popes, had done the like which hee did towardes the vniuerſitie or ſchoole of Cambridge, and concerninge his power ſpirituall ouer all parſons in this nation, thus it is.
                        
                           Honorius Epiſcopus ſeruus ſeruorum Dei, dilectis filijs doctoribus & ſcholaribus in vniuerſitate Cantabrigiae ſtudentibus Apostolicam benedictionem. Dilectiſsimi in Christo filij, nō abſque labore, & plurima perturbatione didicimus, quomodo nonnulli propriae ſalutis immemores luporum faucibus, & vulpina facie, libertates & priuilegia, quae vobis & praedeceſſoribus

in eadem vniuerſitate ſtudentibus gratiosè indulſit ſedes Apostolica, moliuntur 
                                 •…
                              neruare: Ita quòd plures eccleſiarum praepoſiti abſque rationis. Iure minùs inſtè in vos iuriſdictionem indebitam, & inſolitam vſurpantes, quamque non conſueuerunt hactenus, ad vntuerſitatem veſtram accedunt, materiam perturbationis, & diſcordiae ſeminantes, correctionis, emendationis aut reformationis ibidem officia exercentes, contra inhibitionem ſedis Apoſtolicae. Volentes igitur, vt tenemur iustitia ſuadente, paci & tranquillitati vniuerſitatis veſtrae paterna ſollicitudine ſalubriter prouidere. Praedeceſſorum nostrorum Romanae Eccleſiae Pontificum, Eleutherij, Fabiani, Leonis, Simplicij, Felicis & Bonifacij veſtigijs debitè inhaerentes, authoritate omnipotentis Dei districtius inhibemus, ſub poena excommunicationis, quam veniens in contrarium ipſo facto incurrat, ne quis Archiepiſcopus, aut eorum officiales, ſeu viſitatores generales aut ſpeciales à Sede Apostolica deputati, audent in aliquem veſtrum ſuſpenſionis vel excommunicationis, ſcu interdicti ſententias inferre, aut vos familiares vestros molestare praeſumat.
                        
                        Honorius Biſhop, ſeruant of the ſeruants of God, to his beloued ſonnes the doctors &

ſchollers of the vniuerſitie of Cambridge ſendeth Apoſtolicall benediction. Wee haue learned not without labour and much ſorrowe, moſte beloued ſonnes in Chriſt, how ſome vnmindfull of their owne ſaluation, like greedy wolues, and craftly foxes goe about to weaken or euacuate the liberties & priuiledges which the See Apoſtolicke hath graunted graciouſly to you, and your predeceſſors ſtudents in the ſame vniuerſitie. Soe that many Rulers of churches without right of reaſon, vſurping, vniuſtly ouer you vndue iuriſdiction, and vnaccuſtomed, and which hitherto they haue not vſed, come to your vniuerſitie, ſowing matter of trouble, and diſcord, exerciſing there the offices of correction, emendation, or reformation, againſt the inhibition of the See Apoſtolick. Wee therfore willing, as wee are bound by iuſtice perſuadinge it, with a fatherly care ſafely to prouide for the peace, and quietneſſe of your vniuerſitie, duely followinge the ſteps of our predeceſſors, Popes of Rome, Eleutherius, Fabianus, Leo, Simplicius, Felix and Bonifacius, by the authoritie of almightie God, doe ſtrictlie forbid vnder payne of excommunicatiō ipſo facto to bee

incurred by the cōtrary doer, that noe Archbiſhop, or their Officials, nor the viſitors generall or ſpeciall deputed from the See Apoſtolicke, ſhall dare to inflict the ſentences of ſuſpenſion or excommunication, or interdiction, againſt any of you, or preſume to moleſt you, or your ſeruants.
                        By which it is euident, that in this age the Popes of Rome, exerciſed the higheſt ſpiritual iuriſdictiō in this kingdome, limited (as they thought good) the power of Bishops, and Archbiſhops, ſubiecting them to their cēſures, and made exemptions from them, & all others, except the See of Rome it ſelfe, & had their viſitors here to ſuch purpoſes, except theſe Proteſtants doe deceaue vs. Which further teſtifie, that this Pope Fabian, in that time miraculouſlie choſen Pope, and liuing & dying an holy Saint, made diuers decrees, generally bindinge all Chriſtians as: That euery Christiā ſhould cōmunicate thriſe a yeare, that is to ſay, at the feaſts of Eaſter, whitſonday, and the birth of our Sauiour, that preiſts should not bee puniſhed in prophane courts. And the like. Ed. Grymſton. in Fabian. Pope. Rob. Barns l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Fabiano.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE FOVRTH CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE.
                     
                        
                           THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proued likewiſe by the Protestant diuines, and Antiquaries of England, that the Popes of Rome, euer claymed and exerciſed, this their highest power here in this Age.
                        NOw wee are come to the fourth hundred yeare, in the beginninge whereof, Diocletian the perſecutinge Emperor dyinge, although hee had put euen in this Iland, diuers thouſands of Chriſtiās to death, and one thouſand in one time and place, Lichfeild, (Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. Stowe histor. in the Rom. in Coill.) (taking therevpon the name of a Feild of Blood.) yet hee was ſoe farr from extinguiſhinge the name of Chriſt, that wee had a continuall ſucceſſion at that very time of Biſhops, preiſts, religious, and other cleargie men, without intermiſſion deudced from this Roman inſtitution in this kingedome. And this teſtified

by the beſt Antiquities wee haue, S. Gildas, S. Bede, and allmoſte all after them both Catholicks, and Proteſtants. (Gildas l. de excid. & conquest. Brit. cap. 8.) The words of Saint Gildas ar theſe, as Proteſtants publiſh him.
                        
                           Bilustro ſupradicti turbinis necdum ad integrum expleto, emerceſcentibuſque nece ſuorum Authorum nefarijs decretis, laetis luminibus omnes Chriſti Tyrones quaſi poſt hyemalem ac prolixam noctem, temperiem lucemque ſerenam aurae celeſtis excipiunt, renouant eccleſias ad ſolum vſque deſtructas, Baſilicas Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt, perficiunt, ac velut victricia ſigna paſsim propalant, dies feſtos celebrant, ſacra mundo corde, oreque conficiunt, omnes exultant filij gremio ac ſi matris eccleſiae confoti. When ten yeares of the ſaid perſecution were not wholly expired, and the wicked decrees were now voide by the death of their Authors, al the ſouldiars of Chriſt with ioyfull countenance, as it were after a winter longe night, receaue the temper and cleare light of the heauenly ayre, they renew their churches deſtroied euen to the ground, they build churches of the holy martyrs, frame, and perfect them, & as it were publicklie

ſett forth euery where their victorious Enſignes, they celebrate holy dayes, they perfect their ſacrifices, or ſacred things with a cleane hart, and mouth, they all doe reioyce, as it were children foſtered in the lap of their mother the church.
                        The very ſame hath S. Bede whoe addeth (Bed. histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8.) Progreſsi in publicum fideles Christi, qui ſe tempore diſcriminis, ſiluis ac deſertis, abditiſque ſpeluncis occultauerant. The faithfull ſeruants of Chriſt shew themſelues now in publick, whoe in the time of the daunger had hidd themſelues in woods, and wilderneſſes, and hidden dens. And then hee writeth as S. Gildas before. By which publick and hierarchicall Acts and offices of Bishops, and preiſts, as founding and dedicatinge churches, to the honor of holy Martyrs, that had late ſuffered in that perſecution, in inſtitutinge and celebratinge their feſtiuities, renewing and conſecrating other defaced churches, which none but Biſhops might doe, and ſayinge Maſſe, which hee expreſſely by perfecting their ſacrifices or ſacred rites, with a cleane hart, and mouth, the preiſtly office and function, it is moſte euident, that diuers both

preiſts and Biſhops, with other cleargie men eſcaped in this perſecution, and ſoe ſtill continued the hierarchicall ſucceſſion of Archbiſhops and Biſhops, ſoe vniuerſally eſtabliſhed here before by the Popes of Rome, and with the ſame dependance which they had before. For noe hiſtorie maketh mention, of any chaunge, neyther of our Bishops then putt to death, except S. Amphibalus, vnleſſe wee wil coniecture without warrant, that S. Angulus ſuffered martyrdome in this time. And notwithſtanding ſoe many loſſes, and deſolations of our Antiquities, wee haue teſtimonie of ſome Bishops in particular then liuing, the perſecution being ended.
                        For whoe can thinke but ſome of thoſe which fledd into Scotland, whether the perſecution extended not, with S. Amphibalus, remayned there ſtill in the Epiſcopall See of Mona, which kinge Chrathlinte, had ſoe honorably endowed to that purpoſe, and longe after was an Epiſcopall See? I haue named diuers of theſe renowned men before, of whome ſome one in all probabilitie after the returne of Saint Amphibalus into theſe parts, ſupplied that place and dignitie there. And here in England it is euident by

thoſe antiquities wee haue left, that wee had preſerued from the fury of that perſecution, many both Biſhops, and Archbiſhops. To exemplifie in London, wee haue the names of Sixteene Archbiſhops there, before the cominge of S. Auguſtine hither, as both Iocelin of Furnes, the Proteſtants, Stowe, Godwyn and others collect them. (Iocelin Catalog. of Britiſh Biſh. Stowe histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. Catalog. in London, 1. concil. Arelat. in Subſcript. tom. 1. concil. Stowe & Godwyn ſupr.) And it is manifeſt that either Reſtitutus which was Archbiſhop of London, and was preſent at the councel of Arles in Fraunce, in the yeare 326. ſoone after this, or Thedred, or Hillary ſuppoſed to bee his immediate predeceſſors, was then Archbiſhop. And ſoe becauſe euery Archbiſhop inferreth inferiour Biſhops vnder him, that wee had Biſhops alſoe. I will inſtance onely in Wincheſter, where wee ar informed both by an old Manuſcript Author, and a new Proteſtant Biſhop. (Godwyn Catalog. of Biſh. in Winchest. 1. old M. S. apud eundem ſupr.)
That one Conſtans was Biſhop there in this time, and in the yeare 309. or 310. did vpon the 15. day of march, hallowe and dedicate

vnto the honor & memory of S. Amphibalus, that had ſuffered death for Chriſt in the late perſecution, a church there reedified with ſuch wonderfull forwardnes and zeale, as within one yeare and thirtie dayes, both it and all the edifices belonginge vnto it, were quite finiſhed in very ſeemely and conuenient māner. And that Deodatus was Abbot of this new erected Monaſtery.
Thus this Proteſtant Biſhop from an old Manuſcript.
                        By which, and that which is ſpoken before in this chapter, it is euident, that England this part of Britanie then had both Biſhops, and Archbiſhops continuinge in the ſame order and maner as they were firſt inſtituted here by the See of Rome: neither did they now begin to depart or ſeperate themſelues from obedience to that See Apoſtolicke; for ſoone after this, the firſt general councel of Nice beeinge called, theſe Proteſtāts haue told vs, wee had Biſhops there, and moſt euident it is, that it was receaued in this kingdome. And yet the canon of that councell is ſoe manifeſt for the Popes of Rome ſupreamacy, at the leaſt ouer this weſtern world, wherein England is, both in the time of this holy councell, and before, that

a Proteſtant Biſhop doth thus confeſſe it.
(Feild. l. 3. p. 60.61.) In the time of the Nicen councell, & before, as appeareth by the Acts of the councell limitinge their bounds, there were three principall Biſhops, or Patriarkes of the chriſtian church: namely the Biſhop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. Soe writeth the Proteſtant Archbiſhop Whitgift, Foxe and others, whereof one ſaith.
(Whitgift def. of the Answ. p. 331. Foxe tom. 1. pag. 12. Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Rom. in Siluestro.) Sollicitudinem eccleſiarum, pro recepta conſuetudine veterum habendam eſſe ſtatuerunt. The fathers of the nicen councell did decree, that accordinge to the cuſtome receaued from them of old, that the three cheife patriarkes of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, ſhould haue chardge of the churches.
                        Soe that if wee would ſeeke noe further then to theſe great enemies themſelues of the Romane See, yett they confeſſe vnto vs, that it was not onely decreed in this nicen councell, where, as our Proteſtants haue told vs, wee had Biſhops conſentinge, and our kinge and contriman Conſtantine the great Emperor alſoe ſubmittinge himſelfe vnto it, but that it was the old cuſtome and tradition of

the church, that the Biſhop of Rome was the principall Biſhop, and commaundinge Patriarke of all weſterne churches, amonge which this of our Britanie was euer, now is, and of neceſſitie muſt bee one, and if wee will bee members of the church of Chriſt, except wee can remoue Britanie from the vttermoſt part of Europe, to lepp to Alexandria in Africke, or Antioch in Aſia, wee muſt needs by this councel as it is gloſſed by our Proteſtants, bee ſubiect to Rome, as wee euer were by the old cuſtome before that councell. The words of theſe Proteſtants Whitgift and Foxe are theſe. (Whitgift Def. pag. 331. Foxe tom. 1. pag. 12.)
The councell of Nice which was the yeare of our Lord 340. and in the ſixt canon of the ſaid councell wee finde it ſoe decreed, that in euery prouince, or precinct ſome one church or Biſhop of the ſame, was appointed and ſett vp, to haue the Inſpection and Regiment of other churches about him, ſecundum morem antiquum, that is after the auncient cuſtome, as the words of the councell doe purport.
Soe that the Biſhop of Alexandria ſhould haue power of Libia, and Pontapolis, in Egipt, for as much as the Biſhop of Rome

hath the like or ſame maner.
                        Therefore ſeeing there is none named either by the councell, or cuſtome related by that councell, but the Biſhops of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria to haue this high Regiment and power ouer the churches, wee muſt needs adhere and appeale to Rome by theſe men, as wee euer did by the old cuſtome from the beginninge of our firſt life in Chriſt: otherwiſe wee ſhall fall into errors and conclude inualidate things euen in the higheſt matters, theſe men aſſuringe vs, that at this time there were but three 
                              〈◊〉
                            Metropolitane churches before recited, and that to vſe their words.
(Whitgift def. pag. 359.) The church of Rome is called all that is ſubiect to the Bishop of Rome: And (Whitgift Answeare to the Admonit: cap. 2.17. diuiſion.) that notable and famous councell of Nice muſt be, and is of all wiſe and learned men next vnto the ſcriptures themſelues reuerenced, eſteemed and embraced, in the ſixt canon of that councell it is thus written: This councell doth determine him to bee noe Bishop, which is made without the conſent Metropolitani Epiſcopi, of the Metropolitane.
Which cheife Metrotropolitane

to vs then as theſe men haue told vs, was the Biſhop of Rome; ſoe that it is euident by them, that we could not here haue any Archbiſhop, or Biſhopp made without his allowance.
                        And yett theſe our Proteſtant Biſhops & Doctors muſt needs eleuate this power ſpiritual higher, then to make it onely cheife ouer Britanie, thoſe Weſt nations and Europe, and giue, it the higheſt place in the whole church of Chriſt, for ſoe all that can bee pretended by theſe Proteſtants, to haue had intereſt in ſuch things at that time, whether the Pope himſelfe S. Silueſter and others, our kinge and Emperor Conſtantine, or the Biſhops of Britanie, and other nations; for all theſe in thoſe daies acknowledged the Supreamacy in the Romane See ouer all churches. S. Silueſter Pope with the conſent, and Subſcription of the Emperor Conſtātine his Mother S. Helena, and 284. weſtern Biſhops, and 45. preiſts, decreed. (Concil. Roman. ſub Syluestro can. 20. to. 1. Concil.) Nemo Iudicabit primam ſedem: quoniam omnes ſedes à prima ſede deſiderant temperari, neque ab Augusto, neque ab omni clero, neque à Regibus, neque à populo Iudex iudicabitur. Noe man shall iudge

the cheife See (of Rome): becauſe all Sees deſire to bee gouerned by the cheife See. The iudge (Pope of Rome) shall not bee iudged, neither by the Emperour, nor by all the cleargie, nor by kings, nor by the people. Where wee ſee the Pope of Rome to bee by all conſent the higheſt iudge, and ſubiect to noe others iudgment, whoſoeuer. The honor and reuerence which Conſtantine yeelded to Saint Silueſter then Pope, is ſufficiently knowne by Euſebius in his life and others. (Euſeb. de vita Constantini.) I will onely exemplify by the warrant of an engliſh Proteſtant Biſhop, how this greate dutie and Reuerence of him to that holy Pope, and endowinge that Apoſtolicke See with honor and ritches, was ſuch, that it was longe before foretold by an Angell from heauen, to S. Blaſius. ſaying (l. 1. de Act. Rom. Pontif. in Sylueſtro.) That in the time of Conſtantine, Idolatry ſhould ceaſe by his meanes, and this Constantine for his honor to the See of Rome, should tranſlate the ſeate of his Empire from thence, into Thracia, and there ſettle it at the mouth of the Riuer Boſphorus, and leaue Italy and Rome to the Pope, Chriſts vicar there. Adueniet Princeps, ſub quo pacabitur orbis: &

finem accipiet veteram cultura deorum. Constantinus apud Thraces, qua Boſphorus aequor Thracius Euxinis Aegaeum ingurgitat vndis, conſtituet ſedem Imperij: latiumque relinquet Chriſto & Romuleam ſeptem in collibus vrbem.
                        
                        Now for the Biſhops of Britanie there can bee noe queſtion, but they gaue this primacie to S. Silueſter: for firſt it is moſt probable ſome of them were preſent at this Roman councell, ſoe great, conſiſtinge of the weſterne Biſhops. Secondly in all Iudgments they muſt needs acknowledge this ſupreamacy either in the Pope, or Emperor; But not the Emperor which yeelded it to S. Silueſter. Thirdly becauſe the next Pope Saint Marke, who was Pope but three yeares, claimed for the Romane See to be, mater omnium eccleſiarum, the mother of all churches, and priuiledged from hereſie. (Marcus epist. ad Athanaſ. & caeter. Egipti Epiſcopos.) And as theſe Proteſtants tell vs, his ſucceſsor S. Iulius appointed appeales to the See of Rome, and taught noe councel could bee kept lawfully without his conſent. (Rob. Barns in vita Pontif. Roman. in Iulio.) And two other Proteſtant Biſhops ſpeaking of this time affirme: The canō of the primatiue church made euery thinge

voyde that was done without the Biſhop of Rome. (Bilſon true differ. pag. 66.67.) And againe: The canon of the primatiue church forbad any councell to bee called, without his conſent. (Morton Appeale pag. 286.) And to make all ſure in this matter, that the whole cleargie of Britanie and Chriſtians vnder them, at this time attributed this ſpirituall ſupreamacie to the Pope of Rome, our Proteſtants haue told vs before, which aunciēt Authorities alſoe affirme (Theater of greate Britanie l. 6. Sulpit. Seuer. ſacr. hiſtor. lib. 2. Athan. apol. l. 1. cont. Ar. Concil. Sardic. can. 4.7.) that wee had of this nation diuers Biſhops in the generall councell of Sardis, a cytie of Lydia in Aſia with 300. Biſhops; and therfore this kingedome with the reſt, acknowledged the ſupreamacie of the Pope of Rome in all places, and that Appeales were to bee made to him as higheſt iudge.
                        And whereas the councell of Arles in Fraunce in the time of S. Silueſter, in the ſubſcription of the Biſhops there, many Proteſtants and other Antiquaries aſſure vs, (Concil. Arelat. in ſubſcript. Theater of Brit. lib. 6. Stow histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. catalog. in London. 1.) that Reſtitutus our Archbiſhop

of London was preſent there, and ſubſcribed for this nation, that place beeinge ſoe remote from London, wee muſt needs ſay, that hee was called thither by the Pope of Rome, or doe that, which neuer any yett would allowe, to graunt a ſuperioritie vnto the Bishops of Fraunce ouer them of this kingedome. And ſoe for thoſe our Bishops which were at the councell of Ariminum in this time, for noe others medled in theſe affaires in thoſe dayes.
Which wee are further taught by the Example of our holy Bishop S. Ninian, (Capgrau. in Catal. in Ninian. Bed. hiſt. Anglic. Theater of greate Britanie. lib. 6. Bal. centur. 1. de ſcript. in Ninian
                                    •…
                                  Bernini.) whoe towards the later end of this centurie of yeares, was made Bishopp at Rome by the Pope there, and by him ſent Apoſtle to the Weſtern parts of Britanie, to people there which had not yett receaued the faith of Chriſt. Where hee conuerted the nation of the Picts, preached the ghoſpell through the contryes of the Britans, Scots, and Picts, ordeyned there preiſts, conſecrated them Bishops, and diuided the contry into parishes, as both Catholicks and Proteſtants are witneſſes. Audiens Pontifex Romanus

quoſdam in occiduis Britanniae partibus necdum fidem Christi ſuſcepiſſe, ad Epiſcopatus gradum Ninianum conſecrauit.
                           
                           Concreditum à Deo talentum per Britannorum, Scotorum, australium Pictorum terras, ad ſenium vſque latiſsimè profudit. Ordinauit presbyteros, Epiſcopos conſecrauit, & totam terram per certas parochias diuiſit. And liuinge in this preachinge vntill hee was very ould, as a Proteſtant Bishop writeth, (Bal. centur. 1. in Ninian. Palladio Patricio.) he died in the yeare of Chriſt 432. before which time S. Palladius, S. Patricius, SS. Germanus and Lupus were ſent hither by S. Celeſtine Pope of Rome. And yett that hee came hither in the fourth century, it is euident: for in his cominge hither from Rome, hee came by S. Martin Bishopp of Tours, in Fraunce as Capgraue and others writte, (Ioh. Capgr. in S. Ninian.) and yett by Sigebert and others, S. Martine died within the firſt 400. yeares. (Sigebert. in Chronic. ad an. 399.) In which time alſoe wee had Coelius Sedulius of this nation, ſcholler (as a Proteſtant Bishop writeth) to Hildiberthus a learned Bishop of Scotland, (Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Coel. Sedul.) after whoſe death hee trauailed

many nations for learninge ſake, as Spayne, France, Italy and Aſia, and beeinge excellently learned returned to Rome, where hee longe time continued, and was ſoe learned holy and gratefull a man to the Popes of Rome, that Pope Gelaſius (to vſe the Proteſtants words) in the decrees diſtinct 15. calleth him, venerable Sedulius, and much prayſeth his writings.
                        
                        Neyther can wee thinke otherwiſe of his Maſter, Bishop Hildibertus, of whome hee was inſtructed, and directed in theſe courſes. And this Sedulius himſelfe alſoe was a Biſhop, as both Sigebertus, and Bostius our contryman, and the Proteſtant Biſhop Bale from them, are wittneſſes. (Sigebertus & Bostius apud Bal. centur. 1. de Script. in Coel. Sedul.) In which time alſoe liued S. Kebius our Corniſh Biſhop, ſucceſſor, though perhaps not immediate, to S. Amphibalus in the Biſhoprick of Mona. (Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kebio. Harpesf. hiſtor. pag. 26. Pitſ. in Kebio.) Whoe liued longe time with S. Hilary Biſhopp of Poicters in Fraunce, that worthie piller of the true Catholick faith, and honor of the church of Rome, and Succeſſor of Saint Peter there, that hee calleth him.

                           (Hilar. ad Pſalm. 131. & in Matth. can. 16.) Eccleſiae fundamentum, caelestis Regni Ianitor, cuius arbitrio aeterni aditus traduntur, cuius terrestre iudicium praeiudicata authoritas ſit in caelo: Foundation of the church, porter of the kingedome of heauen. The happy foundation of the church, the bleſſed porter of heauen, to woſe will die eternall paſſadges are committed, whoſe iudgement on earth is preiudicate authoritie in heauen.
                        Such a tutor, pedagoge, and conſecrator alſoe had this our happie contryman Saint Kebius, in thoſe turbulent hereticall times of the Arrians, and their oppoſition againſt the Romane church, a greate meanes by this our holy Biſhop, S. Reſtitutus, Faſtidius, Priſcus, our Archbiſhops then, and other godly Biſhops of this nation, to preſerue this kingedome in the true faith, and obedience to the Pope of Rome, in ſoe much that S. Hilarie himſelfe, (lib. de Synodis aduerſus Arr.) commendeth the Biſhops of Britanie for the ſinceritie in thoſe times, to their eternall honor. Hee dyed, as our Proteſtants write, in the yeare of Chriſt, 370. And in this age alſoe was that renowned S. Vrſula, with her glorious company of Biſhops, other

cleargie men, Virgins and others, as thoſe Proteſtants ar witneſſes, whoe as both Ptolomaeus Lucenſis, Capgraue, the Antiquities of Collene, and the German hiſtories teſtifie (Baleus centur. 1. in Vrſula. Cynoſura an. 390. Stowe histor. an. 394. in Theodoſius. Martyrolog. Roman. die 21. & 22. Octob. & Beda hac die & Vandelbert. Baron. in annot. Ptolom. Lucenſ. in S. Vrſula. Capgrau. in S. Vrſula. & Annal. Colonienſ. &c.) made that their moſte holy pilgrimadge to Rome, and at their returne receaued the crowne of Martyrdome at, or neare Cullen in Germanie, where, as alſoe in the whole Chriſtian world, and both to their honor and the glory of our country, they are celebrated in the moſt auncient Martyrologes, in which ſacred company, as Capgrauius and diuers others teſtifie, there were manye Biſhops of this kingedome, as namelie Willielmus or Michael, Columbanus Ywanus, Eleutherius and Lotharius. Which I rather name, that wee may know, how this kingedome at that tyme, both was ſoe repleniſhed with Bishops, that it might ſpare ſoe manie to bee ſent from hence, with thoſe holy Virgins, and to giue euidence how

deuoted and reſpectiue, the Bishops and cleargie, with the reſt the Chriſtians of this kingedome, were towards the See of Rome, in theſe dayes.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE FIFTE CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE.
                     
                        
                           THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge by theſe Protestants of England, how both the Popes higheſt ſpiritual power, was still here continued, and a perpetuall ſucceſsion of our Bishops and Cleargie alſoe in Britanie from the See of Rome, as in the other Ages before.
                        NOw wee are come to the fift Century, in the beginning whereof the firſt Fathers of Hereſie, and Oppoſers againſt the holy Apoſtolick See of Rome, which I finde to haue beene of our Brittiſh nation, were the monſtrous rebellious Hereticks Pelagius and Timotheus, not that I finde them more formally & directly oppoſite to the See Apoſtolick then other Hereticks were, but as the

nature and neceſſitie of hereſie is, to bee euer contrarie and diſobedient to their cheife iudge, and commaunder in ſuch caſes, the Pope of Rome, with councels aſſembled: for as our Proteſtants tell vs, diuers Popes of Rome both by themſelues, and in councels had condemned Pelagius for an hereticke, and yett hee obſtinately perſiſted in his condemned errors. Innocentius the firſt condemned, Pelagius the monke, and Coelestius of hereſie, for preferringe free vvill before the grace of God, and ſayd the vvil of man by it ſelfe, was ſufficient & able to fulfill the cōmaundements of God, and tooke avvay the neceſsitie of Baptiſme and faith in Chriſt. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Rom. in Innocent. Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptorib. in Pelagio hereſiarcha.) Innocentius primus Pelagium monachum, & Coeleſtium haereſeos damnauit: quod liberū arbitrium gratiae Dei praeferrent, dicerent
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               voluntatē per ſe ſufficere, ad implenda Dei mādata, praeſul ordinatus Pelagius ſui nominis haereſim fabricabat, aſſerens hominem ſine peccato naſci, ac ſolo voluntatis imperio ſine gratia ſaluari poſſe, vt ita nefarius baptiſmum ac fidem tolleret. Pelagius after hee was made a Biſhopp, framed an hereſie of his name, affirminge that man was borne

without ſinne, and by the onely commaunde of his wil, without grace by Chriſt, might bee ſaued, that the wicked man might ſoe take away both baptiſme and faith.
                        Pope Sozimus alſoe, as theſe men tell vs, condemned this hereticke, and to vſe their wordes. (Rob. Barnes ſup. in Sozimo Papa.) That Sozimus might declare, that nothinge was in any place ratified, that was done in holy things, except it were done by the Popes authoritie, hee ſent Faustinus a Biſhop, & two preiſts, to the councell of Carthadge. The decrees of the councell were brought to Pope Sozimus, which beeinge by him approued, the Pelagian hereſie was condemned euery where. Vt Sozimus declararet, nihil vſquam ratum fore, quod in rebu
                                 •…
                               ſacris ageretur, niſi id Romani Pontificis authoritate fieret, Fauſtinum Epiſcopum, & duos presbyteros, ad Cathaginenſem Synodum miſit. Synodalia decreta ad Sozimum perlata ſunt: quibus approbatis, Pelagiana haereſis paſsim damnata eſt. Thus wee ſee by theſe Proteſtants, that the Popes of Rome, euen in this time, when they were moſte afflicted, and Rome it ſelfe taken, and ſacked by Gothes, in the time of this Pope, (Barns ſupr,) beeinge Pope but one yeare 3. moneths and twelue dayes,

                           Sozimo Pontifice, Roma à Gothis capta est: They ſtill exerciſed and practiſed this higheſt ſpirituall power in all places, euen in Africk, as theſe Proteſtants aſſure vs, and not onely in Europe where our Britanie is: In which they ſhewed, and exerciſed this their higheſt ſupreamacy in many and diuers matters in that time.
                        And firſt in this Buſines of Pelagius, the monke or Abbot of Bangor, in Wales; Thus writeth a Proteſtant Biſhop with conſent of Antiquities. (Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor. in Palladio Graeco. Hector Boeth. hiſt. Scotor. l. 7. fol. 132.133. Holinsh. histor. of Scotland. Ed. Grymston cap. Relig. of Scotland pag. 20. Proſper. in Chronico.) Palladius Graecus à Caelestino Romanorum Pontifice Antistes mittebatur, vt Pelagianam haereſim, quae tunc magnam Britanniae partem inquinauerat, à Britannorum gente arceret, atque Scotorum populum ad veram pictatem, à qua continua bellorum atrocitate paulùm aberrarit, rite reduceret. Hunc ferunt concionibus pijs à quibuſdam gentilium ſuperſtitiū
                              culis eccleſias illas purgaſſe, atque ob id in hodiernum vſque diem, Scotorum Apostolus appelatur. Palladius a Graecian was by Celeſtine Pope of Rome, ſent a Biſhop, to driue

from the nation of the Britans, the Pelagian hereſie, which then had defiled a great part of Britanie, and rightly to reduce the Scots to true pietie, from which by the continuall crueltie of wars they had erred. The ſaying is, that with his godly ſermons, hee purged thoſe churches from ſome ſuperſtitions of the gentiles, and ſoe is to this day called the Apoſtle of the Scots. Here wee ſee it firſt left to the Popes Iudgment, what was hereſie to bee condemned, what was error to bee recalled, ſuperſtition to bee reformed, and in his power ſpirituall (the temporall Romane then hauinge nothing to doe in any part of this Iland) to aſſigne, and ſend a Bi-Biſhop, and Apoſtle to that nation, which was neuer ſubiect, either in temporall reſpects, to the Romane Emperors, whoe ſoe performed the higheſt ſacred duties, and authoritie in that church, that, as before, and by all writers hee is called, Scotorum Apostolus, the Apoſtle of the Scots: as iuſtlie hee deſerued it, ſettling all things there, by his legatine power, makinge a Biſhop, an Archbiſhop, and the like matters of greateſt Iuriſdiction, as namely S. Seruanus Biſhop of the Orchads, and S. Teruanus Archbishop

of the Picts, Palladius Seruanum Epiſcopum ad Orchadas Inſulas miſſum, vt Populum rudem christiana pietate institueret, creauit, & Teruanum quem Infantē lustrico lauerat fonte, Pictorū Archiepiſcopum constituit. Palladius created Seruanus a Biſhopp, and ſent him to the Orchads Ilands, to inſtruct the rude people, in the chriſtian faith, and hee appointed Teruanus, whome hee baptized when hee was an Infant, to bee Archbiſhop of the Picts. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l. 7. folio 133. pag. 1. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scoticar. l. 5. Rege 42. pag. 146. Polidor. Verg. hist. Anglic. l. 3. pag. 58.59.
                        Thus the Scottiſh hiſtories teach vs. By which it is euident, that the whole ſtate of the church of Scots, and Picts alſoe, was then ſettled by the Authoritie of this Roman Legate, and that the other Gouernors which he appointed in it, were alſoe ſent from Rome, for, if Teruanus whom hee appointed Archbiſhop of the Picts, was baptized when hee was but an Infant, as theſe Scottiſh hiſtorians tell vs, hee was baptized at Rome or thoſe parts where S. Palladius then liued, & not in this kingdome, where it is confeſſed by all antiquities, that S. Palladius liued

a verie ſhort time. And S. Teruanus beeinge made by him an Archbiſhopp amonge the Picts, it both informeth, that there were other Biſhops there vnder him, els he could not bee Archbiſhop, cheefe of the Biſhops there; and maketh probable, that S. Ninian, whoe as a Proteſtant Bishop writeth, (Bal. cent. 1. in Ninian. Bernic.) died about this time, was alſoe Archbishopp there, and now dyinge Teruanus was by Palladius his legatine power ordeyned his ſucceſſor: or that both theſe were Archbiſhops of Yorke, ſoe appointed by the See of Rome, and named Biſhops of the Picts, becauſe they with other prouinces, were ſubiect to the Archbishops See of Yorke, a ſubordination neyther altered by S. Celeſtine or any other Pope vntill ſuch time, as I haue before declared, except in ſuch extraordinary caſes, of ſpecial legats ſent immediately from Rome, with cheife authoritie, ſuch as S. Palladius was, whoe by that prerogatiue exerciſed this iuriſdiction extraordinarily, in conſecrating and inſtituting Bishops, within the limits of the Metropolitane of Yorke, which ordinarily belonged vnto his See, by the order of Pope Eleutherius from the beginning of our publick

receauing of the faith of Chriſt. And the ſame care and chardge which S. Celeſtine then Pope of Rome tooke of the Scots, and Picts, at this time, the ſame alſoe hee had, and as cheife paſtor performed, both to this kingedome of Britanie, and Ireland alſoe.
                        Concerning Britanie, theſe Proteſtants aſſure vs, that when Pelagius was dead before, and his hereſies by many Popes and councells condemned, yett it beeing maintayned here by Leporius Agricola, a very learned Hereticke. (Bal. centur. 1. de ſcriptor. in Leporio Agricola & l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Celeſtino. Rob. Barns l. de vita Pontif. Roman. in Caelestin.) That Saint Palladius of whome I haue ſpoken, the Popes Legate in Scotland, informed S. Celestine Pope hereof, whoe therevppon ſent the twoe french Biſhops, Germanus and Lupus hither to strengthen the Britans in the true doctrine of heauēly grace, and to cōfute the wicked doctrine of the ſufficiency of mans vvorkes vvithout the grace of Christ. Quod per Palladium audiēs Caelestinus Pontifex Romanus, Germanum Antiſsiodorenſem, & Lupum Tracafeſsum, Gallicanos Epiſcopos illuc miſit vt Britannos, in fide gratiae caeleſtis ſolidarent, & impiam

atque Hipocriticam humanorum operum doctrinam confutarent. And that wee may bee fully informed, that S. Celeſtine the Pope did not ſend theſe two holy Biſhops into Britanie onely to ſuppreſſe the pelagian hereſy, but to ſupply the ſpiritual wants in this kingdome, this Proteſtant Biſhop and greateſt enemy to the See of Rome, will tell vs more plentifully, where hee deſcribeth that holy Pope and his doctrine in this maner. (Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Coelestino. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in Coelestino.) Caeleſtinus Campanus, Introitum graduale, Reſponſorium, tractum, & offertorium papisticae miſſae inſeruit: atque vt Sacerdotes pontificum Canones ſcirēt, a
                                 •…
                              è praecepit. Germanum in Britanniam, Palladium in Scotiam, & Patricium cum quodam Segetio in Hiberniam, vt pelagianas haereſes extirparent, Epiſcopos miſit, obijtque anno Christi 435. Confeſſorum numero aſſcriptus. Pope Celeſtine borne in Campania, did put to the Papiſticall maſſe the introite, graduale, reſponſorie, tract, and offertorie; and ſtreightly commanded, that preiſts ſhould knowe the canons of the Popes, hee ſent Biſhops, Germanus into Britanie, Palladius into Scotland, and Patricke with

one called Segetius into Ireland, to roote out the Pelagian hereſies. And hee died in the yeare of Chriſt 435. in the number of Confeſſors.
                        An other interpretinge this addition hee made to the maſſe, ſaith. (Barns ſupr.) In initio ſacrificij, vt Pſalmus Iudica me Deus & diſcerne cauſam meam &c. à ſacrificaturo diceretur, ordinauit. Graduale in miſſa ordinauit, vt Sacerdotes canones ſacros tenerent, praecepit. Pope Celeſtine ordeyned, that in the beginninge of the ſacrifice, when a preiſt was to ſacrifice, hee ſhould ſay the pſalme which beginneth, Iudge mee o God, and diſcerne my cauſe &c. hee did order the graduale in the Maſſe, & cōmaunded that preiſts ſhould vnderſtand or keepe the holy canons as before. And the Proteſtant Archbiſhopp Whitgift. (Whitg. Answere to the Admonition pag. 44. ſect. 1.2.) Speaking of this holie Pope writeth: Celeſtine was a godly Biſhop, and the church of Rome at that time, had the ſubſtance of the Sacraments: accordinge to gods word: neither was there any ſuperſtition mixed with them, the Introite that hee appointed, was one of the pſalmes. The like hath

Maſter Foxe, (Foxe tom. 2. in Queene Mary pag. 1401.) whoe affirmeth, this vſe of a pſalme before the Maſſe was vſed longe before in the Greeke church. And it is the common opinion of our English Proteſtāts, their Bishops, Antiquaries, and doctors that the Religion which theſe holy Legats of Rome SS. Germanus and Lupus taught here, was in all things, veritatis praedicatio, doctrina ſincera, ſinceriſsima, purus Dei cultus, qualis ab Apostolis mandato diuino Chriſtianorum Eccleſiis traditus erat. The preaching of truth, ſincere doctrine, moſte ſincere doctrine, the pure worship of God, ſuch as by the commandement of God, was by the Apoſtles deliuered to the churches of Chriſtians: and ſoe it continued here in this puritie longe after. Matth. Parker Antiq. Britan. pag. 6.45.46. Goſcelin. histor. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Greg. 1. & l. de Script. centur. 1. in August. Dionatho. Godvvyn. Conuerſ. of Brit. Povvel. in annot. in lib. Girald. Cambr. de Itinerar. Cambr. c. 1. Foxe pag. 463. edit. an. an. 1576. Fulk. Answ. to a count. Cathol. pag. 40. Midleton Papiſtam. pag. 202. Stovve hiſtor. in Ethelb. Holinsh. hiſtor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102.
                        
                           Therefore wee may not now make any doubt of any thinge, done here by theſe holy Biſhops, by power from the Pope, either in cauſinge the decrees and canons of the Popes ſoe much dignifyinge the higheſt ſpirituall power in the See of Rome, generally to bee vſed and receaued here, by all preiſts, and cleargie men, as this holy Pope had commanded, nor in conſecratinge Biſhops, and Archbiſhops, with limitation of their Iuriſdictions, and the like, but they were moſte Iuſtely, and religiouſly performed. (Matth. West. an. 446. Matth. Park. antiq. Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Sigibert. an. 428. Stowe and Howes histor· in Theodoſius. Bal. centur. 1. in Leporio Agricola.) And yett beſides their powerable, and authoritatiue condemninge of the Pelagian hereſies here, together with the Timothean Hereticks, they ordeyned and conſecrated ſoe many Biſhops in this nation, that ſome writers amonge Proteſtants. (Godvvin Conuerſ. of Britanie pag. 25.) are of opinion, their number was greater then of thoſe that were conſecrated here in the time of Kinge Lucius: amonge whome a Proteſtant Bishop writteth in this maner: I cannot but rest perſuaded, that our Britanie

had very few Biſhops vntill the cominge ouer of Germanus and Lupus, to ſuppreſſe the Pelagian Hereſie: concerninge which matter, I thinke it not amiſſe to offer vnto the Reader, what I finde in our hiſtory of Landaff. Postquam praedicti Seniores (Sanctus Germanus Epiſcopus & Lupus) Pelagianam hereſim extirpauerant, Epiſcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae conſecrauerunt. Super omnes autem Britannos dextralis partis Britanniae, beatum Dubricium, ſummum Doctorem, à Rege & ab omni parochia electum Archiepiſcopum conſecrauerunt. Hac dignitate, ei à Germano & Lupo data, constituerunt ei epiſcopalem ſedem, conceſſu M
                                 •…
                              nrici Regis, Principum, Cleri & populi, apud podium Lantaui, in honore S. Petri Apostoli fundatam, & cum finibus iſtis &c. Which thus hee engliſheth: After the ſaid elders (S. Germanus Biſhop, and Lupus) had rooted out the Pelagian Hereſie, they conſecrated Biſhops in many places of Britanie. Ouer all the Brittans dwellinge on the right ſide of Britanie, they conſecrated for Archbiſhop, S. Dubritius, whoe was choſen for the ſupreame doctor by the kinge and all the Dioceſſe. This dignitie beeing beſtowed vpon him by Germanus and Lupus, they with the conſent of

Mo
                              •…
                           ric the kinge, the nobilitie, cleargie and people, appointed his See to bee at the manner of Lantaui, and founded the ſame there, to the honor of S. Peter, boundinge the territories thereof in this wiſe. &c. Then hee addeth immediately: This was about the yeare of Chriſt 430. about which time alſoe, Palladius did first appoint Biſhops and ordeine Bishopricks in Scotland, as Buchanan hath deliuered. The words of Buchanan the puritane are theſe. (Georg. Buchan. l. 5. Reg. 42. pag. 146. Rer. Scotic.) Creditur Palladius primus Epiſcopus in Scotia creaſſe. Palladius is thought to bee the firſt that created Biſhops in Scotland.
                        Where wee are taught, by theſe great Proteſtāts themſelues, that the firſt Biſhops, that euer were in this Iland, whether Scotland, or this other part of England, and Wales, were inſtituted together with their Sees, Iuriſdictions, and limitts by the Popes authoritie, and this Proteſtant Biſhop in tranſlating his Antiquitie hath abuſed his reader, that is ignorant of the latine tonge, for where hee tranſlateth. (who vvas choſen for the ſupreame doctor by the kinge and all the dioceſſe:) there is noe ſuch thinge in that antiquitie, as hee himſelfe alleadged it, but only that the king

conſented with the dioceſſe to his conſecration in Archiepiſcopall dignitye by the Popes Legats, or at the moſte that they did chooſe him rather then any other: for that hee was a cheife doctor here longe before, and that by the Popes approbation, I will ſhew herafter. And it ſeemeth to bee certayne, both by himſelfe, and others, that this Proteſtant Biſhop where hee ſpeaketh of the kings and peoples election, did add it of his owne Inuention, for both by others, and himſelfe alſoe in other places, there is no ſuch thinge in this narration. Iohn Capgraue whome this man much commendeth, thus relateth this hiſtory. (Godwin Conuerſ. of Brit.)
                        
                           Cum Sanctus Germanus & Lupus haereſim illam (Pelagianam) extirpaſſent: Epiſcopos in pluribus locis Britanniae conſecrarunt: & dextralis partis Britanniae beatum Dubritium, ſummum Doctorem & Archiepiſcopum statuerunt: & Landauenſem eccleſiam in honore beati Petri fundatam, ſedem cathedralem collocarunt: collatis autem eccleſiae Landauenſi à Rege multis poſſeſsionibus & eccleſijs, Dubricius diſcipulos per eccleſias diuiſit, quaſdam nouas eccleſias fundauit, Danielem in Epiſcopum Bangerenſem, & Sanctum Iltutum in loco ab illo Lanitut, id eſt

Eccleſia Iltuti vocatum ordinauit. (Ioh. Capgrauius in Catalog. in S. Dubritio.) When S. Germanus and Lupus had rooted out that (Pelagian) hereſie, they conſecrated Biſhops in many places of Britanie: & they appointed bleſſed Dubritius, cheife Doctor, and Archbiſhop of the right hand part of Britanie, and placed the church of Landaffe founded in honor of S. Peter the cathedrall See, and many poſſeſſions and pariſhes being giuen by the kinge to the church of Landaffe, Dubricius diuided his diſciples by the churches: builded ſome new churches. Hee ordeyned Daniel Biſhop of Bangor, and S. Iltutus in a place called of him Lanitut, that is, the church of Iltutus. The very ſame words without any word added or detracted, ar in the life of S. Dubritius, in the greate old Manuſcript of many Saints, written diuers hundreds of yeares ſince. (Manuſcript antiquum & permagnum pr. glorioſi ac Deo dilecti. in S. Dubricio.) And both theſe Antiquities teach with all others, that Aurelius Ambroſius kinge, was here at that time, with generall commaund, and that hee with the whole cleargie, conſented to haue S. Dubritius Archbiſhop of Wales, and S. Sampſon

of Yorke, their words bee: Sancti Epiſcopi praedicti conſentiente Rege Ambroſio Aurelio, necnon & omni clero, Dubritium Archiepiſcopum conſecrarunt. The twoe holy Biſhops (S. Germanus and Lupus) the kinge Ambroſius Aurelius, and all the cleargie conſentinge, conſecrated Dubritius Archbiſhop, and againe: Impoſitum eſt Diadema capiti Regis Aurelij Ambroſij, & de communi conſenſu ſedem Eboracenſem contulit Sampſoni viro Sancto, vrbis verò Legionum Archiepiſcopatum inclito Dubritio dedit. Aurelius Ambroſius was crowned kinge, and by common conſent (of the Legats and cleargie) hee beſtowed the See of Yorke on Sampſon an holy man, and the Archbiſhoprick of Caerlegion on renowned Dubritius.
                        Soe that it clearely appeareth, that if there was any ſuch kinge, as Monric at that time, he was but a little Regulus in the cōtry about Lantaui, and perhaps temporall Lord of that place, and ſoe his conſent for the ſettlinge of the Archbiſhops See there, by the Legats was requiſite, and graunted, and in noe other ſence. For this Proteſtant Biſhop himſelfe. (Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauies. Roger Houeden. Matth. Parker antiquit. Britan.)
                           
Producer of this Antiquitie, is wittnes, with all writers, that at this time, and at the cominge of S. Auguſtine ſoe longe after, the Biſhopricks of Exeter in Deuonſhire, Bathe in Sommerſettſhire, Hereford, and Worceſter, which could not belonge to any petty Prince or Regulus, were ſubiect to that Archiepiſcopall See, therefore ſuch things were rather done by the direction, or cōmaund of the Legats, Iubente Sancto Germano, as our Proteſtants publiſh in their Brittiſh hiſtory. (Galfrid monum. histor. Reg. Britan. lib. 6. c. 14.) And as much confeſſed by this Proteſtant Biſhop himſelfe, in diuers others places, and in theſe plaine termes. (Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauids in Dubritius.) Dubritius was made. Archbiſhopp of all Walles, by Germanus and Lupus, twoe Bishops of Fraunce that were entreated by Aurelius Ambroſius, the Kinge, or Ruler of Britanie, to come ouer, and yeeld their beſt helpe, for extinguishing the Pelagian hereſie, that had then taken great roote in this contry And they appointed his See to bee at Landaff, which ſoone after was remoued to Caerlegion vppon Vske in Monmoutshire. And in an other place thus hee writeth. (Godwyn. Catalog. in

Landaff. 1. in Dubritius.) The cathedral church of Landaffe is reported to haue beene firſt built in the time of Lucius, about the yeare of Chriſt 180. But I perceiue not, that any Biſhop ſatt there before Dubritius, that by Germanus Biſhop of Altiſiodore, and Lupus of Trecaſia (tvvo Biſhops of Fraunce) vvas firſt conſecrate Archbishop of thoſe parts, and ſate ſometimes at Caerleon, ſometimes at Landaffe. Where hee quite forgetteth his kinge Monric, attributinge all to the Popes Legates. And a little after, citinge the very ſame booke of Landaffe which hee did before, hee produceth many Biſhops of that See, to haue excommunicated the kinges or princes of that contry; of which hereafter. Godvvyn. Catalog. of Bish. in Landaff. pag. 518.520.521.523. & edit. an. 1615.
                        Soe that there is not the leaſte ſuſpition left, eyther by the booke of Landaffe, or any antiquitie, but the cheife ſpirituall power and iuriſdiction in this kingedome, was euer acknowledged generally, to be in the holy Apoſtolick See of Rome, and at this time executed here by thoſe holy Legats from thence. Which more appeareth in this holy Archbiſhop S. Dubritius, whoe was not onlie

thus conſecrated and diſpoſed of in thoſe higheſt ſpirituall affaires, by authoritie from Rome, but was alſoe himſelfe the Popes Legate here in Britanie, as Robertus Caenalis the french Biſhop, the Brittiſh hiſtory and other witters ſay. (Robert. Caenal. Gallic. hist. l. 1. perioche 6. Galfr. monum. l. 9. cap. 12. histor. Brit.) Ex Vrbe Legionū, Dubritius hic Britaniae primas, & Apoſtolicae ſedis Legatus, tanto religione clarebat, vt quemcumque langore grauatis orationibus ſuis ſanaret. Dubritius Archbiſhop of Caerlegion, Primate of Britanie, and legate of the See Apoſtolicke, was ſoe holy, that hee healed all ſick parſons by his prayers. Therefore beeing the Popes Legate, and liuinge here ſoe longe vntill the yeare of Chriſt 522. as two Proteſtant Biſhops tell vs. Godwyn ſup. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubricius.) And Primate of Britanie, there can bee noe doubt of the Popes power here in this time, if wee had noe other inſtances and Arguments to Inſiſt vpon in this matter for thoſe daies.
                        But theſe Proteſtant Antiquaries. Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Britan l. 6. c. 13. Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Dubritij Manuſcript. of Saints old in Dubrit.) and others tell vs, that theſe

Legats thus ſent from the Pope, did not come hither onely to extirpate thoſe hereſies, but to preach the true Religion in all other things, for the christianitie of the Britans was then corrupted, not onely by the Pelagian hereſie, but by the Pagans which the kinge had brought hither, and by the preachinge of theſe bleſſed men (the Popes Legats) the Religion of true faith was restored amonge them. In tempore illo venit S. Germanus Antiſsiodorenſis Epiſcopus, & Lupus Trecenſis Epiſcopus vt verbum Dei Britonibus praedicarent, corrupta namque fuerat christianitas eorum, tum propter Paganos quos Rex in ſocietatem corum poſuerat, tum propter Pelagianam haereſim. Beatorum igitur virorum praedicatione, restituta eſt inter eos verae fidei Religio. And in particular beſides the common Pelagian hereſies againſt the neceſſitie of Baptiſme, and grace of Chriſt, it ſeemeth the Pelagian preiſts and Biſhops, contrary to chriſtian Religion, in all churches, had women, whom they called their wiues, for wee reade that Leporius Agricola, the greate promoter of that hereſie here, was the ſonne of Seuerianus a Pelagian Bishop, ſaith

one Proteſtant. (Stowe hiſtor. in Theodoſius the yonger.) Seueri cuiuſdam Pelagianorum Sacerdotis in Britannia filius, the ſonne of one Seuerus a Pelagian preiſt in Britanie, ſaith an other. Io: Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor. in Leporio Agric.) And the kinge Vortiger ſoe countenanced the Pagan Saxons, that wee heare, that many chriſtians intermarried with them, as the kinge himſelfe had done, although hee had then aliue his chriſtian wife, by whome hee had three ſonnes, to wit Vortimer, Catigern, and Paſcentius, yett hee married the Pagan daughter of Hongiſtus the Pagan, named Rowenna, and ſoe aduanced the Infidels, that the whole kingedome was endaungered, and to aggrauate theſe ſinnes, this kinge kept in vvicked maner his owne daughter vvhich hee had by his Chriſtian vvife, and begott a child a daughter of her. (Mattheus Westminſter. anno 450.) Generat etiam ex eadem coniuge filiam, quam in ſocietatem thori ſuſcipiens, filiam ex ea proceauit. Whereupon (to ſpeake in Proteſtant wordes.) (Stovve and Hovves hiſtor. in Vortigern.) Vodine Archbiſhopp of London,

                              a man of ſingular deuotion, and good life, by the aduiſe of Vortimer (the kinges eldeſt ſonne and next kinge) went to Vortiger, and ſaid to him that hee had not done as a Chriſtian prince, in departinge from his lawfull wife, and takinge an other woman, whoſe father was an enemy to the Chriſtian faith, and alſoe went about to conquer the crowne of Britanie. Hengiſt hearing Vortiger make lamentation, forth with ſlew the good Archbiſhop Vodine, and many other preiſts, and Religious parſons, all the churches in lent were polluted with blood, the Nunnes with other religious parſons, were by force putt from their howſes, and goods, & conſtreined to pollutiō of their bodies. The Brittās conſideringe the daily repaire of the Saxons into this Realme, ſhewed to their kinge the Ieoperdie that might therof enſue, and aduertiſed him of the daunger, but all was in vaine: for Vortiger by reaſons of his wife, bare ſuch fauour to the Saxons, that hee would in noe wiſe heare the counſaile of his ſubiects. Thus farre theſe Proteſtants.
                        
                        But Nennius in his manuſcript hiſtory writing as a Proteſtāt Biſhop ſaith. Io: Bal. centur. 1. in Nennio Bamachorenſi. Nennius in M. S.

histor. in Guorthigirno Rege.) a thouſand yeares ſince, writeth plainely, that amonge other wickedneſſes of this kinge, hee tooke his owne daughter for his wife, and had a daughter by her. Which when it was proued to S. Germanus (the Popes Legate) hee came with all the cleargie of Britanie to correct the kinge: And when a Synode of the cleargie and nobilitie was aſſembled. The kinge aroſe and was very angry, and ſought to fly from the face of S. German, and hee was accurſed, and condemned by bleſsed German, and all the councell of the Britans. Super haec omnia mala adijciens Guorthigirnus, accepit filiam ſuam propriam in vxorem ſibi, quae poperit ei filiam. Hoc autem cum compertum eſſet à Sancto Germano, venit corripere Regem, cum omni clero Britannum: & dum conuenta eſset magna Synodus Clericorum in vno concilio, ipſe Rex ſurrexit, iratuſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               est vehementer, & vt à facie Sancti Germani fugeret, quaerebat, & maledictus est, & damnatus à beato Germano, & omni concilio Britannum. Our engliſh Proteſtants in their Matthew of Weſtminſter, as hee is publiſhed by them, (Matth. Weſtm. an. 450.) Thus tell vs: A S. Germano & ab omni Epiſcoporum conuenta eſt excommunicatus. Vortiger was excommunicated

by S. German, and the whole aſſembly of Biſhops, yet this notwithſtandinge, hee alſo went about to ouerthrow both chriſtian Religion, and the kingdome, ioyninge with the Pagan Infidels, and hauing three wiues of which one an Infidell enemy to the land, the other his own daughter; which & ſuch things noe chriſtian could or would doe, yet it doth not appeare by Nē
                           nius. (Nennius ſupr.) That hee was depoſed, but ſtraungly puniſhed by God, neither doth the Brittiſh hiſtory or Matthew of Weſtminſter ſay, hee was depoſed, but deſeruerunt eum. The Britans forſooke Vortigern, ioyninge with their enemies the Saxōs Infidels, wherby hee rather relinquiſhed to bee their kinge, then they depoſed him, although afterward they ſay, Vortimerum filium eius in Regem erexerunt, they made Vortimer his ſonne kinge to defend the kingedome, beeing driuen to thoſe extremities. (Galfrid. monum. l. 6. c. 13. Matth. Weſtm. But our Engliſh Proteſtants, (noe vnlearned ſchollers in depoſing kings) write confidently: The Britās vvith one mind depriued him of his roiall dignity, vvhē hee had reigned ſixe yeares, & ordeined to bee their king, Vortimer his eldest sonne. (Stow & Hov hist.

in Vort. Hol. hiſt of Eng. Matth. Park. ant. Brit. p. 78 prot. ānot. in Matth. Westm. in Mer. ā. 454.
                        And theſe men are ſoe far from findinge fault herein, that generally they applaud, and much commend the fact. I will Inſtance onely in one their firſt Proteſtant Archbiſhop, which relatinge the continuall preſeruinge of true Religion inuiolate by the Britans, doth exemplify in this as an heroicall Act in that kinde, his words bee theſe. (Matth. Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 7.8.) Magnum eſt Britannorum perfectae in Chriſtum fidei argumentum, illa expostulatio & Querela, qua in Vortigernum ſuum Regem vehementer egerunt: quod Hengisti Infidelis filiam matrimonio ſibi iunxiſset. Quare Incenſi proceres, Vortigerno regia potestate abdicato, Vortimerum eius filium Regem creabant. It is a great Argument of the perfect faith in Chriſt of the Britans, that their expoſtulation and quarrell by which they delt vehemently againſt Vortigern their kinge, becauſe he had martyred the daughter of Hengiſt an infidell; wherfore his noble men beeing offended, depriue him of his kingly power, makinge Vortimer his ſonne their kinge. This is our Proteſtants Relation, and conſtruction of this matter.

Whoe propoſe vnto vs an other like example, of the ſame S. Germane in the caſe of Bulie, kinge of Powſey, in walles. (Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. pag. 84.) Whoe contemninge the preachinge of S. German, was miraculouſly puniſhed with death, and a meane man a chriſtian called Ketell, by Nennius, placed in that dignitie, and they cite Ranulphus Higeden, whoe as they write citeth Gildas for the ſame hiſtory. But Nēnius hath it at lardg, and ſaith of this Ketell, ſoe erected. (Nennius M. S. in S. German.) Et omnes filij eius facti ſunt Reges, & à ſemine eorum omnis Regio Prouiſorum regitur vſque hodiernam diem. And all his ſonnes after him were kings, and from their ſeede the whole Region of Pouis is ruled to this day. From the time of S. German to the writinge of Nennius.
                        And it is euident by Nennius, the Relator of this hiſtorie, that S. German was not a depoſer of this wicked kinge. For firſt it is manifeſt by the hiſtory, that hee was a pagan, which was in noe wiſe ſubiect to Chriſtian diſcipline, or coercion, ſecondly hee & his kindred were miraculouſly deſtroyed and conſumed by God, and noe heyre left of that linadge to inherite. Then if S. German

with the conſent of the nobles, and people; now deſtitute of a Ruler, gaue way to the election of an other, a worthie and holy man, what wronge or iniurie in any opinion was here committed by him? none at al, but an action which all Religions doth allowe, and commend vnto vs.
                        But to leaue theſe things to Proteſtants, as their propertie quarto modo in all places, & times, when they haue preuailed, and which I would not haue mentioned, but beeinge thus called vppon, by them, wee are further taught by them, that in this time our dependance here in Britanie, was ſoe greate on the Popes of Rome, that not ſoe much as as a publick ſchole was here kept without his allowance, and the audience of other matters was referred to him. Theſe things appeare to bee ſoe, in the caſe of the ſchole of Cambridge, priuiledged by the holy Popes S. Leo, and Simplicius in this age, and S. Iltutus, that renowned Maſter of many moſte Learned Schollers. (Honor. Papa. ſupr. Caius Antiquitat. Cantabrig. l. 1. p. 147. lib. vit. Sanctoaum Wall. in Iltuto.) To vvhome, magiſtralis cura conceſſa est à Pontifice: The magiſtrall chardge was committed by the

Pope. How renowned this man was in this kinde, as alſo S. Dubritius in the like caſe, hauinge a thouſand ſchollers, as our Proteſtant teſtifie. (Caius ſupr. p. 145.146. Bal. l. de ſcript. centur. 1. in Dubrit. & Iltuto. Godvvin Catalog. S. Dauid. 1. Bal. cent. 1. in Macceo.) And Macceus a diſciple of S. Patricke beeinge accuſed at Rome, was conſtrayned to purge himſelfe there, edito libello Romanae vrbis pontifici ſatisfecit, and ſatisfied the Pope of Rome in his booke publiſhed to that purpoſe.
                        Neither without great cauſe, were theſe duties performed to the Pope from hence, or hee did require them ſingularly of the Britans in this time: for theſe our Proteſtants aſſure vs, that the Pope in thoſe daies, claimed and exerciſed that their higheſt ſpirituall power, ouer all churches, and parſons how eminent ſoeuer, temporall or ſpirituall, For to inſiſt in theſe mens very words. (Io: Bal. l. 2. de Act. Rom. Pont. in Hilario. Rob. Barns in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Hilar.) Hilarius decreta ſynodalia fecit, & per vniuerſum mundum ſeruanda, publicauit. Pope Hilary (about the yeare 142.) did make ſynodall decrees, and publiſhed them to bee kept

throughout the whole world. Faelix Achatiū Cōstantinopolitanum epiſcopum vna cum Petro Eutichiano excommunicat, quod Eutichianum exilium propter baereſim puiſum, reuocauerat. Pope Faelix the third, did excommunicate Achatius patriarke of Conſtantinople with Peter an Eutichian heretick, becauſe he had recalled an Eutichian, that for hereſie was exiled. Gelaſius Anastaſium Imperatorem à coetu Christianorum excluſit, quòd Achatio & alijs haereticis faueret. (Idem in Gelaſio) Gelaſius the Pope, did exclude Anaſtaſius the Emperor from the companie of Chriſtians, becauſe hee fauoured Achatius and other hereticks. And they further tell vs, (Balaeus & Barns in Anaſtaſio 2.) how Pope Anaſtaſius the ſecond, did alſoe excommunicate the ſame Emperor for the like. Soe it is euident by this our Engliſh Proteſtants, that the Popes of Rome in al this age both claymed, and exerciſed this their ſupreame ſpirituall power and commaunde in this kingedome of Britanie. And becauſe the kingedome of Ireland is now belonging to the crowne of greate Britanie, and S. Patricke (generally called the Apoſtle of that nation) was borne in this our Britanie, and ſent to Ireland by

the ſame Pope Celeſtine, whoe ſent S. Palladius Germanus and Lupus hither, I muſt ſay ſome-what of him, and his proceedings in this matter.
                        The very name of the Apoſtle of Ireland which is giuen vnto him in all Antiquities, and that hee was thus ſent from the Pope of Rome, Saint Celeſtine, with that highe ſpirituall power requiſite in ſuch a caſe of the conuerſion of ſoe greate a contrye, will ſufficiently warrant the dependance of the ſame in ſpirituall things of the Apoſtolicke See of Rome. For to ſpeake nothinge of his miraculous & powerable proceedings with greate oppoſites vnto him, remembred by the writers of his life and others, Nennius himſelfe is thus farr a witneſſe for this renowned Saint and Iriſh Apoſtle. (Nennius in manu-ſcripto codice antiq. in Patricio.) Sanctus Patricius Euangelium Christi externis nationibus per annos 40. Praedicabat, virtutes Apoſtolicos faciebat, caecos illuminabat, leproſos mundabat, ſurdos audire faciebat, daemones obſeſsis corporibus fugabat, mortuos numero vſque nouem ſuſcitauit, captiuos multos vtriuſque ſexus proprijs donis redemit, ſcripſit Abegetoria 300. ſexaginta quinque, aut amplius, eccleſias

quoque eodem numero fundauit, trecentas ſexaginta quinque, ordinauit Epiſc
                                 •…
                              pos 365. aut amplius, in quibus ſpiritus Dei erat, presbyteros autem vſque ad tria millia ordinauit, & duodecim milia hominum in vna Regione Conachta ad fidem Christi conuertit, & baptizauit, quadraginta diebus totidemque nocti
                                 •…
                              us in cacumine montis Eile ieiunauit. S. Patrick did preache the ghoſpell of Chriſt 40. yeares to externe nations, hee wrought Apoſtolicall miracles, hee made the blinde to ſee, cleanſed lepers, cauſed the deaffe to heare, draue away deuills from poſſeſſed bodies, hee raiſed to life nyne deade parſons, hee redeemed many captiues of either ſexe, with his owne goods, hee wrote Abegetories 365. or more, hee founded churches in the ſame number, three hundred ſixtie fiue, hee ordeyned three hundred three ſcore & fiue Biſhops or more, in whom there was the ſpirit of God, hee ordeyned preiſts to the number of three thouſande, and hee conuerted to the faith of Chriſt and baptized, twelue thouſand men in one Region called Conacht, hee faſted fourtie dayes & ſoe many nights in the topp of the montaine Eile.
                        Thus this auntient Brittiſh Author comparing

this holy Biſhop S. Patrick, to Moyſes in fower thinges: firſt for his ſpeakinge with an Angell, in rubo, in a bushe: ſecondlie for his faſt of fourtie dayes and nights: thirdlie for the yeares of his age 120. fourthlie for the place of his buriall vnknowne. By which narration of Nennius ſoe auntient, and recommended an Author, that S. Patricke did conſecrate ſoe manye preiſts and Biſhops, eſpeciallie aaboue three hundred and threeſcore holy Biſhops, when the fourth part of them could not bee employed for theſe Ilands of Britanie and Ireland, it is an euident argument, that his legatine power from the See Apoſtolick of Rome, did not confine it ſelfe in theſe Ilands, but extended it ſelfe to other parts farr off, which wee now call America, becauſe neyther Fraunce nor any nation in the old continent, was then ſubordinate to Britanie, or Ireland, to receaue Biſhops and preachers from them. And this Nennius ſeemeth to inſinuate, when hee ſayth Saint Patricke preached the ghoſpell, externis nationibus, to externe and ſtraunge nations, the Popes power ſpiritual rechinge vnto all Regions, & this is cō
                           firmed

by the writers of the life of S. Brendan, whoe as both an old manuſcript which I haue ſeene (an old manuſcript in the life of S. Brendan.) written diuers hundreds yeares ſince; and Iohn Capgraue, (in Catal. in S. Brendan.) whoe wrote longe before, (and was publiſhed in print an. 1516.) the late diſcouerie of America, are witneſſes, founde in diuers places, manie dayes ſaylinge from Ireland, in America and Ilands belonging vnto it, diuers religious Chriſtians that came thither in the time of S. Patricke, and ſent or brought thither by him. And the Iland called ſtill S. Brendan, in thoſe parts, may ſeeme to haue taken, and ſtill to keepe the name from that holy Saint, beeinge there in thoſe his holie trauailes. Inſul. Sancti Brendani in deſcript. Amaric. apud Abrah. Ortel. & alios.
                        
                        And yet to conclude the labours of Saint Patrick, and his teſtifyinge the ſpirituall prerogatiue of the Roman See here in Britanie, where hee was borne, theſe Proteſtants haue before recommended his epiſtle vnto vs, wherein hee declareth, that as Saint Phaganus, and Deruuianus (Damianus by others) obteyned ten yeares Indulgence of S.

Eleutherius for the holy place of Glaſtenburie. (Antiquit. Glasten. apud M. S. antiq. Ioh. Capgrau. & al. in S. Patricio.) ſoe hee obteyned of S. Celeſtine Pope, whoe ſent him into theſe parts, twelue yeares of Indulgēce for the ſame place. Et ego frater Patricius, à piae memoriae Caelestino Papa duodecimo annos Indulgentiae acquiſiui. And to make all cleare, that neither S. Palladius, S. Germanus, and Lupus, or S. Patricius did any thinge in theſe parts, nor any vnder them, but by the Popes actuall or virtuall approbation, or allowance, thus it is teſtified by our Proteſtant hiſtorians in theſe words. (Raphael Holinsh. Iohn Hooker histor. of Ireland pag 53.)
Palladius Landed in the North of Ireland, whence hee eſcaped right hardly with his life, into the Iles adioyninge, where hee preached the ghoſpell, and conuerted noe ſmall number of Scots to the chriſtian faith, and purged that part which was chriſtened from the infection of the Pelagians. Hee was required by the Scots that inhabited here in Britanie, to leaue the Iles, and come ouer vnto them, there to Inſtruct the people in the way of true ſaluation, to the which with the Popes Licence, hee ſeemed willinge enough, and

the Biſhop of Rome the more redily condiſcended thereunto, for that in the inſtant time, when Palladius was to depart, and Patrick attended at Rome, ſuinge for licence to bee ſent into Ireland, the Pope therefore graunted that Palladius might paſſe ouer to the Scots in Britanie, and appointed Patricke to goe with authoritie from him into Ireland.
Thus wee ſee all eccleſiaſticall things, ordered and diſpoſed here by the Popes authoritie in this age.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE SIXTE CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE.
                     
                        
                           THE X. CHAPTER. Wherein the ſame highest ſpirituall power of the Popes of Rome, is still by theſe English Protestant Diuines and Antiquaries continued, in this kingedome.
                        IT is euident by that which is entreated before, that in the beginninge of this ſixt hundred yeares, and longe after, the ſupreame

papal power continued inuiolably in this kingedome; for S. Dubritius the Popes Legate liued vntill the yeare 522. And many or moſte of the renowned men in this age in Britanie were his Schollers, taught, and inſtructed by him: thus the Antiquarie of Cambridge writeth. (Ioh. Caius antiquit· Cantabrig. l. 1. pag. 148. Catal. Sanct. Wall. in S. Dubrit. In vetuſto codice, cui titulus est de vitis Sanctorum Wallenſium, in vita S. Dubritij iſta lego: creuit illius (Dubritij) fama cum vtriuſque legis notae & veteris peritia, P
                                 •…
                              rtotam Britanniam, ita quòd ex omni parte totius Britanniae Scholares veni
                                 •…
                              bant, non tantum rudes, ſed etiam viri ſapientes, & doctores ad eum ſtudendi gratia confluebant. Theſe I reade in an old booke intituled of the liues of the Saints of Walles, in the life of Saint Dubritius: The fame of him (Dubritius) with his knowledge both of the new and old lawe, ſoe increaſed throughout all Britanie, that out of euerie part of all Britanie ſchollers came vnto him, not onely the ignorant, but wiſe men and doctors, flocked vnto him to ſtudy: cheifely S. Helian, Sampſon his diſciple, Vbelinus, Merchiguinus, Elguoredus, Guninus, Longual, Artbodu,

Longur, Arguiſtus, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elhebarn, Iudnon, Curdocui, Aidan, Cinnarh, and with theſe he had a thouſand clergie men ſeuen yeares together, in the villadge Hentlan, vppon the riuer fide of Guy, in the ſtudie of diuine and humane learninge, giuinge them example in himſelfe, of a religious life and perfect charitie. Therefore theſe ſoe manie renowned men out of all parts of Britanie, and ſchollers to a Maſter the Popes Legate, and primate of Britanie, and many of them by the ſame authoritie, after made Rulers in the church of Britanie, and one of them S. Sampſon Archbiſhop of Yorke, they could not in any equall iudgement, bee otherwiſe affected to the See of Rome, then that their ſoe glorious and renowned Maſter, and inſtructor was; for otherwiſe they could not haue bee named his ſchollers, and beeing ſoe many a thouſand & more in number, it is not credible but all, moſte, or many of them, followed him in this, as in other doctrines.
                        Like was the caſe of S. Iltutus of whome I haue breiflye ſpoken before, hee alſoe liued longe after this time, as a Proteſtant

Biſhop wittneſſeth, in the yeare of Chriſt 520. Bal. l. de Script. centur. 1. in Ilchat. Morgan. fol. 29.) Egregius iste Britannorum Magiſter (inquiunt Vincentius & Antoninus) ex diſcipulis erat diui Germani. Qui omnium ſcripturarum, veteris ac noui testamenti, & omnium artium philoſophiae, cunctorum ſuae gentis ſcientiſſimus, futura Dei dono praenouit· In magno numero diſcipulos iste habuit, tam Gallos quam Britānos, quorum fuere praecipui Sampſon, Paulinus, Dauid & Gildas Badonicus. This excellent Maſter of the Britans (ſay Vincentius and Antoninus) was one of the diſciples of S. German (the Popes Legate) whoe among all of his nation, was the moſte skilfull in all ſcriptures, both of the old, and new teſtament, and in all arts of philoſophie, and by the guift of God knew things to come. This man had diſciples in greate number, aſwell French men as Britās of the which the cheifeſt were Sampſon, Paulinus, Dauid, and Gyldas Badonicus. The ſame is proued vnto vs by other Proteſtants. (Merchiannus Rex in Dipl. apud Caium antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. pag. 147. Catalog. Sanct. Wall. in S. Iltuto.) And how the Pope graunted him this priuiledge of ſuch publick teachinge: Magiſtralis tibi cura

à Pontifice conceſſa est, as the kinge of thoſe parts in his princely graunt with others witneſſe. Therefore if the greateſt doctors and teachers of others in Britanie in theſe times, were thus licenced by the Popes, their Legates, and ſchollers of their legats, wee cannot queſtion, but ſuch as the Maſters, ſuch likewiſe the ſchollers and diſciples were, eſpecially when wee find their cheifeſt Schollers S. Dauid, S. Sampſon, made Archbiſhops by the Poopes Authoritie, and this former primate of all Britanie, by the Popes graunt as hereafter, Matth. Westm. ad An. 727.
                        And that the ſcholers of Britanie were not then allowed, without the Popes priuiledge, doth further appeare by our Proteſtants, Hardinghe, Lydgate, and others. (Ioh. Hardinge apud Bal. in praefat. ad l. de Script. Stow histor. Ioh. Caius l. 1. antiq Cantabrig. Brian Twin. apol. Oxon. l. 1.) teſtifying, that in the tyme of S Gregorie, the vniuerſities or publick Scholes of Stamford, Caerlegion and perhaps ſome others, were interdicted by the Pope for ſome errors they held at this time. The Antiquaries of Cambridge contend (Caius ſup. l. 1.) that their vniuerſity

was then Innocent, and ſoe preſerued and priuiledged. (Brian. Twyn. apol. l. 2. pag. 143.) They of Oxord ſeeme to graunt and glory in it, that S. Germanus the Popes Legate, did confirme the orders and conſtitutions of the vniuerſitie of Oxford, and alledge Aſſerius Meneuerſis to that purpoſe. (Aſser. Meneu. apud Brian. Twyn. ſupr.) Diuum Germanum Oxoniam adueniſſe, annique dimidium illic eſse moratum, qui ordines & instituta illius loci mirum in modum comprobauit. Saint German came to Oxford, and ſtayed there halfe a yeare, and greately approued the orders and inſtitutions of that place. And to proue that all the Chriſtians of this Britany then in this age, acknowledged this power, of the Pope or Rome, and their dependance of him in ſpirituall things, the Archbiſhops See of London beeinge waſted and perſecuted by the pagan Saxons, moſte ſwayinge in the prouinces ſubiect vnto it, wee doe not reade of any Archbiſhop of London after the martyrdome of S. Vodinus, vntill Theonus Biſhop of Gloceſter tooke charge thereof in the yeare 553. as a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth in this manner. (Godwyn Catalog. of Biſh. in Lond. in Vodinus and Theonas. Stow.

histor. in Lucius.) I finde onely one of them named, viz. Theonus, that beeing firſt Bishop of Gloceſter, forſooke it, and tooke the chardge of London vppon him, in the yeare 553. ſoe write other Proteſtants. Therefore wee muſt now ſeeke to the other two Archiepiſcopall Sees, Caerlegion and Yorke. For S. Dubricius, hee was both conſecrated by the Popes Legate, S. Germanus, and hee himſelfe alſoe both the Popes Legate, and Primate of all Britanie. Britanniae Primas, & Apostolicae ſedis Legatus. (Galfrid. Monum. hiſt. Reg. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12. Godwyn. Catal. in S. Dauids 1. & Landaff. 1.) Soe that there is noe queſtion of him, but hee acknowledged this higheſt ſpirituall power in the See of Rome, whoſe Legate hee was then in this kingedome.
                        Neyther can there bee any doubt of the Archbiſhop of Yorke in this behalfe, at this time, for S. Sampſon was then Archbiſhop there, whoe as before, was both ſcholler to S. Dubritius, ſoe earneſt a patrō of the Romane See, and alſoe of S. Iltutus, as before, ſcholler to S. German, the Popes Legate, and warrā
                           ted to bee publick profeſſor, & teacher here, by the Popes allowāce, & to giue more certaynety herein, this holy man S. Sāpſon was

miraculouſly choſen of God, as Capgraue and others write, to the Archiepiſcopall See of Yorke, (Ioh. Capgrau in Sampſone.) and was conſecrated by S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, and primate of Britanie. Therefore there cannot bee the leaſt ſuſpition, but that, both hee, and the prouinces both of the North of England, and Scotland alſoe, then vnder his iuriſdiction, were of the ſame opinion in this matter. And if the Metropolitan See of London a little before deſtroyed, as our hiſtories tell vs. (Galfrid. mon. hiſtor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap 9.) by the pagan Saxons, with other churches of that prouince, had then any Archbiſhop, whoſe name is not remembred, noe man of indifferent iudgement will thinke, that he differed in opinion in this matter, from thoſe glories of this kingedome, and church thereof, S. Dubritrius the Popes Legate and S. Sampſon conſecrated by him, by whome alſoe, & whoſe authoritie from the See of Rome, if London then had any Archbiſhop at this time, hee was likewiſe conſecrated, noe others then beeing to intermedle in that buſines. And our kings of that time Vortimer, Aurelius Ambroſius. Vther Pendragon and Arthur

crowned kings by theſe holy Archbiſhops, Legats, patrons and knowne mainteyners of the priuiledges of the Apoſtolicke See of Rome. Kinge Vortimer belonged to the age before, therefore I onely here ſay of him, as I am directed by our Proteſtants in the Brittiſhe hiſtorie, as they approue it. (Galfrid. Monum. l. 6. cap. 14. Matth. Westm. an. 454.) That after hee was choſen kinge and obteyned victorie of the pagans, ſoe ſoone as, it was in his power, hee did all thinges, eſpecially apperteyning to Religion, by the direction or rather commaund, as the words be, of S. Germanus the Popes Legate: Victoria potitus Vortimerus caepit reddere poſſeſsiones ereptas ciuibus, ipſoſque diligere ac honorare, & Eccleſias iubente Sancto Germano renouare. Vortimer hauing obteyned victorie, began to reſtore the poſſeſſions, that were taken from the citizens, and to loue, and honor them, and by the commaundement of S. German to renewe the churches.
                        Neyther can wee make it a ſtraūge thing, if wee will follow ſoe manie Proteſtant guides to leade vs, as before, that kinge Vortimer followed the commaundement of Saint German the Popes Legate, in ſuch affaires,

when they haue aſſured vs, that by his direction and order, both his Father Vortigern kinge before him, was depoſed, and this man by the ſame power, and order was choſen and erected to bee kinge. And the ſame is the condition and caſe of Aurelius Ambroſius, by the ſame power and proceedings made kinge, as theſe Proteſtants tell vs, when Vortigern was depoſed the ſecond time. (Protest. Catalog. Regum Britan. Stowe histor. in Vortiger. Aurel. Ambroſ. and Vterp. Holinsh. in eiſd.) Soe likewiſe of Vterpendragon his brother both of them made kings by cōmon conſent of the cleargie, & nobles, the line of Vortigern beeinge quite diſinherited, and hee himſelfe (to write in Proteſtāt words (burnt in his castle in Wales by Aurelius Ambroſius & his brother Vter. (Galfrid. monum. hiſtor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap. 2.17.) But Nennius writeth, that one opinion is, which is in libro S. Germani, in the booke of S. German, that hee with his wicked wyues or concubines, was burned with fier miraculouſly from heauen. An other opinion there is, that hee wandered vpp and downe vagrantly, and his hart burſt in ſonder. The third, that the earthe miraculouſly opened & swallowed him vp aliue.
                           
All agree that for betraying the country to the Infidels, and his other moſte horrible ſinnes, hee was iuſtly and greeuouſly puniſhed by God, and died miſerably with eternall infamie: and the others were renowned patrons and obedient children to the church of God, which had aduaunced them, to the regall dignitie. Matth. Weſtm. an. 465.466.488.490.498. Nennius in M. S. histor. in Guorthigurno.
                        
                        And if wee will followe Nennius the beſt Author wee haue of theſe thinges, S. German omitted noe meanes to procure kinge Vortigern to penance, & when nothinge would preuayle, notwithſtanding the moſt horrible ſinne of him with his owne daughter, hee baptized the ſonne ſoe begotten naming him Faustus, hee brought him vp and ſoe instructed him in pietie, that hee was a glorious Saint. (Nennius ſupr.) Quartus filij Guorthigirni fuit Faustus qui illi de filia ſua natus eſt, quem Sanctus Germanus baptizauit, enutriuit, atque docuit: vnam habuit filiam quae vt diximus, mater fuit Sancti Fausti. Next to theſe was kinge Arthur, whoe allthough hee was by birth diſabled, as our Proteſtants ſay, ex furtiue concubitu Vtheri & Dulciſſa Cornubiana

natus. Yett to ſpeake in Proteſtants words. (Proteſt. Index in Galfrid. monum. V. Arthurus. Galfrid. mon. hiſtor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. c. 19. Stowe hiſtor. in K. Arthur.) Arthur the ſonne of Vther, at the age of fifteene yeares, was crowned kinge of Britanie by Dubritius Archbiſhop of Legions, the Popes Legate, as before. And this was not the ſole Act of that Saint, but of all the Biſhops, and nobles of the kingedome: Defuncto Rege conuenerunt Pontifices cum clero Regni, & populo, ipſumque more regio humauerunt. Quo facto Dubritius vrbis Legionum Archiepiſcopus, ſociatis ſibi Epiſcopis, & magnatibus. Arthurum filium eius iunenem quindecim annorum, in Regem magnificè exercuit. (Matth. Westm. an. 516. Galfrid. mon. lib. 9. cap. 1.) Kinge Vther beeing deade, the Biſhops aſſemble together with the clergie and people of the kingedome, and bury him in kingely maner. Which beeinge ended Dubritius Archbiſhop of the citie of Legions, the Biſhops and Nobles beeing aſſociate vnto him magnificently erect for king-Arthur his ſonne, a yonge man of fifteene yeares old.
                        And yett this worthie prince ſoe by byrth by himſelfe diſabled, and for age vnfitt

to manadge ſoe many and greate matters, yett made kinge by the power I haue related before, and followinge the direction of the Pope in matters requiſite, and his Legate, and Biſhops here, became ſoe renowned & glorious a kinge as all hiſtories report. This kinge, beſides the common benefites hee beſtowed on the church of Chriſt in Britanie, then allmoſte deſolate by the rage of the pagan Saxons, hee did in particular, to ſhew his gratefull and due dependance on the Popes of Rome, With the conſent and counſaile of all the Biſhops and peeres of the kingedome, and with licence of the See Apoſtolique, graunt priuiledge to the ſchoole of Cambridge, to bee exempt and free from publick vectigals and burthenous workes, and this hee did for the loue of the heauenly kingedome, and remedy of the ſoules of his Auncestors: as the Proteſtants of Cambridge produce vnto vs out of his owne charter beginninge thus. Charta Regis Arthuri de priuileg. Cantabr. apud Ioh. Caium lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. pag. 68.69.) Arthurus regali à Deo fultus dignitate, omnibus ſuis ſalutem pro amore caelestis patriae, remedioque animarum anteceſſorum meorum Britannia Regum, pro augmentatione

inſuper Reipublicae Regni mei Britanniae, ac profectu ſpirituali Scholarium in lege Domini iugiter Cantabrigiae studentium, conſilio, & aſſenſu omnium & ſingulorum Pontificium, & Principum huius Regni, & licentia ſedis Apostolicae, statue praeſenti ſcripto, & firmiter decerno, vt ciuitas Scholarium praedicta, à publicis vectigalibus & operibus oneroſis abſoluātur. Where wee ſee the Popes licence requiſite, and firſt obteyned of this kinge, euen from freeing that ſchole in tēporal reſpects.
                        This licence as it ſeemeth, beeing obteyned from Pope Iohn the ſecond, for the Charter beareth date, anno ab Incarnatione Domini 531.7. die Aprilis, iu ciuitate Londoni, the yeare of Chriſt 531. the ſeuenth day of Aprill in the citie of London, at which time Iohn the ſeconde, is cōmonly thought to haue beene Pope. How many Popes confirmed that ſchole and exempted it from all other iuriſdiction but the See Apoſtolick I haue written before, and now add from Pope Sergius the firſt, (apud Caium. lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. accadem. pag. 78.79.80.) ſhewinge how his predeceſſors in the See Apoſtolick had done the ſame: Sergius Epiſcopus ſeruns ſeruorum Dei, praeſentium authoritate

decreuimus, vt nulli Archiepiſcope, ſeu Epiſcopo, alijue eccleſiaſticae perſonae, vel ſeculariliceat, vniuerſitatem vestram, aut aliquem veſtrum ſuſpendere, ſeu excommunicare, vel quolibet ſub interdicto ponere, abſque ſummi Pontificis aſſenſu, vel eius mandato ſpeciali: prohibemus inſuper, ne quis priuilegia, à ſede Apoſtolica gratiosè conceſſa, vel indulta, auſu temerario infringere, ſeu restringere praeſumat, vel attemptet, nulli igitur hominum omnino liceat, hanc paginam nostrae conceſsionis, & exemptionis infringere, vel ei quouiſmodo contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praeſumpſerit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, & beatorum Apoſtolorum Petri, & Pauli ſe nouerit incurſurum. Sergius Pope ſeruant of the ſeruāts of God. Wee haue decreed by the Authoritie of theſe preſents, that it ſhall bee lawfull for noe Archbiſhop, Biſhop, or other parſon ſpirituall or ſecular to ſuſpend, or excommunicate, or any way to interdict your vniuerſitie, or any of you, without the Popes aſſent, or ſpecial commandement. Wee further forbid, that noe man by temerarious boldnes, preſume or attempt to infringe, or reſtrict the priuiledges gratiouſly graunted & giuen by the See Apoſtolick. It ſhall bee lawfull

for noe man at all, to infringe or contradict, the tenure of this our graunt and exemptiō, if any man preſume to attempt it, lett him know that he ſhall incurr the indignation of almightie God, and the bleſſed Apoſtles Peter and Paul. Where wee ſee all parſons in Britanie then, ſubiect and ſubordinate in ſpirituall iuriſdiction, to the Pope of Rome.
                        And this teſtified by our Proteſtants thē
                           ſelues. (Wil. Lamb. in l. de leg. Reg. in Legib: Edward· fol. 126. Ingulph. histor. in fine.) Whoe goe furher in ſuch things, and aſſure vs from the common lawes themſelues of our auncient kings S. Edward the confeſſor, and others, and confirmed by king William the firſt, both as Ingulphus and out Proteſtant antiquaries acknowledge, that this kingdome at that time, and kings therof, did acknowledge as great power in the See of Rome in matters concerning this nation, as any catholick now may yeeld vnto it: for our auntient publick lawes warranted by our Proteſtants thus Inſtruct vs. (Leges S. Eduardi titul. de iure & appendicijs coronae Regui Britanniae. Guliel. Lamb. ſup. p. 137.238. Hackluit booke of trauailes, pag. 244.) Impetrauit

temporibus illis Arthurus Rex à Domino Papa, á a Curia Romana, quod confirmata ſit Norweia in perpetuum coronae Britanniae, in augmentum Regni huius, vocauitque illam Arthurus Cameram Britanniae. Hac vero de cauſa dicunt Norwegienſes ſe debere in regno iſto cohabitare, & dicunt ſe eſſe de corpore regni huius, ſcilicet de corona Britanniae. Thus in engliſh by a Proteſtant miniſter: kinge Arthur obteyned in thoſe dayes of the Pope, and Court of Rome, that Norway ſhould bee for euer annexed to the crowne of Britanie, for the enlardgment of this kingdome, and hee called it the chamber of Britanie. For this cauſe the Norſes ſay, that they ought, to dwell with vs in this kingedome, to witt. that they belonge to the crowne of Britanie.
                        And if wee would bee as little beholding to the See of Rome, for confirming Norway to this kingedom, as to Pope Eleutherius before, to the Ilands, and ſay kinge Arthur claymed Norway, by a former Title, as Dē
                           marke was before, or Iurebelli, as a conqueror, and the Pope did nothinge, but confirme theſe, or one of theſe Titles, it ſufficeth to aſſcribe the iudgment of that queſtion to the See Apoſtolicke.
                        
                           This ſeemeth to mee, to confeſſe and acknowlege greate, and ample prerogatiue in the Pope of Rome in ſpirituall maters, and directing alſo of temporal to a ſpiritual end, as Catholicks now attribute vnto him, or hee demaunde. And yett wee are by theſe Proteſtans (whoe freely acknowledge the Popes and church of Rome then to haue beene holy) aſſured that the holy Pope and court of Rome, ſoe practized it. That our kinge, Christianus optimus fuit, kinge Arthur was an exceeding good chriſtian, who ſought, & accepted it, & both he the Biſhop & cleargie and the whole kingedome ſoe approued thereof, that it was by publick authoritie receaued for a lawe in this nation, and ratified both by our Britās, Saxons, & Normans after them. For it is ſet downe in this lawe before, that from that time the Norſes or Norwegians claymed priuiledge to bee free here, by thoſe proceedings. Which is more plainly expreſſed afterward in the ſame lawe in theſe words by Proteſtants tranſlation: The people of Norvvay may, and ought from henceforth, dvvel, & remaine in this kingdome, vvith vs, as our louinge and svvorne Brethren. Qua de cauſa poſsint & debent praedicti decaetero nobiſcū
                              
cohabitare, & remanere in regno, ſicut coniurate fratres nostri (Guliel. Lamb. in leg. Eduardi ſup. Richard. Hackluyt p. 245.) And the motiue whereupon the Pope then ſoe proceeded, in annexing and confirminge the kingdome of Norway to the crowne of Britanie, ſeemeth to bee the very ſame, the ſpirituall good both of that contrie, this kingedome alſoe, and the church of God, in ordine ad ſpiritualia. Which the preſent Pope and Catholicque diuines alledge ordinarilie, for priuiledges of the See Apoſtolicke, in ſuch cauſes, the ſpirituall good and helpe of all, or many, and hurt of none at all.
                        For beſides many hiſtories of thoſe times ſoe teſtifyinge, and to bee paſſed ouer, it is recorded in theſe verie lawes themſelues ſoe warranted by Proteſtants and antiquities. (Leges S. Edwardi ſupr. titul. de Iure & Appendicijs.) Fuerunt gentes ferae, & indomitae, non habuerunt legem Dei, nec proximi, fuerunt autem ibi Chriſtiani occultè. Arthurus autem Chriſtianus optimus fuit, & fecit eos baptizari, & vnum Deum per totam Norweiam venerari, & vnam fidem Christi ſemper inuiolatam custodire.

caperunt vniuerſi proceres Norweia vxores ſuas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo, vnde Norwegienſes dicunt ſe exijſſe de gente, & ſanguine regnihuius. They were wilde and barbarous nations. They had not the lawe of God, nor neighbour, but there were Chriſtians there ſecretly. But kinge Arthur was an exceeding good Chriſtian, and cauſed them to bee baptized, and throughout all Norway to worſhip one God, and to receaue and keepe the faith of Chriſt inuiolably, all the noble men of Norway tooke wiues of the noble nation of the Britans. Whereuppon the Norwegians ſay, that they ar deſcended of the race and blood of this kingedome. And then immediatly followeth that which is cited before: The aforeſaid kinge Arthur obteyned in thoſe daies of the Pope and Court of Rome, that Norway should bee for euer annexed to the crovvne of Britanie. Whereby it ſeemeth by theſe Proteſtants, the motiue of the Pope to ioyne Norway to the crowne of Britany, was the ſpiritual good of both kingdomes, and the church of God, kinge Arthur ſoe worthie a chriſtian, hauing procured ſoe ſtraunge and happy an alteration in the kingedome of Norway; his victories

there againſt the barbarous giuing free libertie and acceſſe to ſuch chriſtian preachers, as by the Popes licence, and allowance were directed thither. For S. Kentegern, made Biſhop by S. Palladius the Popes Legate, if wee may beleeue the puritan hiſtorian of Scotland: vvent ſeuen times to Rome, and the Pope ſent him to performe the worke of the ministry enioyned him by the holy ghost. Vir Dei ſepties Romam adiens, ſanctus Papa illum virum Dei & Spiritus ſancti gratia plenie intelligens, in opus miniſterij à Spiritu ſancto illi iniuncti destinauit. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scotic. l. 5. Rege 42. pag. 146. Ioh. Capgr. in Catal. in S. Kentegerno.
                        
                        And as our Proteſtants with others teſtifie this Apoſtolick man, thus warranted and priuiledged, ſent of his diſciples ſome to the Orchades, to Norway, and Iſland, that they might receaue the light of faith by their instructions. For hee had in his colledge at Elguel in Walles, three hundred, ſixtie, and fiue learned men, allwayes ſoe prepared to preach. (Bal. l. de Scriptor. centur. 1. in Kentegerno Elguenſi. Cap. ſupr. eod. Hector Boeth. Scot. hist. l. 9.) Ex diſcipulis ſuis quoſdam ad Orchadas, ad Norwegiam & Iſlandiam miſit, vt eorum

inſtructionibus fidei lumen reciperent, nam in Elguenſi collegio, trecentos & ſexaginta quinque literatos viros ad id ſemper paratos hahebat. And to add further to the honor of the See Apoſtolick of Rome, by the example of this moſte bleſſed man S. Kentegern, hee neuer beeing but an ordinary Biſhop ſomtimes in Walles, ſometimes in Scotland, yett by the priuiledge hee had from the Popes of Rome in that kinde, beſides his labors here in Britanie, Norway, and the remembred other places, to write in a Proteſtant Biſhops words. (Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Kentegerno in Elguen.) Formam primitiuae ſeruauit Eccleſiae, Apostolico more pedes ad praedicandum porrexit, plaeroſque ad fidem conuertit, Apoſtatas reuocauit, Pelagianos ciecit, nondum renatos baptizauit, ſimulachra ſubuertit, Eccleſias construxit, agrotis ministrauit, languores curauit, atque in magna vixit abstinentia, praedicabat ad flumen vſque Fordenſe, & ad mare Scotium, Caledonos, Athalos, Horestos ac vicinarum Albainae regionum Incolas, docendo, mouendo, hortando, ad verae pietatis obſeruationem inſtigauit. Hee kept the forme of the primatiue church, after the maner of the Apoſtles goinge on foote to preach, hee conuerted

very many to the faith, recalled Apoſtats, caſt forth Pelagians, baptized thoſe that wanted baptiſme, ouerthrew the Idols, builded churches, miniſtred to the ſick, cured diſeaſes, and liued in great abſtinence: hee preached euen to the riuer of Fordune, & the Scottiſh See, hee incited by teaching, admoniſhinge, and exhortinge to the obſeruation of true piety, the Caldoniās, Athals, Horeſts, and the inhabitants of the Regions neare to Albania. This holy Biſhop beeing firſt Biſhop of Glaſcow in Scotland, came into Walles about the yeare of Chriſt 560 and there ſettled an epiſcopall See, hee beeing the firſt Biſhop thereof by the riuer Elwy, and notwithſtandinge hee was at the firſt reſiſted therein by Malgo, or Malgocunus a Brittiſh kinge in that contry, yett his authoritie and power ſoe preuailed, that to ſpeake in a Proteſtant Biſhops phraſe. (Hector Boeth. hiſt. Scot. in Kentigern. Godwin. Catalog. in Aſſaph. 1.
                        The kinge at laſt was content to allow the ſame church to bee an epiſcopall ſee, and moreouer to beſtowe vppon it, diuers Lordſhips, manners, immunities, and priuiledges. Kentegern hauinge ſtayed here ſome number

of yeares gaue ouer his Biſhoprick vnto a diſciple of his named Aſſoph, a man of greate vertue and learninge, whoe writ the life of his Maſter Kentegern; and beſides that hee was diſciple to ſoe greate a patron of the Apoſtolick Roman See, to giue Euidence that hee himſelfe was ſoe alſoe affected, notwithſtandinge there were then many Biſhops, and Archbiſhops alſoe in Britanie, yett a Proteſtant Biſhop writeth. (Bal. centur. 1. in Asapho.) à Pontificis Romani diſcipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritate & vnctionem accepit. Hee receaued both authoritie and conſecration from the diſciples of the Pope of Rome, that came into England, and liued vntill the yeare of Chriſt 590. claruit anno à communis ſalutis origine 590. Within foure yeares of S. Auguſtines coming hither. Before which time alſoe and in this age S. Iuo a Perſian by birth, and an holy Archbiſhop, was ſent by the Pope of Rome into this our Britanie or England, together with Sithius his Nephew, Inthius his Kinſman, and others of whome the Towne yet called S. Iues in Huntington ſhire, where about hee moſte liued tooke the name, dyinge after many yeares in the yeare of Chriſt 600. or

there about, beeinge here longe time by the Pope of Rome his miſſion before S. Gregory his ſendinge S. Auguſtine hither. Iohn Capgrau. in S. Iuone. Flor. Wigorn. an. 600. An
                                 •…
                              r. Leucand. & Got
                                 •…
                              elin. in vita eius.
                        
                        Neyther were our owne Archbiſhops that liued in this age after S. Dubritius, Vodinus and Sampſon otherwiſe affected in this matter. Firſt S. Sampſon beeing driuen by the pagans from Yorke, Pyramus, or Pyrannus, chapleyne to that greate freind of the Romane See, kinge Arthur was Archbiſhop there, conuocato Clero & populo, with common conſent, and conſecrated by S. Dubricius the Popes Legate, and primate here then, noe other beeing to conſecrate him. (Galfrid. Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 9. cap. 8. Matth. Westm. an 522.) The immediate ſucceſſor to S. Dubricius, bothe in his legatine power from the See of Rome, and primate Metropolitane here, in thoſe times by common conſent of writers, Proteſtants and others was, (Godwyn. Catalog. in S. Dauids. 1.2. and Landaffe 1. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubrit and Dauid. Capgrau. Catalog.) that glorie of this nation, S. Dauid, to vvhome S. Dubritius reſigned in his life, liuing as an Exemite. Delicto

Epiſcopatu eremiticam vitam elegit ac tenuit. S. Dauid by his legatine power tranſlated the Archbiſhops See from Caerlegion, where it was inſtituted by Pope Eleutherius, to Meneuia, S. Dauids, of this name, where it after remayned. (in S. Dubrit. & S. Dauid. Giral. Cambr. itinerar. Cambr. Capgrau. in S. Dauid.) Wee reade of this our holy and learned Metropolitane, that hauinge expelled the Pelagian hereſie, and reſtoringe the true faith, Saint Dauid was constituted Archbiſhop of all Britanie, and his citie dedicated the Metropolitane See of all the contry, ſee that whoſoeuer ſhould gouerne it, ſhould bee Archbiſhop: Therefore all hereſie beeing expelled, all the churches of Britanie, receaued the maner and Rule by the Romane Authoritie, monasteries or builded in all places, and S. Dauid vvas made the highest protector, cheifeſt preacher, from vvhome all receaued the Rule, and forme of well liuinge. Hee vvas an order, correction, and imitation to all: learninge to the Readers, life to the needy, noriſhment to Orphans, a ſuſteyner of the naked, the head of the contry, a Rule to monkes, life to ſeculars. Expulſa haereſi, fides ſanis pectoribus reboratur, & ſanctus Dauid totius Britanniae Archiepiſcopus conſtituitur,

necnon ciuitas eius totius patriae Metropolis dedicatur, ita vt quicumque eam regeret, Archiepiſcopus foret. Expulſa itaque haereſi, omnes Britanniae Eccleſiae modum & regulam Romana authoritate acceperunt. Monasteria per loca conſtruuntur, & ſanctus Dauid ſummus protector, ſummus praedicator, à quo omnes normam atque formam rectè viuendi acceperunt, effectus est. Ipſe cunctis or do, correctio, innitatio, legentibus doctrina, egentibus vita, orphanis nutrimentum, nudis fulcimen, patriae caput, monachis regula, ſecularibus vita fuit.
                        
                        
                           The Archbishop of London in this time, as our Proteſtants tel vs. (Matth. Parker. antiquitat. Brit. pag. 7. Godwyn. Catal. in London in Theonus. Stowe hiſtor. in Lucius. Holinsh. hiſtor. of Engl. Matth. Westm. an. 586. Galfrid. Monument. hiſt. i. 11. c. 10.) was Theonus, or Theanus, vvhoe takinge the chardge of London vpon him the yeare 553. the yeare 586. hee vvith Thadiorus Bishop of Yorke, takinge their clergie, and reliques of Saints, with them, gett them into Walles and Cornwall to the reſt of their contrymen, whom the Saxons had drovven thither. Soe that except theſe Proteſtants deceaue themſelues and others, this Archbiſhop of London and Thadiorus

of Yorke alſoe muſt needs bee of the ſame minde with the others before for the Roman ſpirituall power in this nation; for theſe Proteſtants, (Godwyn Catal. in S. Dauids 1.2.) telling vs, that S. Dubritius liued vntill the yeare of Chriſt 522. and S. Dauid which ſucceeded him, ſate longe, to vvit 65. yeares, they both muſt needs bee made Biſhops vnder him, and their flyinge into Walles and ioyneninge with the Britans there, dooth planely conuince, that they were of that opinion: for if S. Dauid was now deade, which cannot appeare, yet moſte manifeſt it is, that both S. Kentegern and S. Aſaph, thoſe moſte worthie Biſhops cheifeſt then in thoſe parts, and all Britanie alſoe, if S. Dauid was deade, were longe time liuing & ruling after this, and yett ſuch patrons of the Romane ſpirituall power, with their whole cleargie, as before is euidently proued by theſe Proteſtants, that noe Catholick may yeeld more to the See of Rome in theſe, then they did in thoſe dayes. And if S. Dauid was deade; yett the next ſucceſſors of him in that Archiepiſcopall See, which were Cenauc and S. Teliaus or Eliud, muſt needs alſoe ſucceed him in that opinion of

him towards the Roman See: for though little is written of Biſhop Cenauc, but onely that hee was Biſhop of Patern and after ſucceſſor to S. Dauid in the See Archiepiſcopall of S. Dauids, this ſufficiently conuinceth it, for the Biſhoprick of Paterne beeing then vnder the iuriſdiction of S. Dauid, 
                              〈◊〉
                            cannot thinke that the Biſhop thereof was otherwiſe affected in this matter, then his ſoe holye and learned Metropolitane, to whome hee owed obedience.
                        And his very beeing Archbiſhop of Meneuia immediatly after S. Dauid doth proue the ſame by theſe Proteſtants before, (Godwyn. Catal. in S. Dauids. Girald. Cambr. itiner. Cambr. antiquit. eccleſ. Meneuen. apud Godwyn. ſupr.) whoe haue tould vs, that by the power of the Romane See, Meneuia was made the Metropolis, and this Biſhop did not, nor could accept it in any other ſence, or by other Title, of S. Teliaus the matter is more manifeſt, more beeinge written of him by Proteſtants and others, that hee was Scholler to S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, the vndiuided companion of S. Dauid, in their holy pilgrimadge, not onely ſoe farr as Rome, but to Hieruſalem it ſelfe where hee

was conſecrated Biſhop, and after his returne home, and the death of Cenauc, beeing Archbiſhop of Meneuia, then had principalitie ouer all the churches of the west Britanie vnto the end of his life. Principatum ſuper omnes eccleſias occidentalis Britannia vſque ad 
                                 •…
                              em vitae ſua tenuit. (Godwyn in Landaffe. Girald. Cambr. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. pag. 146. Catal. Epiſ. Landaf. Ioh. Capgr. in Catal in S. Thellao. Engl. Martyrol. die 25. Nouember.) And was Archbiſhop there at, and after alſoe by ſome, the death of S. Auguſtine. For it is euident by the Brittiſh hiſtorie, as it is allowed by our Proteſtants, and by their owne chronologie of the kings of Britanie, that S. Dauid himſelfe liued within 16. yeares of S. Auguſtines coming hither. (Galfrid. monum. hiſtor. Reg. Brit. l. 11. cap. 3.) Tunc obijt ſanctiſsimus vrbis Legionum Archiepiſcopus Dauid Meneuia ciuitate, intra Abbatiam ſuam, & iubente Malgone Venedotorum Rege in eadem Eccleſia ſepultus, pro eo ponitur in Metropolitana ſede Kincos Lampaternenſis. Eccleſia Antistes, & ad altiorem dignitatem promouetur. Then Dauid the moſte holy Archbiſhop of the citie of Legions, died in the citie of Meneuia within

his owne Abbey, and by commande of Malgo kinge of North walles, was buried in the ſame church Kincus (hee which by others before is called Cenauc) Biſhopp of the church of Patern, is placed in the Metropolitane See, and promoted to an higher dignitie. For as theſe Proteſtants, Matthew of Weſtminſter, and others are witneſſes. (Proteſt. Catalog. Rer. Britan. in Malgo. Matth. West. an. 586 581.) this kinge began his Reigne in the yeare of Chriſt 581. or 580. ſo that by this calculation, there cannot bee from the death of S. Dauid dyinge in this kings time, and the coming of S. Auguſtine hither by all accompts in the yeare 596. aboue 15. or 16. yeares at the moſte. Soe that wee either muſt ſay, theſe two. Succeſſor of S. Dauid liued a very ſhort time, after they were called to that dignitie (the contrarie whereof is ſett downe before) or that S. Telaus this patrone of the See of Rome, and a canonized Saint of that church, was liuing in the time of S. Auguſtines preaching in this kingedome.
                        Which is the more confirmed by all thoſe hiſtories, which relate the oppoſition of ſome Brittiſh Biſhops and religions men

againſt S. Auguſtine (Bed. lib. 2. histor. cap. 2. Galfrid. mon. lib. 11. hist. Matth. Westm. an. 603. Capgran. in S. Auguſtino.) and ſpeaking of an Archbiſhop of the citie of Legions, and yett not anie one of them maketh the leaſt mention, that any Archbiſhop did either reſiſt S. Auguſtine, or pretend the leaſt diſlike of the ſpirituall ſupreamacie in the See of Rome, or gaineſay any order or decree of the bleſſed Pope S. Gregorie which ſent him hither, nor any Proteſtants though diuers of them name the Biſhops as they coniecture which reſiſted S. Auguſtine, (Matth. Parker ant. Britan. in August. Godwyn. Conuerſ. of Brit. Stowe histor. in Ethelb. Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Rom. in Gregor. 1.) doe once name S. Telaus, or any Archiepiſcopal See, at S. Dauids, or anye other place in Walles at that time, to haue conſented to that oppoſition.
                        Hardinge in his Cronicle maketh this matter playne, that the Britans which gainſaid S. Auguſtine did not deny the ſupreame ſpirituall power of the Pope of Rome in Britanie at that time, but rather defended and maintayned it, and thereby alſoe, as they thought, did iuſtely refuſe S. Auguſtine, for

when hee demaunded obedience of them thus they anſweared by this Author: Ioh. Hardinge Chronicle cap. 88. in Ethelbert kinge of Saxons fol. 83.84.
                        
                           To which Britōs answeared that they not knew
                           That hee had ſuch estate in all Britanie,
                           For they had three Archbishops, to obeyu,
                           Of Caerlion, London and Yorke citie
                           By Bishops of Rome graunted to vs & ordinate
                           Full longe afore yee had ſuch dignitie
                           Wherefore wee will obey noe nevv primate
                           And ſpecially none English nevv prelate,
                           For Englishmen and Saxons haue vs noyed,
                           And haue our Land and all our kyn destroyed.
                        
                        Where wee ſee the Britans were ſoe far from diſallowinge the Popes Authoritie in ſuch things, that by the ſame they both claymed, and maintayned the power, and prerogatiues, of three Archbiſhops, amonge them, now foure hundred yeares ſince
                        But theſe Proteſtants themſelues with others acknowledge, that the moſte renowned Biſhops that were in this kingedome at that time, both receaued the Authoritie of the Pope of Rome, and ſubmitted themſelues to S. Auguſtine his holy Legate. Of the holines and learninge of S. Aſſaph, I haue

ſpoken before, yett a Proteſtant Bishop ſaith of him, (Bal. centur. 1. in Aſſaph.) A Gregorij Pontificis Romani diſcipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritatem accepit, hee receaued authoritie from the diſciples of Gregorie the Pope of Rome that came into England. S. Aſaph in the life of his Maſter S. Kētegern. Capgraue and others after, affirme as much of S. Kentegern. (S. Aſſaph & Ioh. Capgrau. in vit. S Kentegerni.) that hee did acknowledg this high power in S. Gregory the Pope, and receaued power, and confirmation from him. All our hiſtories with generall conſent affirme the ſame of S. Lethardus, the french Bishop that liued with Queene Bertha in Kent. I haue proued the ſame of S. Iuo the Perſian Archbishop, that then preached in Huntington-shire. Of S. Telaus alſoe the Archbiſhop of Walles, ſufficient is ſaid allready. And yet theſe were onely the cheife holy, and learned Bishops here in that time, not anie one comparable to the meaneſt of theſe mentioned in any writer I can finde, to haue reſiſted either the Popes ordinance, or his Legats authoritie.
                        And to ſatisfie a vaine obiection of ſome Proteſtant writers; That S. Columbanus the

holy Iriſh, or Scottiſh Abbot, whoſe authoritie ſome Britans in the tyme of S. Auguſtine pretended for defence of their error in obſeruing the feaſt of Eaſter, & not preſently ſubmitting thēſelues to the cōmaund of the church of Rome, it is euident by auntiēt hiſtories, that both this S. Columban, and the cheifeſt of them, ſubmitted thēſelues wholly vnto it, & receaued both inſtruction and iuriſdictiō frō thence. For it is teſtified in a very old Manuſcript cited by Surius, that both S. Kelian, which was the moſt renowned of them, and that S Columbanus and S. Gallus, ſubmitted themſelues with their aſſociats to the Pope of Rome in all thinges at that time. Thus it teſtifieth of S. Keliā, made Biſhop of Herbypolis Wirtzburg in Franconia by the Pope. (Sur. in vit. S. Kel. M. S. peruetuſt. apud eund. ſupr.) Praedicationi abſtinuit, donec Romano ſe Pontifici praeſentaret, quatenus apud Romanā ſedem & integrū christianae Religionis dogma, & licentiā praedicādi acciperet. Hibernia ſiquidem olim Pelagiana faedata fuerat haereſi, Apoſtolica
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cenſura damnata. Hee abſtayned from preaching, vntil hee preſented himſelfe vnto the Pope of Rome, that hee might receaue frō the See of Rome, both the ſownd

doctrine of Chriſtian Religion, and licence to preach. For Irland (his contry) was auntiently defiled with the pelagian hereſie, and condemned by apoſtolick cenſure: and there ſheweth how hee had companions both of his iorney and ſubmiſſion, amonge others Saint Columbanus, and S. Gallus, leauing the firſt in Italy, and the other in Almayne. The like hath Iohn Capgraue, and a verie old manuſcript which hee followeth, if not the ſame with that of Surius. (Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kilian. M. S. antiq. pr. glorioſiſsimus Rex Eduardus in S. Kiliano.) In oppido orientalis Fraunciae quod Wirttzburch eorum lingua dicitur, cum aliquo tempore ſub ſilentio stetiſſet, Romam profectus est, & officio praedicandi à Papa recepto, Epiſcopus ordinatus: ſocijs eius Columbano ſcilicet in Italia, & Gallo in Almania remanentibus. Saint Kilian ſtayed in a Towne of eaſt France, called in their languadge Wirtzburch, and when hee had beene there ſome time in ſilence, hee went to Rome, and receauing from the Pope power to preach, and beeing ordeyned a Biſhop, returned, leauing his Companions, Columbanus in Italy, and Gallus in Almayne. Where it is euident not onely theſe

Scottiſh Saints did not onely ſubmitt themſelues to the Pope in all matters both of doctrine and iuriſdiction, but the Pope at that time extended and exerciſed that his ſupreame ſpirituall power, both in Italie, Fraunce, Almayne, Britaine, and Ireland, both to cenſure a whole nation, and to diſable any to preach or exerciſe ſpirituall function without his licence.
                        And although the kings of Britanie after Kinge Arthur euen to the deſolation of the Britans, were by all hiſtories euen of their owne as Gildas, Nennius, the Brittiſh hiſtorie, and others, moſte wicked men, and ſuch that by all teſtimonie of Proteſtants, and others, their kingedome was ouerthrowne by God for the ſinnes of them, and their people, yett not anie one of them by any hiſtorie did denie this power of the See Apoſtolick, but euen their laſt kinge Cadwalladar, as their owne hiſtorian writteth. (Gildas de excid. Britan. Galfrid. mon. l. 11. histor. cap. 3.4.5.6.7.8. monum. hiſtor.) beeing admoniſhed from heauen: Nolebat Deus Britones in Inſula Britanniae diutius regnare: that God would not haue the Britans reigne any any longer in the Iland of Britanie, went as

hee was admoniſhed on pilgrimage to Rome, ſubmitted himſelfe to Pope Sergius, and died an holy Saint, in ſoe much that our Proteſtants thus note of him. (Galfrid. mon. l. 12. cap. 17.18. Bed. l. 4. histor. & in Epitom. an. 688. Matth. Westm. an 688.689. Proteſt. annot. in Matth. Weſtm. an. 688.) Regnum relinquens propter Deum, Romam venit: leauinge his kingdome for gods ſake, hee went to Rome. An other ſaith. (Stowe histor in Cadwallader.) Cadwallader forſakinge his kingely authoritie, went to Rome, whoe after became a monke, and was buried in S. Peters church at Rome, hee was the laſte kinge of Britanie, ſaith Geffrey (Galfrid. Mon. l. 11. cap. 12.) And for the Archbiſhop of Walles to whome ſome Britiſh Biſhops in the time of S. Auguſtine ſaid, they ought obedience, cum ſuum Archipraeſulem haberent, there is not the leaſt colour, or pretence of any title by theſe Proteſtants themſelues, how hee or his See could bee exempted from the Popes Authoritie: for as theſe men haue told vs before, it was firſt inſtituted by Pope Eleutherius, in the time of kinge Lucius, and by the ſucceedinge Popes and their Legats here as is before declared, confirmed and

ratified, they receaued their Palle, the ſigne of an Archbiſhop from Rome, and after their vnion with the Saxons and diſciples of Pope Gregory, in the time of S. Theodore Archbiſhop of Canterbury vſed it, and Archiepiſcopall Authoritie in all degrees, and by the Popes permiſſion and allowance, fiue and twentie Archbiſhops ſucceſſiuely from S. Dauid to Archbiſhop Sampſon, and had ſeuen Bishops ſubiect vnto them vntill this Sampſon, flyinge the contry in a time of ſicknes carried away the Pall into little Britanie. Amonge manie others a Proteſtant Bishop thus relateth this matter. Girald. Cambren. in Itinerar. Cambr. Antiquit. eccl. S. Dauid apud Godwin S. Dauid. Matth. Park. antiquit. Brit. Rog. Houeden. Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauids in Sampſone.
                        
                        
                           In the time of Sampſon the See of S. Dauid had ſeuen Bishops Suffragans ſubiect vnto it, as the Antiquitie of the church of S. Dauid declareth, to witt, Exeter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, S. Aſſaph, & Furnes in Ireland.
                           
                              Roger Houeden, vvhich I accompt more likely, reckoneth theſe, Landaffe, Lanpatern in Cardigan shire, Bangor Saint Aſſaph,

Chicheſter, Hereford, and Worceſter. While hee was Biſhop it hapned the people of all that contry were wonderfully vexed, with Ianudiſe, ſoe as great numbers of them died daily of that diſeaſe. By the importunitie of his clergie and diſciples, hee was induced to flie the contry, and ſailed into Britanie, where the Biſhoprick of Dola beeing voide, hee was ſtraight way elected vnto the ſame. Hee had brought thither with him the Archiepiſcopall Pall of S. Dauid, and vſed it duringe his life, as did alſoe his ſucceſſors there, for many yeares, vntill they were compelled by the Pope, at the ſuite of the Archbiſhop of Turon, to leaue it, and make profeſſion of obedience vnto him, as in former times. By this occa
                                 •…
                              on it fell out that the Succeſſors of Sampſon in Saint Dauids, what for want of their Pall, or for pouertie, or negligence, or ſome other occaſion, loſte their Title of biſhop, and to this day neuer recouered the ſame. Howbeit they vſed all authoritie belonginge to an Archbiſhop by conſecratinge of other Biſhops; and neither did they euer make profeſſion of ſubiection vnto Canterburie vntill the time of Henry 1. Kinge of England. (Godwin ſupr. in Bernard. 46.)

When Bernard Chaplaine vnto King Henry the firſt, and chauncellour to his Queene, was conſecrate by the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Iulij 12. 1115. not choſen by the clergie of Walles as hitherto had beene accuſtomed, but forced vpon them by the Kinge of England.
And there with others declareth, how this Bernard tooke vppon him the title of Archbiſhop, but Theobaldus Archbishop of Canterbury, prouinge before the Pope in the councell of Rhemes, by witneſſes, cum ſuam fidem & obſeruantiam cantuarienſi astrinxiſſe: that Bernard had promiſed obedience vnto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the cauſe was by the Pope adiudged againſt Bernard, and the See of S. Dauid. Match. West. an. 1115. Matth. Par. an. 1115. Godwin. ſupr. Girald. Lambr. in Itiner. Camb. & Topogr Harpſ. ſecul. 12. cap. 46.
                        Soe it is euident, that from the beginning thereof to the endinge of the ſame, the Archiepiſcopall See of Walles depended of the Pope of Rome, and it was not hee, but the Acts of their owne Bishops, which ouerthrew the dignitie & priuiledges of it, which the Popes had graunted and confirmed. Of the Popes power here after the cominge of S.

Auguſtine there is noe denial amonge Proteſtants, all generally conſentinge that from that time now aboue a thouſand yeares, the Popes ſupreamacy euer ruled here in ſpirituall thinges, hee chaunged the Metropolitone See of London to Canterbury, conſtituted that of Yorke, interdicted our vniuerſities, conſtituted Bishops in places as ſeemed beſt to him, Kinge Ethelbert chaunged his lawes, and receaued the cuſtomes of the Romans: caſſatis paternis legibus, nouas Sapientum conſilio iuxta Romanorum conſuetudines Anglorum ſermone conſtituit. (Bal. centur. 1. in Ethelberto.) The greate flaterer of King Henry the eight, whoe firſt denied the Popes ſupreamacy, and tooke it to himſelfe, Polidor Vergil, ſpeaketh of that parlament. (Polidor Verg. l. 27. pag. 689) Habetur concilium Londini, in quo eccleſia Anglicana formam poteſtatis nallis ante temporibus viſam induit: Henricus enim Rex caput ipſius eccleſiae conſtituitur. A parlament is held at London, in which the church of England did put on a forme of power, neuer ſeene in any time before: for Kinge Henry was made head of the church. The firſt Proteſtant Archbishop of Canterbury ſpeaking of the lawes of that

parlament plainely confeſſeth. (Matth. Parker. antiquit. Britan. in Tho. Cramner pag. 329.) His legibus potentia papalis quae nongentis amplius annis in Anglia durauit facile concidit. By theſe lawes the power of the Pope, which had continued here in England aboue neyne hundred yeares, was eaſely ouerthrowne. The preſent Proteſtant Archbiſhop of Canterbury, director to Francis Maſon, and hee with others in their booke of pretended conſecration of Biſhops, ſpeaking of the ſame Matthew Parker. (Fran: Maſon Booke of conſecrat. 3. cap. 4. pag. 131. vit. Matth. Parkeri.) ſay: Concerninge Archbishop Parker beeing the 70. Archbishop after Austin, yett of all that number, hee was the onely man, and the firſt of all, which receaued conſecration without the Popes Bulls. To this, this man himſelf, together with their Proteſtant Biſhop, Godwin, Goceline and others, in the liues of the Archbiſhops of England doe plainely teſtifie; to this all antiquities and antiquaries agree, none diſſenteth. Matth. Parker in antiq. Britan. Godwin Catalog. in Canterbury and Yorke, Goceline in epiſt.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           THE XI. CHAPTER. How by theſe Protestants the Britans and Scots which oppoſed against S. Gregories diſciples, did take vpon then greater or as ample power in Princes matters, as euer the Popes of Rome or their Legates did in this kingedome.
                        BEcauſe our Proteſtant Antiquaries and writers of England doe with a common conſent agree in this, that the Britans at the coming of S. Auguſtine hither, from S. Gregory, did truely and inuiolably keepe in all points that holy Religion which was planted here in the Apoſtles time, eſpecially they which at the firſt oppoſed againſt the proceedings of that our holy Apoſtles. (Matth. Park. antiq. Britan. pag. 1. Godwin Conuerſ. pag. 43.44. Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pont. Rom. in Gregor. 1. Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. Dauid Povvel. in annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102. Fulk. Ansvv. to a count. cath. pag. 40.) therefore to walke ſtill by their directions, lett vs now learne of them, what was the opinion and practice of thoſe Scots,

and Britrans in this queſtion of Iuriſdiction in ſpiritual Rulers, claimed and deriued from whomeſoeuer they will, or any of them shall pleaſe, though it is euidently proued in all ages before, that neuer any ſuch was practized here, but that which was deriued and approued from, and by the Apoſtolick Roman See. And wee ſhall plainely ſee, that theſe their ſoe much by them commended gayne-ſaiers to S Auguſtine, and the Pope alſoe, as many of theſe men contend, did further intermeddle with Princes and temporall affaires, then the Popes of Rome, or any their Legats in this kingedome: our Proteſtant Antiquaries with others, write of Kinge Frequahard or Frechard the firſt of Scotland ſonne to Eugenius, in this maner. Hect. Boeth. lib 9. fol. 179. pag. 1. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 5. Reg. 52. pag. 160. Holinsh. histor. of Scotand in Frequahard pag. 112.
                        
                           Frequahard beſides other his vvicked behauiours, vvas alſoe infected vvith the erroneous opinion of the Pelagian hereſie. Which ſuſpition vvas the more increaſed, for that hee vſed to haue ſondry Brittish preists in his company: the vvhich nation had beene euer noted vvith the

ſpot of that damnable infection. The nobilitie of the Realme moued herevvith ſommoned him to come to a councell, vvhich they had appointed to hold of all the states, that they might there vnderſtand, if it vvere true or not, vvhich vvas commonly reported of him. But hee refuſinge to come, they aſſembled together, and beſeiged him in a castle, vvherein hee had incloſed himſelfe, and vvinning the place, got him into their hands, and immediately thereuppon committed him to ſafe keepinge. This done they conſult together for the administration of the Realme, vvhether they should quite depoſe Frequahard, or reſtore him to his place. Then it followerh how they depoſed him, and ſent to S. Fiacre his Brother then an Eremite in Fraunce, to gouerne the kingedome, but hee refuſed it. Then theſe Proteſtants add. (Holinsh. & Buch. ſupr. & Hect. Boeth. ſupr.) The Lords of the land aſſembled themſelues together in Argile, about the chooſinge of a nevv kinge, vvhere by common conſent, Domoald the third ſonne of Eugenius beeing called thither vvith Bishop Conan, out of the Ile of Man, vvas inueſted kinge vvith greate ioy, and triumph.
                        
                        Where wee ſee that S. Fiacre though next

heire liuinge in Fraunce, where the Popes Authoritie was generally embraced, would not conſent to the depoſition of kinge Frequahard, to gaine a kingedome, when his Brother Domoald and all thoſe Scots which by theſe Proteſtants then oppoſed againſt the Popes Authoritie, performed this with great Ioy and triumphe. Of kinge Frequahard the ſecond they write in this order. (Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. pag. 114. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l. 5. Reg. 54.) Hee was couetous, wicked towards God, a Tormentor of the iuſt and righteous people, inſatiable in all vnlawfull affections, ſuch of the prelates, as hee vnderstood to bee wealthie, hee rested not till hee had picked one matter, or other vnto them, vvhereby they vvere ſuer to forfeite all their Treaſure vnto his coffers. Buchanan addeth, which I am aſhamed to tranſlate. (Buchan. ſupr.) Eandem in ſuos furorem vertit, Iugulata vxore, & stupratis filiabus, ob haec ſcelera communione christianorū fuit excluſus. For theſe wicked offences hee was excluded from the communion of Chriſtians. (Holinsh. ſupr.) The Bishops of the Realme, namely thoſe tvvo reuerend Fathers, Colman, & Finnan perceyuinge ſuch wickednes in the prince, blamed him sharply ſondry

times for the ſame: and at length becauſe they ſavv hee regarded not their admonishments, hee vvas by them excommunicated. Thus continuinge certaine yeares in his vvickednes, at length the nobles began to conſpire against him, ſoe that they vvould haue deuiſed a meane hovv to haue ridd him out of the vvay, if Biſhop Colman, had not forbidd them that practiſe. Then followeth how beeing miſerably puniſhed for his ſinnes, and beeinge at the laſt penitent, hee was abſolued of his excommunication by the ſame Biſhop Colman: whoe was that great oppoſer againſt the diſciples of Saint Gregory, and Saint Auguſtine, and diſputant for the Scots againſt S. Wilfride.
                        And the Biſhops of Walles which were in the ſame oppoſition to the diſciples of S. Gregory the Pope, were in the ſame caſe by theſe Proteſtants: One a Biſhop and antiquary amonge them writeth, from the antient antiquities of that nation. (Godvvin Catalog. in Landaff. Annal. eccleſ. Landaffen: in Oudoceus. 3.)
Kinge Morcant hauinge killed one Frioc his Vncle, beeinge therefore excommunicate by the Biſhop, vppon his abſolution, beſides a graunt of diuers priuiledges

vnto the church of Landaff, gaue Cyncirill and certaine land called Cynfall, as alſoe the churches of Ythat-Haffern. (In Guruan. 10.) Biſhop Guruan excommunicated Tendur king of Brechinianc, for killing Engiſtill a kinge of that contry trecherouſly, & for abſolutiō had from him the guift of Lannihangel tref. ceriāc. Guoderec ſlew his owne Brother Merchion. (In Greciclus.) for which deed, hee was by Biſhop Grecielus excōmunicate, and enioyned by way of penance before hee might bee abſolued, to ſpend a yeare in pilgrimadge to the church of Dola in little Brittanie. Garcan the ſonne of Guinā (In Berthygion 14.) kept his owne ſtepmother, and beeing excommunicate for that Inceſt, gaue to the Biſhop Marchywis. (In Bish. Cerenhir 18.) Houel Kinge of Glewiſſig by periury circūuented Gallū the ſonne of Cidrich, for which hee was held vnder excommunication, by the ſpace of a yeare, at the time of his abſolution hee gaue Merthir-buceil, Merthirminor, & Tircollan. Like was the caſe of Ili the ſonne of Conblus whoe vpon the like occaſion gaue Gulipe. Aquod ſonne of Ioua falling out with the Biſhop, draue him and his men into the church of Landaff, & threw

ſtones at them into the very church, for ſoe doinge hee was excommunicate, and to bee abſolued, was glad to giue Pennoun, with the church of Lautilul, and certaine other Lands. (In Bish. Ioſeph. 28.) Monric Kinge of Glamorgan beeinge excommunicate for puttinge out the eyes of Ergum, the ſonne of Guriat of Gueinſcot in the time of a truce, to haue his abſolution gaue Painipriſc.
                        
                        Whoe deſireth more of ſuch proceedings by the Britans, ſoe recommended by Proteſtants, may enquire thē in the auntient Annals of Landaffe, and this Proteſtant Biſhop Francis Godwin, Proteſtant Biſhop there, who in his treatiſe of that See, is very plentifull in ſuch Examples. And this ſhall ſuffice for this ſhort hiſtorie of the Popes preeminence and proceedings here, from the beginning of our firſt faith in Chriſt, by them and their happie inſtruments therein. By whome, & whoſe preeminence ſpirituall, this kingdome from that time, hath receaued many greate and irrecomprehenſible graces and benefites, both ſpiritual & temporal, to bynde vs euerlaſtingly to honor and reuerence, with al dutie, that Apoſtolick See, and cheifeſt paſtors

thereof, ſucceſſors to our moſt glorious firſt Fathers and founders in the faith of Chriſt, and our cheife Sheephards on earth, except wee will deſperately runne away and caſt our ſelues out of the bleſſed flock and folde of the militant church of God, out of which there is noe ſaluation.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  Faults eſcaped.
                  Pag. 42. line 1. distributor, reade, distribution pag. 52. line 19. there nowned, reade, the renowned. pag. 153. line 19. this, reade, theſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AN ADVETISEMENT. Whereas in the first hundred yeare it is as ſuppoſe written in the story of S. Manſuetus, that Ireland was neuer plainely called Scotia, I wiſh it thus to bee qualified. pag. 34.
                  
                  For if we graunt as ſome few write, that Ireland hath beene called Scotia, or Scotia Maior, Scotland, or the greater Scotland, yett that is very ſeldome found in hiſtories, but it is commonly called in them auntient and late, Hibernia, Iuernia, Inuernia, and Ierne, Iris, and Ogigia little Brittanie, and by the Iriſh themſelues, Erin, when the part of great Britanie, after the name of Albania ceaſed, is commonly in all hiſtorians named Scotia, Scotland. Ariſtotil. l. de mundo Pompon. Mela l. 3. Solinus Poly. histor. c. 25. Strab. l. 4. Iuuenal. Satyr. 2. Claudian. l. 7. Stangh. Hunfrid. Lhuid. Stow Holinsh
                           ••
                         hist. Hect. Boeth. Buchan. Capgr. in Catalog. 
                           •…
                         Gryimst. in Ireland.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   