
      
         
            
            
            An ansvvere to MaSTER
CARTVVRIGHT HIS
LETTER FOR IOYNING
with the English Churches: whereunto
the true copie of his
sayde letter is annexed.
            
            Ye are deceiued not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God. Matth. 22. 29.
            
            Search the Scriptures: for in them ye thinke to haue
eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me.
Iohn 5. 39.
            
            Let euery one that calleth on the Name of Christ
depart from iniquitie. 2 Tim. 2. 19.
            
            And these things that I say vnto you, I say vnto all
men: watch. Marke 13. 37.
            
            Imprinted at LONDON.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN
READER, GRACE AND PEACE
from God the Father, and from the
Lord Iesus Christ &c.
            DEARELY beloued in the truth, you haue in this booke
an answere to an answere written vnto Master Harrison
at Middleborough by Master Cartwright vpon occasion
of controuersie betweene them concerning the true
spouse of Christ or his ordinarie visible Churches in Englande,
And it is thought good to put this aunswere before the saide aunswere
of Master Cartwright. And although the godlywise, and
such as haue onely the glorie of God before their eyes and his pure
Religion and seruice together with the saluation of their brethren,
will easily perceiue the reasons, and causes: yet least anye
might take offence in this offence in this behalfe, it is though meete
to shewe some. The first reason therefore is this. Our corrupt nature
is more prone and readie to imbrace the errour of man then
the trueth of God Another cause was for that our vntowardenesse
is so great, that if an vntrueth be once receiued, it worketh
such a preiudice in the heades and mindes of men, that they will
heare neither God his worde, neither reason or argument to the
contrary be it neuer so good and effectuall. A thirde cause mooued
to place this answere first, for that it shoulde bee an occasion
vnto the Reader, to vse more diligent conferring of this aunswere
with the other, for the better discerning and finding out of the
trueth in this controuersie. It is not necessarie that any man interpose
his iudgement at this tyme, but to attende by prayer the
good euent which God will giue for the further manifestation of
his trueth, and abolishing of the contrary. Nowe these fewe lynes

are thought in this matter sufficient, least it might seeme to foreiudge
any trueth in either of these answeres, or else by accepting
of persons to foster corruption, or a lye in any thing set foorth in
the Name of the Lorde. It is expedient therefore that the scriptures
be faithfull searched by the godly Reader, to see whether
these thinges be euen so or not. For no man that feareth God is ignorant
of the doctrine of our Sauiour christ, that whosoeuer
breaketh the least of the commaundements of God, and teacheth
men so, is least in the kingdom of heauen. Neither ye
                  •
                of this generall
& vniuersal doctrine of god his word, true repentance, vnfeined
faith with amendment of life, to be necessarie vnto saluation.
But it is said before, these fewe things suffice. Therefore
the faithfull Reader is to be commended
to the grace of God, for his further
direction in this behalfe,
farewell deare
brother in the
Lord.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ANSVVERE
TO MASTER CARTWRIGHT
HIS LETTER, FOR
ioyning with the English Churches:
Whereunto the true Copie of his
saide Letter is annexed.
            AS there be alwayes both friendes and enemies to the
Church of God, so some doe giue their handes vnto
it as friendes, and some being enemies will giue it
their left hande of friendshihpe to turne it cleane
out of the way. Howe friendly Master Cartwright is to it,
let vs examine by this his Letter, and by the grace of God,
let vs trie out the trueth betwixt him and vs: his letter is
in many mens handes, and was seene abroade vnsealed and
open, as if he cared not who shoulde reade it, wherefore I
may the more boldely answere it, and the rather because
the matter thereof is publike and pertaining to the Church
of God. It came but lately to my handes, and was written
as they tell me more then fiue or sixe weekes agoe, wherein
if he and others that prouoke him, sought not to take vs
tardie in the trueth and to worke vs trouble, we would the
les
                  •
               e haue regarded his letters: but seeing he will needes
make vs enemies to the common and ordinarie good lawes
of the Realme, to the Church of god in the Realme, and to
the peace and welfare of the common wealth: Let vs answere
his cauilles: and for so much as we haue so small respite
of time, let vs shortly gather vp his vntrueths and errours,
and hurle them out by manifest & knowen markes,
least any man doe beleeue them as trueth.
            
               
               Master Cartwright doeth mooue the first question
thus: That the outwarde profession made by the lawes of the
lande, and the assemblyes of the Church helde accordingly, are condened
as vnlawfull: this is the short (saith he) of M. Harrisons
lōger discourse, if he vse to make such shorts, he is not meete
to deale with short or with long. Let him lappe vp his
shortes in his budget, and not sende them abroade in steade
of our lengths or larger syse. For at the first brunt he would
set against vs all these enemies: 1. The lawes of the lande.
2. The outwarde profession by the lawes. 3. The apparant
Churches of Christ, 4 and the lawfull assemblyes thereof.
First, for the lawes, he knewe well ynough what Lawes we
meane: namely, certaine Popish Cannon lawes, which though
the Magistrates doe tollerate for a time, yet the common
good lawes of the lande are wholy against them. Wherefore
let him not deale doubly with vs, as hauing our true
meaning in his heart, to fumble out of his mouth or to
shuffle vp in his letter a contrary meaning: we know that
the lawes doe punish all outward grosse wickednesse, or suffer
it to be punished: as namely, Idolatrie, forswearing, vsurping
of Lordshippe, rebellion, murther▪ fleshly filthinesse, theft, oppression,
raylings, grieuous slanders, drunkennes, &c. and if there
be any vice not punishable by the lawe, yet the lawes doe
suffer either the Church, or euery housholder, or gouernour
to correct (so it be not against lawe) such as are vnder their
charge. So then the lawes are a wall to the Church rounde
about: they stande vp for it as an armed man, that it may
shewe it selfe openly without shame or feare. For when
they put downe all outwarde grosse wickednesse, and will
not suffer it, they doe as it were scatter and driue awaye
darkenesse from the Church, that men may see it visible
and cleare as the Sunne. Likewise for the outwarde profession
by the lawes, Master Cartwright woulde playe at
handie dandie with vs, and yet not giue vs that hand which
we doe choose: for there is an outwarde profession after
the olde Popish traditions and orders, let him holde this

profession in his left hande: and there is a profession more
syncerely by some, after some better Lawes and Orders,
this he shoulde houlde in his right hande: wherefore then
doeth hee reach vs that in his right hande as taking it vnlawfull,
which we choose as lawfull. If he saye that wee
condemne that ordinarie abused and corrupt profession of
the most, I aunswere that the Lawes doe also the same:
For the common Lawes are against the cannon Lawes
in many hundreth poyntes, one giueth checke to the other
as two Dames at variance in one house, the cannon is as
fire in the house to burne it, the common is as water powring
downe to quenche it. The Popishe courtes esteeme
all sortes of christians for churches of Christ, much like
those harlots, that woulde haue many children though it
were by fornication, that they myght rule ouer many, but
the Common wealth reiecteth her children, as beyng
children of Death, euen for smaller Theftes, Felonyes,
Roginges, and Wanderinges, without honest Trades
and laboures; as for the right corrections of Adulteryes,
those Whoorish courtes haue taken so much vpon them,
that the Ciuill Magistrates coulde not so well see to it before
this time. But nowe euen for this matter they haue
giuen a great checke to the cannon Officers. Also for
persecuting the brethren and sundry worthye men, their
authoritie and cannon power hath receiued a great blowe
and wounde. If there be contrary lawes one against another,
as through change of tymes, variaunce of people, and
other necessities, it may fall out, yet through fauour and
helpe of good Magistrates, the lawe shall still be with the
Church and not against it: As for the Maiestracie of Byshops
there is no lawe to warrant it, but only her Maiesties
permission: likewise for the common forme of seruice and
prayers, there is exception by the lawe, and it is set downe
also in the booke of Common prayer, that the prayers may
be changed, intermitted, and left off by occasions: as when

the Minister is to preach or applye him selfe to his studie
for preaching. Further whereas the lawe doeth binde vs to
come to the church, it doth well, for no man ought to refuse
the Church of God, yet if when we come to the church,
we finde there an vnlawfull minister, and a wicked confusion
of all sortes of people, the fault is not nowe in the law
but in the Byshoppes which place such ministers, and in
their spirituall courtes which are authours of such confusion:
for the Lawe commaundeth that the Minister should
be Doctus and Clericus, which wordes doe require learning
sufficient, and godlinesse meete for a cleargie man: otherwise
howe shoulde he be Clericus that is one of the Lordes
inheritance. But the Bishops count him learned if he can
but reade onely, and answere to a catechisme as doe children:
wherefore good Magistrates will execute the lawe
according to the true meaning, and not according to the extremitie
of the wordes, and if they see to it, that men shall
come to Church, they will first see that the church be better
ordered that men may come with comforte, and not
with heart burning to their conscience. Also for discipline
in gathering the worthie from the vnworthy, the lawe appointeth
it and giueth leaue to make exception both in
publique iudgement and in churches against vnworthye
persons: as against Drunkennesse, fightings, murther, adulteryes,
stealth, slaunders, &c. and that before the Constables,
Iustices of Peace, Iudges and Iustices of Assises, and
yet also doe giue libertie to the Church to vse their owne
discipline. But eyther the Popes cannon lawes, and his officers
doe quite ouerthrowe it, or the Ministers are so seruile
and foolish that they can not, or dare not execute it: It
were too long to rehearse what libertie the lawes do yeelde
to vs, and what outwarde profession there is by the lawes:
but thus we conclude, that seeing very many of the Bishops
doings and their officers are vnlawfull, and yet very vsually
and ordinarily professed, helde, and practised, we must
needes say that such an ordinary profession is vnlawfull.
            
               
Nowe followeth the chiefest and greatest matter in
controuersie: namely, Whether the ordinarie assemblies of
the professors in Englande be the Churches of Christ. A part of
this question he must make as he doeth the vsuall outward
profession. What Master Harrison did write in his letter,
and vpon what wordes Master C. doeth gather this question,
I can not tell: for I neuer sawe Master Harrisons letter:
but I hope Master H. did not condemne any assemblyes,
but abused assemblies, neither any professors, but false professors:
wherefore let him take his right meaning, namely,
The ordinarie abused assemblyes of false professors. But he will
admit no such distinction: for belike he will haue no such
assemblyes, yet in a time of better reformation then is now
in Englande,Ierem. 3. 6. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                as in the dayes of King Iosiah, the Lord witnesseth,
that Iudah had not returned vnto him with their whole heart
but faynedly. If they then were false professors, whose hypocrisie
was in their hearts, why should not they be false professors,
which doe shewe foorth in practise a false profession,
and that chiefely in their assemblyes? but whatsoeuer
false profession they haue, and howe grosse soeuer their abuses
be, Master Cartwright will prooue them to bee churches
of Christ. But goe to, let vs examine his proo
                  •
               es: those
assemblyes haue Christ for their head and foundation, for
saith hee, they beleeue in Christ, and haue the spirite of
Christ, therefore they are the churches of Christ. Nowe to
prooue that they beleeue, he bringeth in their profession: so
that all Master Cartwrights arguments falleth from one to
one, till it come to nothing at all, for from the head and
foundation of the church, he descendeth to the spirite and
to faith, and so at last to the outwarde profession. Nowe
the outwarde profession must chiefely be shewed and iustified
by the lawfull vsing of publique assemblyes. If they
then be so shamefully abused by meanes of the bishoppes,
and their officers, then his proofe of the outward profession
also falleth to the ground. Thus of necessitie he must iustifie
many grosse corruptions both in the assemblyes, & in

sundry their practises and customes, or else laye by his
proofe as vntrue. But what neede hee haue fetched about
and made suche adoo, touching faith and the spirite, and
the head and the foundation of the Church, and then to
haue no other proofe but the question to prooue the question.
For the question is, whether the assemblyes bee lawfull
outwarde Churches, being helde according to so corrupt profession?
or whether the outwarde profession of the false professours
standing as it doeth, the assemblyes that are according, bee
lawfull or no? Thus he prooueth idem per idem: it is so, because
it is so: it shall bee so, because it shall bee so. But
marke his turning and shifting to and fro in this matter.
For from the outward church and the outwarde profession
he leapeth and fleeth to the spirite and faith, which are inwarde:
and from the inwarde graces he returneth to the
outwarde profession. Thus as one that is hunted with his
enemie within, he runneth out, and being in daunger without
he runneth in: for by faith which is inwarde, and the
spirite that is inwarde, hee woulde iustifie an outwarde
churche. Againe, by an outwarde, false, and corrupt profession,
he will iustifie the inwarde spirite and faith of
professours, to bee syncere. Thus with turning and returning
to and fro, he woulde establishe his errour, but hee
doeth wearie him selfe in vaine. Nowe as his dealing
herein is ridiculous, so hee increaseth it vnto a shamelesse
and blasphemous doctrine: For he sayeth that there being
but one onely true Christian in a church, or congregation,
and all the rest wicked, yea and so wicked that they haue
but a bare profession in worde onely without any good
workes, they shoulde all be counted the church of God,
for that one mans cause. I maruaile howe his penne coulde
droppe downe such poyson, and he not smell the stinch
thereof as he wrote it: For by this doctrine euery faithfull
christian shall bee aboue Christ. For Master Cartwright
doeth giue them power to loose those on earth, which
God doeth binde in heauen, and this power Christ neuer

had: For if the faith of one or a fewe beleeuers in an assembly
be of force to make them all the Church, though
the rest be grosse offendours,Mat. 18. 18. then neede they to bynde
none in earth: And why shoulde Saint Paule alleadge
this power of our Lorde Iesus Christ,1. Cor. 5. 4. if all may bee taken
for the Church by the faith of some?
            For Master Cartwright will giue vs a contrary power,
namely,Ierem. 7. 9. 1▪
                to reckon all for the churche. But will you steale,
murther, commit adulterie, and sweare falsely, &c. sayeth the
Lorde, and come, and stande before me in this house whereupon
my Name is called, and say, We are deliuered, though wee haue
done all these abominations? If Master Cartwright shoulde answere
this question, we shoulde heare those lying wordes
(for so the Prophet tearmeth them) namely,Iere. 7. 4. 
               The Temple of
the Lorde, the Temple of the Lorde, allis the Temple and
Church of god: But a denne of thieues is not the house
and Temple of God. And if the faith of fewe will make
many wretches to be the church, then the vnfaithfulnes of
many shoulde be of force to make them all no Church:
But as my wickednesse condemneth no man but my selfe,
except they partake with me in my wickednes, so my faith
iustifieth no man to be of the church, except they hold with
me an outward good profe
                  •
               sion according to faith. For shew
me thy faith by thy works (saith S. Iam. 2) as who say,Iames 2. he would
not beleue there were faith, if he saw not the works of faith.
And Paul ioyneth the beleefe of the heart,
               Rom. 10. 10. 
               and confession of the
mouth both together, as needeful vnto righteousnes & saluation:
and by the confession of the mouth, he meaneth al outward
profession agreeing to faith, because the professiō by mouth
is chiefest. He can not turne his words, as if he spake of one
truly faithful, and all the rest secret hypocrites, for he speaketh
of the outward profession, of the outward works, and
of the outward church, & granteth also that there are many
outward & grosse abuses: further, he nameth that in wordes
only they hold the true faith, as who say, be the deeds neuer
so abhominable, yet for that faithful mans sake, they are al

to be called one church with him. If Master Cartwright had
sayde cleane contrary, he had spoken more truely: namely,
that if among many good liuers, one wicked man were
founde, as a m
                  •
               rtherer, an idolater, or an adulterer, and the
rest become so negligent or wilfull, or are helde in such spirituall
bondage, that any one such open and manifest offence
is incurable, then the couenant is broken and disanulled
with them all, till they repent and redresse such wickednesse.
Proofe there is by the 7.Iosh. 7. 12. 
               of Ioshua, the 13.Deut. 13. 
               of Deuteronomie,
the 9.Ezra 9. 
               of Ezra, the 20.Iudg. 20. 
               of Iudges, the 3.Ierem. 3. 1. 
               of Ieremie and
1. verse. By the punishment of the whole land for Sauls offence, 2.
Samuel. 21.2. Sam. 21. 
               By the ceremonies of leprosies. Of touching vncleane
things. By the leauen (named of Paul) that leaueneth the whole lūpe
1. Cor. 5.1. Cor. 5. & by sundry other places. Wherefore this doctrine
of his, as it maketh for the Pope, that a whole wretched
multitude may be the Church and depende on one man, &
cleane ouerthroweth the discipline of the church: so it is
so contrary to God and all godlinesse, that I wonder anye
man shoulde haue the face to auouche it. If M. C. say, that
hee meaneth not a profession altogether corrupted, but a
good profession in other dueties, though that bee nought,
which iustifieth such abuses in assemblies, I maruaile howe
he dare pronounce it an apparant sanctification, or an holy
profession in other dueties, where there is so corrupt and
polluted a profession in publique assemblyes. Doth not the
Prophet teach vs,Ezech. 18. 10. 
               That that man can haue no name of a righteous,
iust, and holy man, which offendeth in any one grose sinne. If
he sinne in any one of these thinges (saith the Prophet) though he
doe 
                     •
                  ot all these thinges he is a wicked man, all the righteousnesse
which he hath done, shall not be mentioned, but his wickednesse shall
be vpon him.
               Iames. 1. 26. And if it be true that Iames saith, cap. 
                  •
               . 26. that
not to refraine a mans tongue, is to proue his religion vaine: then
to haue a filthie polluted profession in publique assemblies,
is to make all other profession filthy and polluted. And so
reasoneth the Prophet Haggi,Hag 2. 13. 14. 
               That as any holy meate was
made vnholy and vncleane, if a polluted person did but touch it,

or the skirt of a mans garment did but touch it, so much more vncleane
was that people and nation, and all their holy exercises and
sacrifices, and all the workes of their handes, becuase they polluted
them selues but in one thing, namely, in slacking and fearing to
builde the outwarde Temple, which was but a figure of the outwarde
Church of god at this day.
            
            But we come to another of Master Cartwrights proofes,
which hee giueth thus: They haue the couenaunts of the
churches of god, namely the spirit and the worde of god put in
their mouthes, therefore they are the Churches of god. We doe
not denie but that there are sundry churches of god: but
the question is of a corrupt profession by Popish Lawes,
and of vnlawfull assemblyes made thereby. But whatsoeuer
corruption there is, (as he granteth diuers) yet they
haue the couenant saith he of the spirite, and the worde of
god in their mouthes. So without shame he abuseth that
place in Isaiah▪
                59 For he leaueth out one part of the couenant,Isa. 59. 20.
which is, That the Lorde will come vnto Zion and to those
that turne from iniquitie in Iacob, and with them will hee make
his couenant: wherefore the worde is not the couenant to
establish a Church except it reigne and rule in the Church,
to subdue it in obedience to the Lorde: for the Lorde maketh
no couenant, but with those that turne from iniquitie
in Iacob.Gen. 17. 1, 2. As againe it is written, Walke before me, and be thou
vpright, and I will make my couenant betweene me and thee. As
who say, one condition and part of the couenant is our vpright
and good profession.Iere 11. 3, 4. So likewise in Ieremie and Exodus,
               Exod. 19.
the promise of obedience in the people, is set downe as
one part of the couenant, Obey my voyce, and doe according to
all these thinges which I commande you, so shall you be my people
and I will be your god: or else cursed be the man that obeyeth
not the wordes of this couenant. For on this condition will the
Lorde receiue vs,2. Cor. 6. 17, 18 as Paul reasoneth▪ if we come out from among
the wicked,
               Isa. 52. 11. 
               and separate our selues:
               Ierem. 31. 1. 
                     •
                  
                
               Then will I be a Father vnto
you, and ye shall be my sonnes and daughters, saith the Lorde Almightie.
Thus shoulde Master Cartwright haue conferred

place with place, and haue knowen that the worde is no couenant,
where the practise thereof is reiected and troden vnder
foote: neither can men say they haue the couenant of
the spirite, when open and grosse wickednesse so reigneth
in them, that there is no power of the spirite to redresse it,
but it remaineth incurable.Rom. 8. 14. And so Paul reasoneth, that as
many as are led by the spirit of god, they are the sonnes of god▪
                but
he sheweth that they are in the state of condemnation, and
not in Christ Iesus, if they walke after the flesh, and not after
the spirite. For there is not the couenant of the spirite,
where we are not turned from iniquitie as Isaiah him selfe
witnesseth,Zech. 12. 10. and let Zecharie interprete Isaiah, whose sheweth
what spirite God will powre vpon his house and people,
namely, The spirit of grace and compassion, vnto repentance and
mourning for their sinnes.
               Ezec. 11. 19, 20. Likewise Ezechiel doeth giue the
proofe and tryall of that newe spirit and newe heart which
God woulde put in his people, namely this, That they should
walke in his statutes, and keepe his iudgements, and execute them,
and so doing, they shall be his people, and he woulde be their god.
Wherefore let not Master Cartwright account so much of
the word in their mouthes,Deut. 30. 14. except as it is written in Deut.
it be in their mouthes and in their heartes for to doe it. Otherwise
Christ wil pronounce of them, that in vaine they worship
the Lord,Mat. 15. 8. and so are they false worshippers: for god is
neere in their mouthes, and farre from their reignes:Ierem. 1
                     •
                  . 2.
               They drawe neere vnto god with their mouthes and honour him with
their lippes, but their heart is far off from him. Surely such men
are not those burning lampes, neither the goldē candlesticks
he speaketh of, but rather as those that will seeke me daily, saith
the Lord,Isa. 29. 13. 
               euen as a nation that did righteously,
               Isa. 58. 2. 
               and had not forsaken
the statutes of their god: they aske of me ordinances of iustice,
they will drawe neere vnto me.
               Isa. 59. 2, 20. Yet in the next chapter
the Lord witnesseth, that there was a great separation betwene
him and them, so that he was to make a newe couenant with them,
and they were to turne from their former iniquities, or else they
could not be his people and Church. And therefore when Christ

appointeth the Apostles to plant churches throughout the
world,Mat. 28. 19, 20▪
                he appointeth them not, to talke of and professe the
word in their mouthes onely, but he giueth in charge these
three things, as being the chiefe marks of a planted Church:
namely preaching the word, ministration of the sacramēts, & reformation
of life, which is the chiefest thing of all to set forth
his Church & kingdom: for he commādeth to preach and
baptize, & because preaching & baptizing is nothing without
amendmēt of life, he addeth these words, teaching thē to
obserue & do all things, whatsoeuer I haue cōmanded you.
Therfore as appeareth in the acts of the Apostles,Actes 2. was neither
the church nor the couenāts of the Church established
among any,Actes 8. but where their good & godly profession was
shewed,Actes 19. 18. and the contrary refused. I know M. C. will gainsay
that there must needes be hypocrites in euery church, &
sometimes also open breach of gods commandements.1. Cor. 5. 11. It is
true indeede. But yet if any make an open and grosse breach
then Paul hath written vnto vs, that we company not together
with such. For if any (saith he) that is called a brother, be a fornicator,
or couetous, or an idolater, or a railor, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner &c. with such a one eate not. The aduersaries
replie to this, that in deede to eat common bread with such,
or to partake with them in the feastes of charitie was forbidden,
which distinction and shift they alleadge out of
Caluin. But who dare say that the godly wife may not eate
cōmon bread with her excōmunicate husband? or the godly
children with their wicked parents? or seruants with their
masters? For otherwise al seruice, ministery & communiō in
a common wealth should be ouerthrowen. And so as Paul
reasoneth the godly shuld not be able to liue in the world.
Who also dare say that when the church held their feasts of
charitie they might forbid wicked persons to partake with
them in the feastes, and yet suffer them to partake in the
Lordes-table. Nay they kept their feastes and the Lordes
Supper together. And hereupon Paul gaue this distinction,
that they should suffer none but bre
                  •
               hrē to ioyne with
them in the holy feastes or in the assemblyes which were

               for ministration of the Lordes Supper: but if we will not eate
and drinke with sinners in the worlde we must goe out of
the worlde. Wherefore there is an eating with wretches in
the worlde, or in worldly meetings and feastings, which is
forbidden in the Church meetings. As if a brother being separate
and fallen away, should in an Inne or vitailing house
sit downe at the table to eate, after we and others were set;
it were vnlawfull to rise from the table because of him: yea
it were both against common charitie and humanitie, and
also against the peace & communion of a common wealth.
But of this matter it followeth to speake afterwardes.
            We haste one to others proofes. An other proofe is,
as though it were graunted him, that where a preaching minister
is, there is a Church: nay we know that assemblyes of papistes
haue preaching ministers, and yet are not the church
of God. And though they be Protestants which haue a
Preacher ouer them, yet if he for his wickednesse cease to
be a brother, and they also for their wickednesse be no brethren,
the preaching Minister can not cause them to bee a
Church of God. This is manifest before, and shall partly
also afterwarde be spoken of: wherefore I let it passe. As
for that he saith, of some knowledge receiued by a dumbe
ministerie, and of faith receiued by some further Ministerie,
it is much like the same tryfling proofe he vsed before,
and is answered alreadie. For we said, that the inward faith
will not iustifie the outward Church, when there is a wicked
profession contrary to the doctrine of faith. Againe a
man may beleeue, & be wonne to faith, by meanes of some
godly brother, and that before he haue outwardly ioyned
him selfe to the Church: so in gods secret election he is of
the church: yet because he hath not the outwarde profession,
can not be sayde to be the outwarde Church. But here
Master Cartwright though he dare not iustifie the blind reading
Ministers, yet he doeth praise them as doing some
good. But of this matter also it followeth afterwarde to intreate,
as whether he that doeth so much hurt and mischiefe

can be saide to doe any good at all. Likewise it is a trifling
to no purpose, that he sayth, the Church ceaseth not, when a minister
faileth or wanteth: for we knowe that euen two or
three agreeing together in the trueth, & separate from wickednesse,
if none other will ioyne with them, euen they are
an outwarde and visible Church, and haue this power of
Christ,Mat. 18. 18. 
               euen to binde men on earth, and to loose them on earth, that
they may be bound or loosed in heauen. For though by persecution
they be driuen into corners, yet their good profession
is outward and visible in it selfe, and yet hidden from their
enemies which are vnworthy to see it, for the church may
increase into thousandes and decrease also in this worlde, euen
to a litle householde,Reuel. 11. 8. and to foure or fiue persons. For
Ierusalem fell away, and became as Sodome and Egypt, and
the Lorde did blot out the whole name and church of the
Iewes, and called his people by another name: as it is written
Isay 65.Isa. 65. 15. 
               Actes 11.Act. 11. 26. 
               But in these latter dayes, it is prophecied
that the Church shoulde be small, hidden, and driuen into corners.
So that as in Noas time, eight persons onely escaped, euen so when
the sonne of man shall come he shall not finde faith on the earth,
               Reuel. 12. 13, 14.
               & those dayes before his comming shall be so hard, that scarce any
flesh shall be saued.
               Mat. 24. 22. Indeed one person will not make a church▪
for the Church must needes be a number,Mat. 18. 19, 20. 
               but where two or
three are gathered together in the name of Christ,
               Philem. 2. 
               there is he in
the middes of them.
               Col. 4. 15. And the housholde of Philemon is named a
Church.
               Rom. 16. 5. 
               Likewise the housholde of Olymphis,
               1 Cor. 5. 4. 
               of Aquila & Priscilla,
and others. For if they haue the power which Paul calleth
the power of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and doe meete
together fewe or moe in the Name of Christ, they are surely
the Church of Christ. Therefore this doctryne is still agaynst
Master Cartwright for neyther the word in the preachers
mouth, nor the Sacraments can make an outwarde
Church, except they haue the power of Christ to separate
the vnworthye. For Master C. confesseth that the name of
a Church shall remayne, though the preacher and his preaching
doe cease, and is wanting for a tyme. But without

this power of binding, that is, of declaring mens wickednes,
and forsaking their fellowshippe to leaue them vnto Satan
being open and grieuous offendours, there is no name, nor
shewe of the church of Christ remaining. If he demaunde
proofe hereof, the scriptures are manifest. For God hath giuen
this power, not onely to the preachers, but to all the
saintes of god,Psal. 14▪ 9. 6, 7, 8, 9. as appeareth by that Psalme, namely, By the
worde of god in their mouthes, to binde euen the Kings and nobles
of the earth, and to execute vpon them his spirituall iudgement, &
the text followeth, that this honour shall be to all the Saintes.
Wherefore it is not peculiar to some one, or to 
                  •
               ome fewe
alone,Isa. 54. 7. but it belongeth to all: yea this is the heritage of all
the Lordes seruants, as Isaiah testifieth. In deede it is true,
that we ought ioyntly to execute this power: but if others
will not or bee in bondage that they can not ioyne with
vs therein, then they are not the Church, but the bondslaues
of men. For this power belongeth to euery one seuerally
to forsake wicked fellowship,Ephe. 5. 7. and there is a cōmandement
giuen to euery one, to forsake the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse,
to be no companions with such, to haue no fellowshippe with
them,
               2. Thes. 3. 6. 
               to withdraw our selues, from euery brother that walketh inordinately:
yea and to turne away from all,
               2. Tim. 3. 5. 
               which hauing a shew
of godlinesse doe deny the power thereof. For if we walke in darknes,
and say we haue fellowship with god,
               1. Iohn 1. 6. 
               we lye, (sayth S. Iohn)
and doe not truely: But if we walke in the light, we haue fellowship
one with another, otherwise that fellowship holdeth not. And
in Hosea commandement is giuen vnto all,Hose. 2. 2. 
               euen to pleade against
the mother church, if it fal away, that as god doth forsake it
so euery one also should stand against it,
               Actes 2▪ 40. 
               if it become abhominable.
And so also all are commanded to saue them selues from a froward
generation. But it may be here obiected, howe we answere
to the place in Matth. 18 that we must complaine to the Church,
and then if the offender heare not the Church, we must take him
for a heathen and publican. I grant that if the offence be priuate,
he must be first priuately dealt with. But this proueth
not, that either for priuate or open offences, we must waite

on them for redresse, which are enemies of the Church, and
which haue no power to binde and lose, as hath the church.
Wherefore let not Master Cartwright accompt so much of
the assemblyes he speaketh of: for what is a Church without
this power we spake of? yea what are those assemblies
which in steade of it, do holde that Antichristian power of
the spirituall courtes, or rather are helde in bondage by it?
But Master Cartwright alloweth not onely those assemblies,
but also those vile courtes and officers, and Bishoppes set
ouer them to be all the Church of God. For he sayeth afterwarde,
namely in the sixt page, that the calling of the
dumbe ministers, whichis by them, is a calling of the church
and sufficient to make them ministers: yea and he seemeth
to allowe also their suspendings of preachers, as if it were
done by the Church, so that both for complaint and for redresse
of defaults, & for establishing and gathering the churches,
hee alloweth or tollerateth those officers and courtes
to haue the power and authoritie of the church. But God
hath appointed no such kinde of complaintes in the
Church, neither such kinde of redresse, nor ordering of
matters. First, because they redresse and order matters by
money, Brybes, Fees, Ciuill penaltyes &c. wherein the
Church discipline ought not to meddle. For the weapons
of our warefare sayeth Paul,2. Cor▪ 10. 4. are not carnall. He meaneth
that the Church maye not deale in matters of reformation,
as doeth the common wealth and this present
worlde. The Church can deale no further then onely by
rebuke, warning and exhortation out of gods worde, and
by forsaking & casting of fellowship in grosser sinnes: And
therefore rightly may the word and his Spirituall graces be
called the weapons of our warfare. Also in the church there
can bee no recompence made for sinne by money.Num 35. 3
                     •
                  . 32. For
the sinner is the murtherer of his owne soule. And therfore
the law of god is, that for murther or killing any, there cā be
no recōpence made, saue only by the death of the maslayer

him selfe, or the high Priest, which figured thus much, that
except we see in any transgressour open repentance and
faith in the death of Christ, we are to iudge him still dead
in his sinne, and that money can not make him to liue, nor
redresse his wickednesse. And the officers that take money
in such a case,Hose. 4. 8. doe euen eate vp the sinne of the people, as it
is written and lift vp their mindes in their iniquitie. Also because
the Iudges and officers of the court doe wrest Gods
Lawe,Deut. 16. 14. by their Popish cannon Lawe, and respect persons
and take rewarde which is forbidden in Deuteronomie (and
by their profession they must needes doe so, or else they can
not holde their office,) howe shal any make complaint vnto
them for Church matters, which can be counted none of
the church. And seeing Christ hath commanded to complaine
to the Church against the sinner, howe shall Christs
ordinance be broken by complaining vnto such wretches.
Furthermore seeing the Scripture sheweth that the church
hath nothing to doe to iudge those which are without,1. Cor. 5. 12. how
shal any complaine of such a number of wicked men, as neuer
were worthie to be coūted the church. Againe, seeing no
godly man may seeke iudgement vnder the vniust,1. Cor. 6. 1. as Paul
sheweth, if he haue a matter against a brother, why shoulde
we seeke vnto such for iudgement. Further the rebuke and
reforming of a brother ought not to be delayed, till the time
of keeping their courtes,1. Thes. 5. 
               For we knowe perfectly (saith Paul)
that the day of the Lorde shall come as a thiefe in the night: and
as he that sinneth ought not to delay his repentance,
               Deut. 7. 10. 
               and promise
safety to him selfe,
               Amos. 6. 3. 
               least sudden destruction come: so he that seeth
his brother sinne▪ ought to hast his repentance and reformation,
For thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart,
               Leuit. 14. 17. (sayeth the
Scripture) but thou shalt plainely rebuke thy neighbour, and not
suffer sinne vpon him.
               1. Cor 5. And the Corinthians are sharpely rebuked
of negligence, because they hasted not to cast out of
the Church the incestuous person, and likewise, because
they made too long delaye in receiuing him againe being
penitent.2. Cor. 7. 
                     •
                  . Againe because those cannon officers are straungers,

neither knowen to the Churches, not dwelling among
them, no maruaile though Christ say,Iohn. 10. 
               that his sheepe will not
followe nor seeke to strangers, but will flee from them. Moreouer,
Because they bring the Churches into bondage (as it is written)
because they deuoure,
               2. Cor. 11. 20. 
               because they take their goods, because they
exalt them selues, and as it were smite the people on the face, and
cast them them in prison, they do all these things; besides the church
gouernment, and therefore ought to be reiected, and in no case to
be uffered. Thus it is manifest by the worde of God that
such proude prelates, and Antichristian vsurpers, haue no
authoritie nor power of the church: neither is their suspendings
to be counted suspensions by the church, nor their
calling of Ministers a calling by the Churche. Nay
surely the least in the kingdome of God shalbe able by the
worde of God in their mouthes,Mat. 11. 11. to plucke vp and roote out
such plantes if none other will ioyne with them. I meane
they shall pronounce them by the worde of god to be abhominable,Iere 1. 10.
& haue no felowship with thē in the church &
so to thē they are vtterly plucked out of the Church. For
they are kings and priests vnder Christ,Reuel. 1. 6. to execute the lords
gouernement against such:1. Pet. 25. and therefore they ought not to
loose their right,Exod. 19. which is euen their heritage and glorie, Isaiah
54. or rather the glorie or kingdome of god, euen the keyes of
the kingdome of heauen to binde and loose, Mat. 18. The power of
Christ Iesus to deliuer vp the wicked to Satan, 1. Corinth. 5. The
scepter of his worde for rebuke, doctrine, exhortation, promising
life, denouncing iudgement. For this is a right scepter,
which subdueth the people vnder vs,Psa. 45. 6. and the nations
vnder our feete Psalme 45.Psa. 47. 3.
            
            He alleadgeth another proofe by peraduenture. For he
guesseth, that peraduenture we will say, it were better for an
assembly to haue no minister at all, then to haue a blinde
reading minister. And then he reasoneth thus, that hauing
none at all but yesterday they are the church, or may be the
church, then hauing a dumbe minister to day, they are still
the Church of god, and can not so suddenly be made the synagogue

of Satan. This is a slender proofe, and borowed by
imagination: for we make not the minister, whether dūbe,
or not dumbe to be the essence, substance, or life of the outward
Church, but the keeping of the couenant by the outwarde
discipline and gouernement thereof.Zacha. 11. 10. And the Lorde
call
                  •
               th the keeping of the couenant by this discipline, his
staffe of beautie, as appeareth in Zecharie, which being
broken, he disanulleth his couenant with the people, and so
they become the sheepe of slaughter, For he saith, I will not
feede you: that that dyeth, let it dye, and that that perisheth, let it
perish, and let the remnant eate euery one the flesh of neighbour.
Likewise in Iere. & Ezek. as the breaking of the couenant is
set downe to be the death,Iere. 11. 3 4. and perishing of the church &
people of God:Iere, 31. 32. so the keeping thereof by better discipline
and gouernement was the life and renuing of the Church.Ezek. 16. 60. 61. 62. 63.
Why then shoulde Master Cartwright reason so fondly?H
                     •
                  br▪ 8. 8.
as though they that helde the couenant to day, might not
breake it to morowe, and as though any grosse wickednesse
committed of all, were not the breaking of the couenant by
all. Did not the people pleade truely against Reuben and
God,Ioshu. 22. 18. that if they rebelled to daye against the Lorde, euen
to morrowe the Lorde woulde be wroth with all the Congregation
of Israel. And they alleadge further, that for Achans
sinne, wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel.
Howe suddenly and quickely was this sinne committed?Ioshu. 7. 12.
and howe soone was the Lorde prouoked, euen to forsake
all the congregation, and to be with them no more, except
they destroyed the excommunicate from among them: for
so are the wordes of the Lorde him selfe. Nowe what was
that sinne, which Israel calleth rebellion in Reuben and
God, both against the Lorde, and against the rest of Israel?
And what was the sinne of Achan? Surely they thought
that the Reubenites and Gadites had broken that commandement
which the Lorde had giuen them,Deut. 12. 11. 12. 13▪
                namely, that they
should not offer their burnt offerings in euery place which
they liked, but only in the place which the Lorde had chosen

to put his name there. Now who knoweth not, but that
that place of the name of God, figured the visible Church
of god, so that this matter toucheth M. C. very neerely. For
if it be true, that as all sacrifices then, so all sacraments now,
are rebellion against the Lord, being ministred without the
visible Church of God, then that sinne which he calleth a
fault, shalbe found to be more then a fault, euen rebellion &
falling away from the Lord. And this is a sinne of execration,
euen abomination in the eies of the Lord, to measure the
visible church of god, by a compasse of ground, by a nūber
of housholdes, by slint of tythes & tenthes as we see in our
parishes. For the place maketh not the church, neither is the
church or true religiō to be measured by the place,Iohn. 4. 23. as Christ
him selfe teacheth vs, for neither in the mountaine where the
father worshipped, neither yet at Ierusale the citie of god, was God
any more to be worshipped, but the true worshippers shall worship
the father in spirit & truth. By which words Christ meaneth
thus much, first, that the spirit & trueth being shewed by the
outward good profession, declare the outwarde Church of
God, and not the places, neither temples, nor cities, nor parishes.
For in whome we see the spirit, that is, the graces of
the spitit by their outward good works, and the trueth, that
is the lawes and word of Christ which is true, to be kept &
obserued, them only we must call the Church of God. And
therefore in Isaiah it was shewed before
                  •
                that with those only
which turne from iniquitie in Iacob,Isa. 59. 20. will the Lord make
his couenant, euen his spirite which is vpon them, and his
words which he hath put in their mouth. Secondly by those
wordes Christ teacheth, that al the Iewish ceremonies shuld
be abolished, because the chiefest, euen Ierusalem and the
Temple should be no more. For the temple at Ierusalem &
circumcision were the chiefest. How great the citie and the
Temple were,1 King. 8. 29. it appeareth by that prayer of Salomon, 1.
Kinges 8. 29. And by sundry other places. Deuteronom▪
                12. 11.Dent 12. 11.
               Ierem. 3. 17.Iere. 3. 17. 
               Ezek. 43. 7.Ezek. 43. 7. 
               &c.
            
            And of circumcision Paul reasoneth with the Galatians,

               That if they be circumcised, they are bounde to keepe the whole ceremoniall
lawe: for it being one of the chiefest ceremonies,Gala. 5 3.
if they still obserued it, they should also obserue all the rest,
but if they reiected the chiefest, they should also reiect all
the rest. And to that ende Christ reasoneth, that seeing all
things are nowe to be verified in spirit and trueth, therefore
all ceremoniall and superstitious worship shoulde cease. As
also Paul reasoneth,Gala. 5. 18. 
               That if they be led by the spirit, they are not
vnder the ceremonies of the lawe. So then it appeareth that tithings,
because they were ceremonies, belong not to the
Church. And because such abomination is committed by
them, namely, the due planting and gathering of the church
is hindred, and the libertie of the Church for remouing euil
ministers stopped, they are euen the execrable things which
Achan did steale. For if the common wealth (as it ought)
had long agoe taken from the ministerie those tenthes, and
Popish liuings, then Iericho being once destroyed (I meane
the Antichristian churches once put downe) had not so
soone bene built againe: but nowe such tythings, benefices,
and Bishoprickes remaining, they haue builded by them an
other Iericho in steade of the first, in deede somewhat differing
from the first: but as contrary to Gods church and holy
citie as was the first: yea and Master Cartwright also wil
iustifie that execrable stealth of Achan, and call Iericho, (I
meane those woefull assemblies and Parishes) the visible
church and citie of God.Ioshua. 6. 26. 
               But cursed be the man before the Lord
(saith Ioshua) that riseth vp and buildeth againe this citie Iericho:
he shall lay the foundation thereof in his eldest sonne & in his
yongest sonne shall he set vp the gates of it. Satan is that enuious
and malitious man, which hath builded againe this citie, his
eldest sonnes were the first beginners of this lamentable
state, whome God did afterwarde scourge, and cal to repentance
in the time of Queene Marie, and brake their enterprise:
and his youngest sonnes are these latter reformers,
whome God also will certainely plague except they repēt.
But to come againe to Master Cartwrights proofe, let him

not say that we count any assembly, whether they haue a
dumbe minister o
                  •
                haue none to be the outwarde Churches
of God, except they keepe the couenant by the outwarde
discipline and gouernement of the Church. Further Master
Cartwright saith that in such assemblyes, the dumbe minister
is not chiefe, but Christ, and that wee make nothing of
the dumbe minister, and yet will needes haue him to be the
head of those Churches. Indeede we make nothing of him
concerning any goodnes that is by him, for he helpeth nothing
thereto, but concerning the mischiefe and hurt which
he doeth, or the sinne that is by him,Iere. 10. 21. let him not say wee
make nothing of it. For if they be beastes (as it is written) so
that by their want of vnderstanding and conscience, the flockes of
the pastour be scattered and perish, shall we say it is nothing. If
they be those foolish shepheardes whome the Lorde saith by Zecharie,
he will raise vp in iudgement, to sell and to slay the sheepe,
               Zecha. 11. 15. 16. ibid. 11. 4. 5. &c. 
               to
eate the flesh of the fat, and to teare them in pieces, which also shall
not looke for them that are lost, nor seeke the tender lambes, nor
heale that is hurt, nor feede them, but rather feede them selues vpon
their flesh, shall we make nothing of such ministers? But go to:
he sayeth that Christ is the head of those assemblyes, and
not the dumbe ministers. That Christ is their head or foū
               dation,
he can not prooue, as was shewed before, wherefore
for any thing he can prooue, the dumbe ministers in the absence
of the Bishops and their officers, are the chiefe and
heades ouer them. That they are alwayes chiefe we saide it
not, for when the Bishoppes which are greater vsurpers are
present, then they are heades, and both the dumbe ministers
and hireling preachers, may serue well ynough to bee the
tayle. For Satan hath all wayes by such,Reuel. 12. 4. as by the taile of the
dragon, drawing the third part of the starres of heauen, and
cast them to the earth. What shall we vnderstande by heauen,
but the shewe of the church, as it were set in heauen, &
by the starres, but the children of the church, falling to wickednes
and loosing their light. Such are the people of those
assemblies, whom Satan hath cast vpon the earth as starres

               
                  •
               out light. He bringeth another proofe by Corah and his
company. For they (saith he) were not cast foorth of the
lords host by Moses, therefore should not these assemblyes
also which haue a dumbe minister thrust vpon them, be reputed
for runnegates from the Lorde, well, let vs see: was
not in deede Corah with those that claue to him,Num. 16. put apart
from the hoste of the Lord?verse. 24. 25. 26. First, Moses commaunded the
congregation (& the Lord so bade him) to depart from the
tents of those wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest
they perished in their sins: was not this a putting apart, or
a casting out? Againe by the word of the Lord in the mouth
of Moses, the earth opened her mouth,verse. 31. and swallowed thē
vp quicke. For assoone as he had ended his words (saith the
text) euen the grounde claue asunder that was vnder them:
was not this also a putting apart, or a casting out? The next
day also fourteene thousand and seuen hundreth dyed by a
plague for cleauing still to Corah by an aftermurmuring:
was not this a putting apart? And these iudgements were
both an ensample and a figure of the spirituall iudging at
this day, both by excommunication, & by rebuke, and denouncing
iudgement. For otherwise to what purpose is it
said in the reuelation, that the witnesses at this day, meaning euery
faithful preacher,Reue. 11. 4. 
               are as oliue trees, and golden candlesticks
standing before the god of the earth: and that fire proceedeth out
of their mouthes▪ and deuoureth their enemies: and that they haue
power to shut heauen, and power ouer waters to turne them into
blood, and to smite the earth with all maner plagues, as often as
they will.
               verse▪ 12. If he say that Corah and his company were not
forthwith cast out (though it be euident that forthwith they did
cast out themselues) he should know that there must be a time
to examine their cause, yet in that short time they had of examining
being but a day, for the next day they perished.
We read that Dathan & Abiram would not come to be examined,
and so of them selues they were put apart. As for
Corah and his company two hundreth & fiftie, where as
they tooke censers & came before the Lord in the doore of

the tabernacle, they did it as vsurpers: and both in the very
acte doing were separate by fire to destruction, and before
the act, Moses is so farre from ioyning with them, or from
allowing or tollerating their act, that he prayeth against it,
saying, Lord looke not vnto their offring Likewise that the
people ioyned not with them in their censing, it is euident:
for euen while they were burning incense, or before, the cō
               mandement
was giuen▪ which they obe
                  •
               ed, that they should
get them away from about the tabernacle of Corah, Dothā,
& Abiram, and touch nothing of theirs. Now if any will
take vantage, that yet their cēsers were holy, as the text saith
because they offred them before the Lord: & so will impute
some holines to the ministery of dumbe ministers, let vs cō
               sider
what holines this was▪ First, their action was altogether
vnholy, & none might or did ioyne with them therein. And
ther
                  •
               fore the censers were consecrate as a signe & remēbrāce
saith the text, that no stranger which is not of the seed of Aaron,verse. 39. 40.
come nere to offer incense before the Lord, that he be
not like Corah & his cōpanie. Wherfore those censers were
holy, because they were made a holy signe of iudgement for
warning to all posterities not to do the like: wherefore I
would say, there were holines in the dumbe ministery, if all
the dumbe ministers were hanged vp in the Churches and
publike assemblies, for a warning & terrour to the rest, that
are readie to enter such a function. Then indeede they were
a holy signe & remēbrance of iudgmēt against such wretches,
but other holines haue they none in thē. Yet M. C. dare
say that their ministration of Sacramēts, & reading of praiers
is holy & sanctified, yea so farre sanctified that we may
lawfully receiue the Sacraments of them, & ioyne with thē
in praiers▪ Belike because Moses commanded Corah & his
cōpany to come with their censers, therfore those also must
come with their seruice books. But did Moses cal thē for any
other purpose, saue only to destroy thē? Did he meane as M
C. doeth, to ioyne with them, to tollerate their ministerie, to
excuse their vsurping, to pronoūce a blessing on their ministery.
For indeed it is blessed if it be as he saith, that we may

lawfully receiue the Sacraments of them. Did not Moses
say plainely, To morrowe the Lorde will shewe who is his, and
who is holy, and who ought to approche neere vnto him? meaning
that by his terrible iudgement, he woulde shewe that they
were none of his, and that there was no holinesse in their
action of comming neere to the Lorde. Surely therefore,
this holinesse which M. Cartwright imputeth to the dumbe
ministers and their assemblies, is like the holinesse, whereof
Corah spake together with his companie, saying, That all the
congregation was holy, euerie one of them, and the Lorde was among
them.
            
            An other proofe Master Cartwright taketh by the seales
of the couenant, that is, the Sacraments. They haue the
Sacraments (saith he) as seales of the couenant, therefore they
are within the couenant, and so are the Churches of god.
Here the question falleth out, whether the sacraments are
false sacraments, and counterset seales of the couenant: He
saith it is graunted him, that they are true and vncounterfaite
sacraments being ministred by sufficient ministers, for
(sayeth he) if we condemne the seales set to by dumbe ministers,
then we must needes iustifie the Sacraments ministred
by sufficient ministers: So by his iffs and supposings
he will gather against vs what proofes he list. But though
they be preaching ministers, yet are they not sufficient ministers,
as we shewed before. For if they goe out of the way, as
it is written,Mala. 2. 5. 6. 7. 8. 
               and cause many to dash and fall by the lawe, they are
not sufficient ministers, but they breake the couenant of Leui, and
the Lorde will make them despised and vile before the people, because
they keepe not his wayes. If they be neuer so famous in
preaching, yet if they be worldly minded men,Phil. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 18. 
               and whose
bellies are their gods, and glorie to their shame, they are not sufficient
ministers▪ But why did M. C. so subtlely set contrary
to dumbe ministers, sufficient ministers, & not rather preaching
ministers. For the question is of false professors, and
of a false profession, and therefore also of preachers which
hold a false profession, together with their assemblies: now

such we say are not sufficient. for they are not such as Paul
appointeth in his epistles to Timothie and Titus. So herein
we see howe Master Cartwright misseth of his proofe,Titus 
                     •
                  . 6, 7, 8, 9. and
in missing doeth take a further foyle.1. Tim. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. for he reasoneth that
if the Sacraments doe prooue a Church, then though they
haue not the discipline commanded by Christ, yet they are
the Church. But howe doeth this followe? belike he thinketh
that the Sacraments may be seuered from discipline,
yea and the Church also, and yet be an outwarde and visible
Church of God. Howe true this is, it followeth afterwarde
to be examined. First let vs stande on his proofe, that
he taketh by the iudgement of other Churches in Europe,
all which (saith he) giueth the right hande of societie vnto
our English assemblyes▪
                which proofe he confesseth not to be
so strong, yet strong ynough to stay all sudden iudgements,
and so long to cause silence til on eyther side the light of the
trueth doe breake foorth. I will not heare enter into that
question, whether the Churches haue power to sit in mens
consciences, and to shut vp mens mouthes from testifying
their iudgements and consciences, for in some matters Master
Cartwright doeth giue them that power, namely for their
verdite and sentence, which be true Churches of God. What vantage
the Pope and Papistes might take hereby for defence
of their churches it may be easily iudged: and what a clog
to mens consciences it were to iustifie and ioyne with all
assemblies, till all the churches by generall consent did condemne
them, let euery one iudge. But surely Paul witnesseth,1 Cor. 1. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
               that the spirit of God in his children searcheth out all things
euen the deepe things of God: yea it iudgeth and knoweth all
things that are of God. And againe he saith, that he which is
spirituall discerneth all thinges: yet he himselfe is iudged of no
man: meaning, that indeede worldly men can not rightly
iudge of him. wherefore the godly may freely both iudge
and giue their iudgement, euen of all assemblies which they
knowe, whether they be the true Churches of God.Phil. 4. 7, 8, 9. And in
another place he cōmandeth not onely to minde, iudge & think

on all things that are true, and honest and iust, and pure but also
to doe them. Wherefore as we ought to loue the godly and
their assemblyes,Phil. 1. 9. so our loue (as Paul teacheth vs) ought to
abounde more and more in knowledge and in all iudgement,
that wee may discerne thinges that differ, especially
that wee may knowe the house of God from a denne of
thieues. But herein Master Cartwright doeth much abuse
vs and also all the Churches of Europe. For neither we,
doe cast out the churches of two whole. Ilandes as he saith,
neither doe they holde them all in For though the fame of
the Martyrs of Englande came to their eares, and also their
doctrine & profession at that time, as they thēselues wrote
it or testified it by mouth, was knowen vnto them, and then
in the time of affliction they tooke them for brethren and
churches, yet it followeth not, that nowe in our securitie,
they heare of our canon lawes and popish gouernment &
of our wofull abuses thereby, or if they doe heare, that notwithstanding,
they doe hastily iustifie vs. In deede they can
not rashly condemne vs, because they knowe not our state:
and rather they should take our assemblies to be the churches
of God, for the fame they haue sometimes heard of the
Martyrs. But that we which throughly knowe them, should
not iudge truely and doe accordingly, it is both against
reason and duetie.Mat. 15. 13, 14. 
               For as euery pla
                     •
                  nt whi
                     •
                  h the heauenly Father
hath not planted shall be rooted vp: saith Christ: so in the
next verse he sheweth the way to roote them vp: namely
that we put away from vs their guiding and gouerning, being
blinde guides and leaders of the blinde, and let them alone▪ And so
with Ieremie we shall plucke vp and roote out,
               Ierem. 1. 
               destroy and throw
downe euen kingdomes and nations: that is as we saide before,
wee shall pronounce their wickednesse, and iudgement against
them, and forsake their fellowshippe, and so leauing
them to the iudgements of God, they shall surely be plucked
vp and destroyed▪ except they repent. Wherefore let
not Master Cartwright thinke much, if God doe set one
man,Iere. 1. 17, 18. euen against a whole countrey. For Ieremie in as good

times as ours are, was set against the whole lande, against
the Kinges of Iudah, and against the princes thereof, against
the priestes thereof, and against the people of the
lande And in another place,Iere. 9. 2. 
               he woulde vtterly leaue the people,
and goe from them, and dwell alone in the wildernesse And so
well did he like their assemblyes, that he calleth them all adulterers
and an assemblie of rebels. And in another place he is
forbidden to haue any fellowshippe with them,
               Ier. 16. 5, 6, 7, 
                     •
                  
                
               whether pleasant
or vnpleasant: so that he might neither mourne with them, neither
reioyce, neither eate nor drinke with them. And if it bee
said, that Ieremie had a speciall commaundement, which
we haue not, we knowe that all the commaundements of
God, vpon the like occasions, belong vnto vs. And concerning
authoritie and power, wee prooued before, that the
least in the kingdome of God, hath it equall with Ieremie
or any of the Prophetes. Hereby is that also aunswered
which Master Cartwright inferreth, that if one man bee
founde worthie of excommunication, the smaller part of
an assembly is not to proceede against him, if the greater
part will not. What doctrine is this? and what one worde
of God doth he name for profe of this & diuers other such

                  •
               ike? For though Kings & nations & all the would, wuold
take any knowen wretched liuer to be a brother, and communicate
with him, yet neithēr the smaller part of an assembly,
neyther I alone ought to do it. For there is a flat law
set downe by the Lorde:Exod. 23. 2. 
               Thou shalt not followe a multitude
to doe euill: neyther agree in a controuersie to decline after many,
and ouerthrowe the trueth. But Master Cartwright will saye,
that this Lawe was giuen for wittnessing the trueth in
publique iudgement, and not that euery one shoulde
take vpon him to excommunicate. We knowe that the
common wealth of Israel: and their ciuill iudgement
did figure out the Lordes Spirituall iudgement in his
Church:ephes. 2. 12. and therefore it is sayde of Saint Paul that wee
are nowe no more aliauntes from the common wealth of
Israel; which wordes doe shewe that their Common

wealth did figure out our spirituall fellowshippe. But whether
it did or no, the lawe is generally giuen both for ciuill
iudgement, and for all dealings in controuersie, that wee
ought to giue true iudgement and testimonie, and not to
keepe backe iudgement, or peruert the trueth for any mans
cause, yet we say not that euery one may excommunicate
alone. For we ought to tell the Church,
               Matth. 18. (saith Christ,) and so
we should haue the church to ioyne with vs in that action.
And Paul sheweth that his spirit & theirs being met together,
               1. Cor. 5.
               was ioyned as in one for excommunicating the incestuous person.
but what if the rest of the church will not ioyne with vs
therein? Surely then, as we prooued before, we must set our
selues against them all, we must not be afraid of their faces,
as the Lorde commandeth,Ierem. 1. 17. lest he destroy vs before them.
For they all, that knowing Achans sinne, refuse being warned
to cut him off,Iosh. 7. are guiltie with him in his sinne, or if
they touch or come neere the tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
they shall perish with them:Nomb 16. or being in a citie that
is fallen away to Idolatrie, if they flee not out of it, or set
not them selues against it,Deut. 13. 15. they shall be destroyed with it.
All which indgements doe teach the Church at this day,
true iudgement: namely, to set it selfe both against small &
against great companyes, if they withstande or refuse the
true discipline of the church.Iere. 15. 10. For Ieremie saith of him selfe,
that he was as a contentious man, and a man that did striue
with the whole earth: euery one did curse him, his owne familiars
watched for his halting, as he saith in another place,
he was in derision daily and euery one mocked him:Ierem. 20. 7, 8, 9, 10. for
he called thē al an assembly of rebels, priuate famillar felloshippe
he brake off with them, as was shewed before, and
openly he came not amongest them, but only to proclaime
their sinnes, and preach vengeance against them. If it bee
then asked, whether Ieremie did condemne them al as none
of the church and people of God:Ierem. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. let Ieremie him selfe answere
it, for indeede by their vsuall and common profession
and trade of life, they shewed not them selues to be the

people and Church of god. For as it is written, both the
great men and rulers,Ierem. 9. 2, 3. &c. and also the inferiour and poorer
people had all together broken the yoke and burst the
bandes. In the streetes of Ierusalem, and in the open places
there could not a man be fonnde, that did execute iudgement
and sought the trueth, that the Lord might spare the
citie. And he sayeth in another place,Ierem, 6. 28. 
               They are all rebellious
traytours, they are brasse and yron, they are all destroyers, they
shall call them reprobate siluer, because the Lorde hath reiected
them. From the least of them, euen to the greatest of them, euery
one is giuen vnto couetousnesse, and from the Prophet euen vnto
the Priest,
               Ierem 23. 14. 
               they all deale falsely. They are all vnto me (saith the
Lorde againe) as Sodome, and the inhabitants thereof as the people
of Gomorrah, yet I doe not doubt, but that there was the
Church, and children of God amongest them. For Ieremie
him selfe and Barucke was with them:Isa 
                     •
                  9. 14, 15. for Isaiah witnesseth
that when iudgement was turned backewarde, and iustice
stoode a farre off, so that all trueth and equitie failed, yet (I say)
there were some that refrained from euill, and were made a pray to
the rest.
               Isa. 51. 18. In deede openly there was none to reforme the
church: of all his children there was none that tooke her by
the hande to bring her into the way. For the Lorde sought
for a man among them that shoulde make the hedge,Ezek. 22. 30. and
stande in the gappe before him for the land, that he should
not destroy it but he found none. Yet there were those that
had a marke on their foreheades,Ezek. 9. 4. as mourning and crying
for all the abominations that were committed. And if it be
asked, whether these were a visible church of God, it is answered
by Ezekiel in another place, that among the heathen
and in the countreyes where the Lorde did scattere
them,Ezek. 11. 16. he was as a litle Sanctuarie vnto them: whereby is
meant, that though they wanted the visible signe of the tē
               ple
and Sanctuarie at Ierusalem, yet their holy conuersation
shoulde shewe the Lord to be among them,Ezek. 34. 17. and that the
Lorde would iudge betweene sheepe and sheepe, betweene
the rammes and the goates. It is manifest that the Synagogogues

of the Iewes in Antiochia and Ephesus were the
churches of God: yet when Christ was preached vnto thē,
and they withstoode Paul and Barnabas, did Paul or Barnabas
stay for the consent of the most part to cast them off?
Did they not foorthwith separate the disciples,Act. 13 46. 51. and gather
the church apart from thē? yea will M C.
               Act 19. 9. say: for they were
worthy to be cast off, seeing they refused Christ. Then belike
it is true, that one man or a fewe persons may cast off
whole churches, for some greater sinnes and offences. How
then is it true which M. C. saith, that one man being founde
& iudged to deserue separation, should not be separate except
the most part do consent? He wil say peraduēture, that
he excepteth idolaters & apostates frō the Lord. why then
did he giue a generall rule, without naming such exceptiōs?
yet Christ for all disobedience in refusing any message of
God, doth giue cōmandement,Mat. 10. 14. euen to all and euery one of
his messengers, to cast off whole cities and churches,Luk. 9. 5. as being
in a worse case then Sodome and Gomorrha. For if
they receiue you not, sayeth he, nor heare your wordes, when ye
depart out of that house or that citie, shake off the dust of your
feete against them. He will answere, that their sinne also of
not receiuing the messengers of Christ, was the sinne of Apostacie.
And is not this a message from Christ, when one
or a fewe persons doe iustly rebuke the congregation for ouerthrowing
the Lordes discipline and treading his scepter
vnder foote? and is not his scepter cast downe, and his
kingdome polluted, when he which is manifestly knowen
and prooued to deserue separation, can not be cast out?
But againe he will say, that those cities and churches were
not cast off, for refusing the Lordes messengers, but for refusing
such a message as they brought: namely that the
Christ and Messiah was nowe come in the flesh. Surely til
after the death of Christ, they had no such message. For
Christ straightly charged his disciples, that they should tell
no man,Mat. 16. 20. that he was Iesus the Christ: meaning that till his
death and rising againe, it is not meete that that doctrine

shoulde be blased abroade, but it was sufficient for that
time, if they generally beleeued in the Messiah, as the
Iewes also did, and refused him not when he shoulde be
preached more clearely yet long before his death was the
commandement giuen, concerning those houses or cities,
which shoulde refuse his messengers. yet in deede it is true,
that they which refuse his discipline and gouernement, do
also refuse Christ him selfe: and so it is the sinne of apostacie.
For so it is written,Luk. 19. 27. 
               Those mine enemies which woulde
not, that I shoulde reigne oner them, bring hither and slay them
before me. But hereto they will answere, that yet till iudgement
was executed by the Lorde him selfe, they were called
his Citizens:verse. 14. for so the text sayeth that his Citizens
hated him, and sent an ambassage after him, saying, we wil
not haue this man to reigne ouer vs. But doe they not
knowe, that they are called his Citizens, because they
should haue bene so, and were not, but became his enemies.
Indeede they were Citizens in name only, but not in deed.
So Ierusalem in name was called the citie of God, yet in
deede it became that great Citie, as it is written,Reuel. 11. 8. which spiritually
is called Sodome and Aegypt, where our Lorde
also was crucified. The Iewes were planted a noble vine
as Ieremie witnesseth:Isa. 5 7. and Isaiah sayeth, that the vineyard
of the Lorde of Hostes was the house of Israel, and the
men of Iudah (were sometymes) his pleasant plant, but
nowe they are turned vnto me sayeth the Lorde into the
plantes of a strange vine.Iere. 2. 21. yea that we be not beguiled with
the Names of Gods house, Church, and Citie, he him selfe
hath giuen it a name, as it is written, the name of that city
shalbe from that day,Ezek. 48. 35. 
               The Lord is there. And in this respect
also it is called in Ieremie the throne of his glorie. As who
say that amōg whōsoeuer we see not the Lord to reigne by
his gouernement & discipline,Iere. 14. 21. as it were in the throne of his
kingdom, them we shuld 
                  ••
               dge not to be the city & church
of God. And though the church 
                  •
               o pray,Ezek. 43. 7. that God would
not cast downe the throne of his glory, nor breake the conant

with them: yet Ieremie bringeth in those wordes as a
complaint of the penitent, and not to proue that the wretched
sorte either helde the couenant, or were the throne of
God.Isa 35. 8. Wherefore to conclude this matter, The path and way
of the Lord is holy, as the prophet teacheth, & no polluted shal
passe by it: there shalbe no lyon, no noysome beast shall ascend by it,
neither shall they be founde there. whereby is meant that open
and grosse sinners shall not be suffred in the Church. For
either they shall be separate by excommunication, or els all
the godly shall withdraw them selues from them, and hold
them accursed. As it is written, If any man loue not the
Lorde Iesus,1. Cor. 16. 22. let him be had in execration, yea excommunicate
to death. And surely they loue not the Lorde, but are
his enemies,Luke 19. 2 7. as was shewed before, which refuse his gouernment,
that he can not reigne ouer them. And againe it is
written,1 Ioh. 5. 3. 
               This is the loue of God,
               1. Iohn. 2. 4. 5. 
               that we keepe his commandemēts,
and he that sayeth I knowe god, or I loue god, and keepe not his
commaudements, is a lyar, and the trueth is not in him. Not that
we can keepe his commandements without all breach or
offence. for wee are not Donatistes as the aduersaries slā
               der
vs: that we should say, we may be without sinne, or that
the church may be without publike offences, or if there fall
out some sort of grosser sinnes, that therefore it should cease
to be the church of God. we teach no such doctrine, but if
in any Church such grosse sinnes bee incurable, and the
Church hath not power to redresse them, or rebelliously
refuseth to redresse them, then it ceaseth to be the Church
of God, and so remaineth till it repent, & take better order.
            And here cōmeth in that question to be decided, whether
without the discipline cōmanded of Christ, any assembly
or church may be called the church of Christ, M. C. saith,
that for want of this discipline, we giue al the english assemblies,
the blacke stone of condemnation. Howe truely he
writeth this of vs, his conscience is witnes▪ for we neuer said
that all the English assemblyes doe want discipline. Thogh
this matter be sufficiently debated before, yet let vs weigh

               Master Cartwrights answere. H sayeth that faith in Christ
is the essence, being, or life of the church: as for discipline it is
but accidental, and therefore the Church of God may haue
her being and life, and be named the church of God, without
discipline. what worde of God doeth he bring for all
this? we knowe in deede that Christ is the life and essence
of the Church. For except as braunches we abide in him,Iohn 15. 6.
which is the true vine, we can bring foorth no fruite, we are
cast foorth as branches, and are to be consumed with fire.
Christ is the resurrection and the life. He is the way, the
trueth, and the life. So it is true,Iohn 11. 25. that Christ is the life of the
church,Iohn 14. 6. as for faith it is but the hand, whereby we take hold
of this life: As it is written, he that beleeueth in the sonne,
hath euerlasting life, and he addeth vpon it, as a tryall of
faith,Iohn 3. 36. euen our obedience to the sonne, and saith, he that obeyeth
not the sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of god
abideth on him. Nowe it was prooued before, that they
which are guilty of such horrible abuses, & so grossely offende
by their corrupt and false profession, haue not this
faith, neither do holde Christ the foundation. But see, how
fondly & blasphemously Master Cartwright distinguiseth:
He will haue a dead Christ, or an Idol christ to be the life
of the church. For he will ioyne the church to Christ, without
the discipline and gouernement of Christ. He putteth
asunder the church and the discipline of Christ, and so must

                  •
               eedes sunder Christ from his owne discipline or gouernement
Nowe Paul calleth this discipline,1. Cor. 5. 4. the power of our
Lorde Iesus christ. So if wee seuer christ and his power,
what is he but a dead christ? Also by his discipline, and gouernement
he hath ouer vs, he is our king: as againe it is
written,Hebr. 1. 8. the scepter of thy kingdome is a scepter of righteousnesse.Psal. 45. 6. 7.
So if we seuer christ, and his discipline, rule, and
gouernement what is he but an Idol christ? If Master Cartwright
say, that by the scepter there is meant nothing else
but the power of the worde of God, I graunt it: as Paul
saith I will knowe not the speach or wordes of these men,1. Cor. 4. 18. 19.
               
but the power: For the kingdome of God is not in worde, but
in power saith he, and in the psalme, The Lorde shall sende the
rodde of this power out of Zion. And the weapons of our warrefare
are mighty through God, as againe he writeth. So then if
the power of the word to bynde & lose, to remit or refaine
mens sinnes, to promise lyfe, and to rebuke and giue ouer to
execration be taken from Christ or the church of Christ,
what remaineth but an Idol or counterfet christ, an Idol or
counterfet church? Thus while M C. wil haue faith in christ
to be the life of the church without discipline, he doth leaue
christ himselfe without life, & as one that is dead, or turned
into an Idol▪ yet further he proceedeth in his absurdities &
blasphemies, & saith, that fayth only is the essence, being, or life
of the church, and that besides faith, nothing is necessary to the very
essence and being of the church. Thus be like children which
yet through want of discretion, can not haue faith, shall be
without the essence & life of the church. How corrupt doctrine
this is, I neede not heere stand on it. If he say that by
the faith of the parēts they haue life & essēce in the church,
the scripture is against him.Gene. 17. 7. For by the promise & the couenant
made to the righteous & to their seed are their childrē
reckoned in the church & not by their faith. Therefore
the faythful are called by Paul the children of promise.
               Gal. 4. 18. 
               For we
are (sayth he) after the maner of Isaac children of the promise, and
againe to the Romans, the children of the promise are counted
for the true seede of Abraham.
               Rom. 9. 8. But that by any mans faith his
children or others, should haue life & essence in the church,
is the same false doctrine we refuted before. For the iust shall
liue by his fayth saith Habbakk If then a mā shall liue by his
owne faith,Hab. 2. 4. he shall not liue by the faith of another. And by
baptising into the fayth and profession of any, we must
vnderstande, that we are baptized to holde the same fayth
and profession, when wee come to discretion, and not to
haue our lyfe and saluation by an other mans fayth, when
as yet we haue not the same fayth our selues. And if wee
shall liue by faith,Rom. 3. 22. then fayth is the meanes to come by that

lyfe, and is not the life it selfe. Wherefore Christ is the life
and essence of the Church, and not faith. Nowe Christ is
made as no christ vnto vs, except we holde him, and ioyne
with him as our annointed King, priest and Prophet. For so
the word (Christ) doth signifie. And here I demande of M. C.
whether the Kingdome, Priesthood, & Prophecie of Christ
be of the essence and life of the Church. I am sure he dare
not say nay to this: and why then will he haue the Lordes
discipline or gouernement, to be but an accident or hangby
to the church For by Christ as paul sheweth, (that is by the graces
of Christs kingdom, priesthood 
                     •
                   prophecie) all his body,
               Eph. 4. 16. 
               (that
is all his Church) are coupled & knit together by euery ioynt, and
so receyueth increase and edyfiyng in God. So take away the
kingdom and gouernement of Christ, and there can be no
ioyning, nor coupling together of the church, no offices nor
callings in the church, yea no face, or shewe, or rather no
part, signe or token of the church. For these graces do we receiue
of Christs kingdome or from his imperiall Maiestie.
And therefore it is writtē, that when he ascended vp on hie,
(as our triumphant King and Gouernour) he led captiuitie
captiue,Eph. 4. 8. and gaue giftes vnto men: and againe, he ascended
far aboue all heauēs,Iere. 14. 21. that he might fill all things.Ezek. 43. And wherfore
is the church and people of God in so many places,Mat. 13. 7. &c. called
the throne of God and the kingdome of God, but only
to shewe that without the discipline and gouernement of
Christ therein, it loseth euē her essēce, life & being in christ.
And this M C. is forced to cōfesse, For he saith that the ministery
of the word is a part of this discipline, & the obedience
of the people is another: & so reasoneth, that, take away
all discipline & euery part thereof, & there remaineth
no church of christ. Thus the truth hath made him to yeeld
in battell, and turned him backewarde, and yet he will resist
as it were going backward. For how backewardly doeth he
deale in this matter? to say that discipline is not pertaining
to the essence of the church, & now for wāt of discipline, to
take away the essence and name of the Church. Againe to
say, without discipline there may be a church, and nowe

to say that without discipline, there can be no church. So rather
then he will be without an enemie, he will fight with a
shadowe. For nowe full wisely he doeth cut discipline into
partes: namely the ouersight, rule, and gouernement of
such as haue charge in the church, and the obedience of the
people thereto: which two partes indeede doe conteine, all
the other partes, and therefore very vainely he speaketh of
other partes of discipline, as if they might be separate and
secluded from these. For he can shewe none in the church,
but either gouernours, or vnder gouernement: neither can
he shewe any duetie in the church, but onely the dueties of
gouernement or of submission and obedience: neither any
worke, matter, businesse, or ministerie in the church, but either
of charge and ouersight, or vnder charge or ouersight.
Wherefore take away both gouernement and ouersight, &
also obedience and submission, and there can be no other
part of discipline remaining. For the dueties of teaching,
exhorting, improouing, rebuking &c. also all dueties of examining
and deciding controuersies, of reforming abuses,
of relieuing and maintaining the afflicted and poore, of separating
the vnworthy &c. are contained vnder that parte
of gouerning. Also all dueties of beleefe and learning the
trueth, of reuerence, honour, meekenesse and all kinde of
seruice and vpright behauiour &c. are contained vnder
that part of obedience and submission. Thus it is manifest,
that through want of discipline, there is no naturall coniunction
of the partes and members of the church together,
so that both the head and vitall partes are wanting, and all
the other partes are wholy and throughly either displaced
and peruerted, or vtterly lost and perished. But why doeth
he not shewe what part of discipline may be wanting, yea
and of those two partes, which he sayeth can not be wanting▪
yet what defect there may be. Indeede it is commanded
to forgiue a brother,
               Luke 17. 4. 
               if he sinne seuen times in a day, and seuen
times in a day turne againe to vs, saying, it repenteth me. yea
we must forgiue,
               Matth. 18 22. 
               though it were vnto seuentie times, seuen tymes.
               
But yet Christ giueth no power to forgiue, if a brother remaine
wilfull in his sinne, yea if it be but a priuate sinne, I
am to proceede against him, and am not to cease, till either I
haue brought him to repentance, or haue broken off all fellowshippe
with him, as with a brother. But we must take
heed, that they be brethren, and not dogs and scorners whō
we rebuke and labour to redresse.Matth. 18. 15. 
               For if thy brother trespasse
against thee, saith Christ &c. then he sheweth howe to deale
and complaine for reformation of a brother.Prou. 9. 7, 8. But concerning
scorners it is written, He that reprooueth a scorner, purchaseth
to him selfe shame: and he that rebuketh the wicked, getteth
him selfe a blot: againe, Rebuke not a scorner least he hate
thee, but rebuke a wise man and he will loue thee. But to be short:
All the discipline of the church consisteth herein, first that
the church be gathered of the worthie:Matth. 10. 11. as it is written Enquire
who is worthie:
               Matth. 7. 6. 
                     •
                  
                and againe, Giue ye not that which is holy
to dogges, neither cast ye your pearles before swine. And in Ieremie
If thou take away the precious from the vile,
               Iere. 15. 19, 
               then shalt
thou be as my mouth: let them returne vnto thee, but returne not
thou vnto them. And in Ezekiel,Ezek. 44. 23. 
               They shall reach my people the
difference betweene the holy and prophane, and cause them to discerne
betweene the vncleane and the cleane.
               Mala. 1. 13. And in Malachie
the Lorde reiected their offerings, because they offered the scrobled,
and the lame and the sicke and the blinde, which figureth
the reiecting of our sacraments, when dogges and swyne do
communicate therein.Vers. 7. When Papistes and Atheistes, drunkardes,
Maygamesters, blasphemers, raylers, fighters and such like,
are presented as sweete bread at the table of the Lorde. The
seconde point of discipline is, that the couenant, promises,
and Gospel of Christ, and the sacraments of his kingdome,
being established among the worthie, then that they keepe
the couenant & sacraments vnpolluted. And for this purpose
there are appointed these other partes of discipline:
namely that the Church doe iudge those which are within: for it
hath nothing to doe,
               1. Cor. 5. 12. saith Paul, to iudge those that are without.
The discipline of the church poceedeth against the brethrē,

that offend, as was shewed before, & not agaynst scorners,
or careles worldlings. For the lord doth now take vs of
the gentiles for priests & leuites▪
               Isa. 
                     •
                  6. 21. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 44. 7. as it is written, and as wee
may not bring into the lords sanctuary strangers, & vncircamcised
in heart to pollute his house, that is wicked wretches
which haue not the lords couen̄at, may not be receiued
into fellowship of the church: so those that are within being
fallen to transgression,verse. 24. they shal iudge according to my
iudgements saith the Lord, and they shall keepe my lawes
and my statutes in all my assemblies▪ For there is a particular
iudging & dealing against any in the church, as by particular
rebuke, & pronouncing accu
                  •
               sed him that grossely
offendeth, & there is a general iudging of any without the
church.1. Co
                     •
                  . 6. For it is written, that we shal iudge the angels, And
euery nation that shall rise vp in iudgement against the
church,I
                     •
                  a. 
                     •
                  4. 17. shal it condemne, this iudging is no part of the particular
iudging we speak of. And here come in, other parts
of discipline to be spoken of: namely for priuate rebuke of
the brethren that priuately offend, for open rebuke of open
sinnes, & for casting off & forsaking felowship & brotherhood
with grosse & open offenders. These partes of discipline,
although they are prooued & made manifest before,
yet because M C. saith that some part of discipline may bee
wanting, let vs see which of them may be wanting and the
church notwithstanding haue the essence and name of the
church.Luke. 17. 4. 
               First Christ hath gieun power to euery christian to reteyne
the sinnes of euery brother whom he knoweth to trespasse against
him,
               Mat. 18. 
               & not to forgiue hym, except he see him repē: So that
if any person want this power, he is not to be counted a
christian. And this power reacheth so far, not only for open
but euen for priuate offences, to iudge & take any man for a
heathen & a publican, if he wil not be reformed. Now this
liberty & power, euery christian must hold, or els he is the
seruāt of mē,1. Cor. 7. 23. & not of christ. If then a particular christian
cannot want it, how shal the whole church be without it, &
yet be named the church of christ▪
               Reue. 1. 6. Euery particular christiā
               
is a king & a priest vnto god, a king because he holdeth the
scepter of gods word, to iudge the offēders, a priest because
in euery place he offreth incense and a pure offring to the1. Pet 2. 5. ex
                     •
                  dus. 19
                     •
                   6.
name of the Lord as it is Malachy. So thē he is vtterly without
the kingdō & priesthod of christ,Re
                     •
                  e 2. 26. if that liberty be denied
him,Mat. 1. 11. I mean of iudging & rebuking the particular offenders,
& forsaking their fellowship if they wil not be reformed.
Howe much more shall the Church be without this
kingdō, & priesthod of christ▪ & so without christ hymself,
if it want this libertie & power.ephe. 
                     •
                  . 7. Likewise as we shewed before
euery christian hath power seuerally to forsake wicked
fellowship,2. Ties. 3. 6. & not to cōpany together with wicked brethrē.2. Tim. 3. 5.
And as by this liberty & power,1. Iohn. 1. 6. 7. they vphold their kingdō
in Christ,H
                     ••
                  e. 2. 2. so without it,Act. 2. 40. both they and the whole church do
lose their interest in the priesthood & kingdom of Christ,1. Cor. 5. 11.
and so are none of his church. For they haue not the keyes
of the kingdom of heauē to bind & lose, to reteine or remit
mens sinnes, and therefore what right can they haue in the
kingdom of christ.Iohn. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                If they cannot openly & particularly rebuke,
how shall they openly & particularly binde?Ma
                     •
                   16. 1
                     •
                  . and if
they cānot openly & particularly cast out or excōmunicate
the grosser offender, how shal they bind? For being still reteined
as brethrē in the church, how shall they pronounce
them to be boūd in heauē? How shall they shut the gates of
heauen against those, whom still they keepe in the bosome
of the church? If M. C. say that a general rebuke, & iudging
of the wicked is a binding, let him knowe that the Church
hath more liberty & right, particularly to iudge those which
are within, then generally to iudge those that are without.
And safely, if it haue not power to iudge those which are
within, it hath no power of iudging at all. So that it is manifest,
that no part of church discipline can be wanting, but
the church doth straightway go to mine thereby. For a cō
               fused
gathering of al together, was proued to be no church
of God▪ Likewise if the couenant of the church, & the sacraments
thereof, be broken and disanulled, Master C. graunteth
that there is no church: and nowe it is shewed that

without that power of rebuking and iudging those which
are within, and of excomunicating those that deserue it,
there can be no church of God. As for that his fonde answere,
that for some default in preaching, and some default
in obedience, the discipline of the church may fayle and yet
be the church, let him knowe that though some preacher or
other person offende, yet doeth not therefore the discipline
of the church fayle or want, except the church be negligent,
or wilfully refuse to redresse such offences, or is brought
into bondage that it can not redresse them. And yet also
the question is not of some weakenes and failing in discipline
but a full want and ouerthrowe either of the whole,
or of some parte thereof. Wherefore that proofe they alleadgeby
the Corinthians, that they wanted discipline, &
yet were the church of God, is false & very vaine. For they
wanted it not, but were negligent therein. They were not
vnder the bondage of a popish discipline, & power, which
denyed and withhelde the Lordes discipline. Nowe negligence
was a fault in them, yet not an vtter ouerthrowe and
failing of discipline. For being rebuked of Paul, they mended
this negligence,2. Cor. 7. 11. in so much that their repentance and
sorowe for their negligence wrought a great▪ care in them,
yea as the text saith, a clearing of themlselues, an indignation, a
feare, a great desire, a zeale, a punishing of themselues. Likewise
for their abuses in the Sacrament of the Supper, Paul condemneth
euen the Supper,1. Cor. 11. 20. and sayeth, This is not to eate the
Lordes Supper. And for abusing that Sacrament, many of
them were plagued of God, and dyed. So that although for
a tyme, they turned the Sacrament to be a iudgement against
thē, & the discipline of the church did fayle, yet was
it not therefore quite ouerthrowē & debarred from thē. Also
whereas some beleeued not the resurrection frō the dead,1 Cor. 15. 34, 35.
it was the ignorance of those which had newely imbraced
the Christian profession, and not the ouerthrowe of the
church discipline. And here is that answered which M. C.
alledgeth, that Paul calleth the churches of God by the title

of the faythfull and Sayntes. For though some fall away
vnto wickednesse, yet by the discipline of the Church the
rest doe remaine as Saintes. And that tytle of Saintes is agaynst
Master Cartwright. For if they be Sayntes and holy,
howe shall they shewe forth a wicked and vnholy
profession, and still be called the Sayntes and Church of
God.1. Cor. 1, 2. Though Paul wrote his Epistle to the Church and
Sayntes at Corinth, yet doeth he not thereby call the incestuous
person or other grosse sinners, the members or parts
of that Church. But in the fifth Chapter he calleth the incestuous
person a wicked man and not a Saynt.
               1. Cor. 5. 13. As for his tytle of
the faythfull, he can not shewe that Paul vseth it, without
addition of other wordes, to shewe the good profession of
that fayth: as in that place, (To the Sayntes fayeth Paul at Ephesus
and to the faithfull▪
               
               Ephes. 1. 1. And though the tytle of the faythfull
shoulde be vsed alone, yet must we vnderstande their
fayth shewed by an outwarde good profession. Here also
may that place be aunswered which they alleadge out of
Paul,1. Cor. 11. 28. 
               Let a man examine himselfe: and againe to the Romans,
Let vs not therefore iudge one another any more▪
               
               Rom. 14 13. but they abuse
these places,L
                     •
                  ke 6. 43. as if Paul meant, that we were not to iudge men by
their fruites,
               Mat. 12. 33. 
               or the Church had not power to iudge those that sinne
in the Church:
               Mat. 7. 16. for these thinges wee haue prooued before,
but by iudging in that place, wee must vnderstande a rash
iudging or condemning of any, for those deedes or workes
they doe, whereof they can giue a good and probable reason
Likewise whereas Christ sayeth, Iudge not that ye be not
iudged,
               Mat. 7. 1. he meaneth that wee must iudge or condemne no
brethren as reprobates, or rashly condemne that in them,
which is no fault at all, or iudge euery man to be worse
then our selues, but rather we must iudge our selues to bee
the chiefe sinners of all,1. Tim. 1. 15. 
               and yet also keepe the Lordes discipline,
of iudging and rebuking the wicked,
               1. Tim. 6. 14. 
               without spot and vnblameable.
Likewise to examine our selues, that is our owne heartes
and consciences, belongeth to our selues: but wee are not
thereby forbidden to examine the outwarde abuses and

faultes of others.Heb. 10. 14. For it is written, that we are to consider one
another.
               Rom. 16. 
                     •
                  7. 
               Also to marke others diligently, to note others, that wee
looke not euery man on his owne thinges,
               2. Thes. 3. 14. 
               but euery man also on the
things of other men.
               Phil. 2. 4. Here also is that question answered of
the Dutch Churches in hygh Germany, which holde the
errour of transubstantiation▪ For indeede I iudge it to be
an error, and not an heresie, except they obstinately pursue
it with other grosse absurdities, as doe some heretikes, or
with sworde and bloodshed as doe the Papistes, and then
without question they are not the Church of Christ, but remaine
in the state of condemnation, tyll they repent. As for
those of our profession, which are withhelde from the vse
of the Lordes Supper, that question followeth afterwarde
to be answered, and doeth nothing at all make against vs.
Likewyse that matter of neglecting circumcision and the
Passeouer the space of fourtie yeeres he shamefully abuseth.
For there was no negligence but a necessitie and commandement
of omitting. For that seruice of the passeouer
was not to be kept after their comming out of Egypt, saue
at some special charge from the Lord as Nom 9. 2. till they
came into the land of Canaan:Exod. 12. 25. 
               as appeareth in Exo 12. 25. and
other places.
               Exod. 13. 5. And it figured also their hasting both out of
Aegypt and thorowe the wildernesse:Nom. 9. 13. and therefore were
they not to keepe it ordinarily euery yeere, till they came
to the lande of their rest. And for this cause also was circumcision
omited. For being circūcised, they were fore certaine
dayes: by reason whereof, if they had bene circumcised,
they could not haue iourneyed after the cloud & tabernacle.
So a necessitie was laid vpon thē.Nom. 9. 21. 
               For they were to iourney
with the cloud and tabernacle as in Nombers, Whether the
cloude vpon the tabernacle was taken vp by day or by night. All
their iourn
                     ••
                  ing was by the commandement of the Lorde.
            
            Now let vs come to other of his profes. A city saith he,
may be a citie, though it haue not the walles of a citie. And
so he reasoneth that Ierusalem, was the Citie of the great
King, before Nehe
                     •••
                  h had builded the walles, whereupon

he concludeth that a Church may be the church of God,
though it want discipline. Howe greatly here againe doeth
M C. deceiue him selfe and others. He knoweth that the
Temple did figure out and signifie the church of God, as
well as the citie Ierusalem. Nowe as the Temple was noe
Temple of God, but a ruinous heape, without the walles of
the temple, and the foundation of the walles: so the citie
Ierusalem,Neh. 2. 
                     •
                  . 
               was said to lye waste as no citie of God, till the walles
were builded and the gates reared vp: If he require proofe of
both these,Psal. 118. 22. we shewe him the Scripture. For in the Psalme,
in Isaiah,Mat. 21 42 and in Matthewe, Christ is set downe to be the sanctuarie
and head corner stone in the building.
               Isa. 8. 14. And in the Reuelation,
the twelue Apostles are called the twelue foundations of the
wall of the holy citie,
               Reue. 21. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪ verse. 12. 
               and the gates the twelue trybes of Israel,
meaning all the nomber of Gods elect. Nowe therefore let
him iudge, that seeing the Apostles, and all the Saintes of
God, are builded in the walles of this citie, howe it can bee
the citie of God without the walles. Yea he neither doeth,
nor can bring any worde of God, that the walles shoulde
signifie discipline onely, and not rather the gathering and
building of all the saints of god, into one spirituall house &
city of god. And therefore is there no mention made of any
temple or other houses within the city. yea the text saith,
that there was none such, but the Lorde God Almightie and the
Lambe are the Temple thereof.
               Reue. 21. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . And in the 121. psalme that hie
cōmendation of the building of Ierusalē,Psal. 121. 3. is expounded in
the 87. psalme, wherein it consisted, namely in the building
of the walles & gates & therfore he praiseth it, saying, God
laid his foundations among the holy moūtaines,
               Psal. 87. 1. 2. 3. 
               the lord loueth the
gates of Zion more then all the habitations of Iacob: glorious
things are spoken of thee O citie of God.
               Psal. 48. 12. 13. And in the fourtie
and eyght Psalme, Compasse about Z
                     •
                  on, and goe rounde about
it, and tell the towres thereof: marke well the wall thereof. Beholde
her towers,
               Nehem. 1. 3. 
               that ye may tell your posteritie. And in Nehemiah,
the people are sayde to bee in great affliction, and
in reproch, because the wal of Ierusalem was broken downe

and the gates thereof were burnt with fire. Wherefore the
city Ierusalem, was a resemblance and figure of the spirituall
Ierusalem and Church of God, onely by the walles and
gates of the citie & there execution of Iudgement in the gates
thereof. For in these 3. things is described the ioy of Dauid
in that Psalme:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1
                     •
                  2. 1, 2, 5. namely That the people should go into the house
of the Lorde, that their feete shoulde stande in the gates of Ierusalem,
and that there were thrones set for iudgement. Nay sayeth
Master Cartwright, the houses & fayre buildings did figure
the Church of God, and the walles did figure discipline only.
This is his owne dreame, euen an imagination of his
owne head. For not the houses of the city did figure the
spirituall house of God or his citye, but the Temple. Neyther
was the city without the walles any figure, but onely
by the walles. And therefore doth Nehemiah say in the seconde
Chapter,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. 5. 
               That he woulde builde the Citie, because hee
meant to builde the walles of the Citie. But let Master Cartwright
remember himselfe, and shewe any place in the
worlde, that is called a city, and yet hath not the walles of
a City. Or an orcharde, garden, or close so called, without a
hedge, a wall, or some safe inclosing of fensing. Are a clump
of fruite trees called an orcharde, yf they stande open in the
fielde without any fence? or is a fayre piece of grasse
grounde named a close, if it be not enclosed. So by his
owne vayne reason he ouerthroweth him selfe. And wheras
he sayeth that after their returne from Babylon the Citie
is called the Citie of the great king, euen before the walles were
builded: what proofe bringeth he for that▪ It is called a city
indeede by Nehemiah,Nehem. 2. 3. 
               but a destroyed and waste Citie: hee
meaneth that it had bene a Citie, but nowe is destroyed and
waste,verse 5. 
               and he saith he would builde the citie, (not that it was
nowe a citie, for then it had bene buylded to his hande) but
the vse of speach is, that where a city hath bene, to call the
place and the ruinous heape of stones by the name of the
Citie▪ And so in Ezra, before their returne from Babylon,
The Heathen King Cyrus calleth the place of Ierusalem by the

of Ierusalem, yet was neither the people of God there, nor
the Temple of God. Yea Zion was plowed like a fielde, and Ierusalem
was an heape,
               Ezra 1. 3. 
               and the mountaine of the house, was as the
high places of the forest.
               Micah 3. 12. And being in that case it figured rather
the desolation of the spirituall Ierusalem,Ierem. 26. 18. which in the
Reuelation is called Sodome and Aegypt: and howe then could
it be the City of God,Reuel. 11. 8. saue onely in Name, for that it had
bene so. Likewyse his descantyng about a vineyarde is against
himselfe. For there can be no yarde or court except
it haue the walles or fence of a yarde or count, and so where
no yarde is, there may be vynes growing, but there can bee
no vineyarde. And so where discipline is wanting, there
may be some graces of God appearing, as knowledge, and
an outwarde subiection to mens lawes and to Magistrates,
yea there may be Gods secrete elect children, and an outwarde
false shewe of religion and deuotion: and yet no
true shewe nor face of an outwarde and visible Church of
God.
            Nowe Master Cartwright commeth to that poynt, concerning
the dumbe minister: of whome as he, so wee also
haue spoken before. But here he prooueth the Sacraments,
ministred by such, to be Gods Sacraments, and that men
may receiue them lawfully. His proofes are like wynde
blowen out of a bladder. he myght rather laugh at them
him selfe, then offer them to others to take viewe of his
folly. His first proofe is, they are ministers, but no lawfull
ministers, and they are ministers, though they be Idol mynisters,
therefore he concludeth, that though they be Idoles
and vnlawfull ministers, yet wee may heare then
                  •
               , and receyue
the Sacraments of them. He confesseth them to bee
vnlawfull and Idol ministers, and yet their ministration or
mynisterie must be good and lawfull: This is as much, as if
one shoulde condemne a theefe and iustifie hys theft. For
if they be not messengers, nor ministers from Christ, then
their message and ministerie is not from Christ, but from
the deuill. For these be coniugates, an vnlawfull minister,

and his vnlawfull ministerie: a messenger from the diuell▪
and his message from the diuell: a wicked man to be abhorred
and his wickednes to be abhorred. Euen so it must
needes followe, that a minister being vnlawfull and of the
diuell, his action and deedes of ministration, are vnlawfull
and of the deuill.Ier. 23 vers. 16. vers. 21. And so the Lorde reasoneth, that the people
shoulde not heare the prophets that prophecied peace
vnto them, for he had not sent, nor commanded them: as
who say, because they were vnlawfull messengers, therefore
their message also was vnlawfull and to be refused. But
Master Cartwright sayeth that though they bee vnlawfull
messengers and Ministers, & not of God, yet their message
and ministerie is of god. For it is not a false or euil message
or ministerie as was that of the false prophetes, but good
and necessarie for the Churche. For that that is of Christ
sayeth he, is good, and by their ministerie they giue vs that,
that is of Christ, hee meaneth the Sacramentes and their
reading of Common seruice. And so hee concludeth that
they are Ministers of good thinges. Yea and hee addeth
a further distinction? that to vs they are ministers of
god, but to them selues or in respect of them selues, they
are vnlawfull ministers. Surely these are trimme distinctions
to carrye him blyndefolde, hee can not tell whether.
For whether will hee wander in his vanities? or
howe many deuelish doctrines will hee heape vp together?
First hee sayeth, they are vnlawfull ministers, and
yet ministers of god: then that they are ministers of god,
but not lawfull ministers of god: Thirdly that they
haue their calling and allowaunce by the Church and
yet are thrust vpon the Church: Fourthly that eyther
such dumbe ministers, and theyr ministerie is of GOD:
or if they bee of the Diuell, yet if the Bishoppe and his
officers doe authorize them, then the Churche doeth
authorize them, and noe man ought to refuse them:
Fiftely that their reading of seruice, is to bee heard, as being
a good thing from christ: sixtly that their sacraments

are to bee receiued as good thinges from Christe: Whereby
also it followeth that Christe doeth sende such
dumbe, or blynde reading ministers to take charge of the
people: also that for a neede, reading ministers may bee
in the Churche in steade of preaching ministers: Further
that the Byshoppes maye thrust vpon the flocke,
what Ministers they lyst, and giue them that authoritie
and calling which God can not giue them: Also
that the people shall bee counted Gods people and
Churche, though they bee vnder the deuilles messenger,
and subiect to his guyding. Howe vngodly and foolishe
doctrine is all this? and yet hee heapeth much more vnto
it,Psa. 145. 17 before his letter bee ended. It is written that the
Lorde is ryghteous in all his wayes and holy in all his
workes. If then anye Minister bee of God howe shall
he bee an vnlawfull minister? or if he bee vnlawfull,
howe shall he be of God? If he say a thing may be lawfull
before men, which before GOD is not so, and
therefore that men maye take it as lawfull before God:
Let hym remember himselfe, that hee speaketh of vnlawfull
ministers euen before men, yea whome hee himselfe
knoweth and calleth vnlawfull.Mat. 15. 13. 14. So that beeyng vnlawfull
ministers both before men, and before God, how
shall they be ministers of god? Wherefore they are of the
Deuill, and plantes, which the heauenly Father hath not
planted, and therefore shall hee rooted vp: and christ
sheweth the way to roote them vp: namely that we let
them alone blinde guides, leaders of the blinde, and haue
nothing to doe with their guyding and ministerie.Luke 5. 33. For
christ did gather his disciples aparte from the Pharisees
disciples,Mar. 2. 18. so that the Pharisees were to haue no charge,Iohn 3. 25. nor
ouersight on christes disciples.Iohn 9. 27, 28. This appeareth in v
                  •
               ry many
places of the Euangelists. Againe he distingui
                  •
               eth that
he is a minister, and leaueth out his wordes of lawfull and
vnlawfull, of god and not of god: So he woulde fray vs
with the bare worde (minister.) If they bee Satans

ministers shoulde we receiue them, because they beare the
name of ministers: There are prophets also, which come to vs
in sheepes clothing,
               Actes. 8. 21. shoulde we receiue them, being false prophets,
because they beare the name of prophets?Mat 7. 15. Therefore
these are vyle and vngodly mockeries, wherewith Master
Cartwright woulde delude vs:
                  
                     •
                  ech. 11. 4, 5. verse 15. 16. Further he distinguisheth,
that to the dumbe ministers them selues their ministery is a
matter of destruction,Nom. 6. 3 9, 4
                     •
                  , 49. but to the church, it is, he can not tell
what good thing, or gratious benefite from Christ. Wee
shewed before, that they doe good to others, like those foolish
shepherdes named in Zechary, whom God did raise vp in iudgement
to sell and to slay the sheepe. Also like Corah and his companie,
by whome so many thousandes perished. Or like the priestes of
Baal,
               Ez
                     ••
                  . 343. 
               or the Shepheardes spoken of in Ezekiel, which did eate
the fat, and clothe them selues with the wooll, and slewe them that
were fedde but fed not the sheepe: the weake they strengthened not,
the sicke they healed not, neither bound vp the broken, nor brought
again that which was driuen away, neither sought vp that which
was lost: but with crueltie and violence doe they rule them, as
these doe by their cannon power and spirituall courtes. For
they,vers
                     •
                   2
                     •
                  . the Byshoppes, and their officers are those that thrust
with side and with shoulder, and push with their hornes all the
weake of the flocke, till they vtterly scatter them abroade. It is a
wonder, that any man should speake of any good the blind
ministers doe. For through their woefull ministerie, and
through that lamentable bondage of popish discipline, we
may well say with Ieremie that wickednesse is gone foorth into
all the lande.
               Ier. 23. 14, 15. 
               They strengthen also the handes of the wicked,
that none can returne from his wickednesse. They are all vnto me
saith the Lorde as Sodome, and the inhabitantes thereof as Gomorah
But let vs see, what are those things, of Christ, which
he saith the dumbe ministers can giue vs. Forsooth the Sacraments
and the reading of common seruice.Nom. 16. Indeede they
haue gotten the censers of Corah and his companie,
               Deut. 12. and they are
made priestes of such places and churches, as the Lorde as
yet doeth not choose to put his name there. Wherefore as

as we shewed before, both their censings and their offrings,
that is their prayers and sacraments are reiected of the Lord
as execrable things.Ezek. 44. They are those strangers named in Ezekiel
and in Nombers, which are not of the Leuites nor of
the seede of Aaron, but doe pollute the Lordes house, and
can not offer the sweete incense and pure offerings, which
Malachie speaketh of.Mal. 1. 11. Their Sacraments are stollen and
counterfet badges,Reuel. 13. 16. and howe then shoulde we receiue them
as markes of the true church of God? They offer the incense
of Nadab and Abihu.Leuit. 10. 1. For their stinted forme of seruice,
deuised by the Byshoppes, and translated from the
Massebooke, can neuer be prooued to be incense made by
fire from the Altar of the Lorde. But yet Master Cartwright
will iustifie their Sacraments and reading of seruice. Let vs
therefore see to his proofes.Mat. 23. 
                     •
                  . One proofe is this, the Scribes
and Pharises might be heard preaching true doctrine, therfore
the dumbe ministers may be heard reading seruice: a
goodly proofe, For it was lawfull for the Pharisees to bee
preachers of the trueth, and it was a parte of their office
and ministerie: but it is not lawfull to be a blinde reading
minister, neither is it any parte of the ministerie, to reade
ouer such a stinted forme of seruice. Wherefore though I
may heare and like of that, which is truely preached, yet
doeth it not followe, that I shoulde heare, like of, or ioyne
with, that which is vngodly, and blasphemously spoken,
vttered or done. Againe he abuseth that place in Matthew,
saying, that it was cōmanded by Christ to heare the Scribes. There
is no cōmandement giuen to heare, but to do as they knewe
the Pharises taught truely. And though by occasion they
might heare them teaching trueth, yet were they separate
as was shewed before, from being their disciples: they were
not vnder their charge and ministerie, as those are nowe
vnder the dumbe ministers charge, whome Master Cartwright
doeth iustifie in hearing them, and receiuing the Sacraments
of them. Hee can not shewe that the Pharises
were no Leuites nor Priestes, and yet offered the sacrifices

as the Priestes And yet these doe minister the Sacrament
                  ••
               
and will be Priestes ouer the people, beyng neither to bee
counted brethren, nor Christyans. And though the Pharises
or Scribes had so farre vsurped, yet shoulde not the
people haue partaken with them in the sacrifices no more
ought the people at this day, to partake in the Sacraments
with such blinde ministers. But why doth not Master Cartwright
perceiue, that his owne proofe is against him selfe.
For if the Scribes and Pharises were to be heard because
they preached trueth, then are these dumbe ministers not
to bee hearde, because they are no preachers. But this
proofe fayling, Master Cartwright prepareth another,
namely this. The Scribes and Pharisees, were as vnfit and
as vnlawfull ministers, as our reading ministers, and yet
might be heard, therefore our reading minysters may bee
heard. Howe vnfitte ministers the Pharisees were, it is after
examined. We saye not, but that the dumbe ministers
may be heard. For if standing on the gallouse to be executed,
they say they woulde come downe, I knowe we maye
heare them. But the question whether we may be vnder
their charge and guiding, and so daily and vsually heare
them, as our spirituall guides, pastours, watchmen for our
soules, and ministers in the church. This Master Cartwright
can not prooue, and therefore his proofe serueth for another
matter, quite besides the question. Yea if he looke
well, this proofe serueth against him. For the disciples of
Christ were not to heare the Pharisees, as being their disciples
and vnder their charge, therefore may not we be vnder
the dumbe ministers charge, to heare them as our teachers,
and guides in Christ. Another proofe he giueth
thus: The dumbe ministers haue a calling by the Church,
as the scribes and Pharisees had: therefore wee may lawfully
heare them and receiue them as ministers. In this
proofe wee haue these matters to consider whether our
dumbe ministers haue as good a calling as the scribes and
Pharisees had. Whether the bishops and their officers that

call ministers are to be counted the Church: whether if the
church shoulde appoint and receiue a dumbe minister, he
had thereby any whit more authoritie▪ or were any whit the
rather to be receiued.Ezra 7. 6, 11. 
               It is certaine, that Ezra was a Scribe, and
a priest also of the sonnes of Aaron,
               Nehem. 8. 1, 2. 4. 
               as wee may reade in the
booke of Ezra, and Nehemiah. And in other places other Scribes
also were mentioned,
               Luke 11. 46. 
               which were both writers and preachers of
the Lawe and worde of God.
               Ezra 8. 16. 
               And therefore Christ saith, that
they sure in Moses seate.
               Ierem. 8. 8. 
               That is, as it is in the 8. of Ezra▪
               
               Nom. 3. 6. 
               They
were chosen being men of vnderstanding to preache,
               Exod. 29. 
               and minister
to the people as their office required.
               Mat 32. 35. 
               Yea by the Priestes and
Elders & consent of the Congregation were they chosen
               Nom. 8. 9. But dare
Master Cartwright say that our dumbe ministers are thus
chosen and called? or dare he say that they sit in Moses
seate? If then he bring it for a good profe, That the Scribes
& Pharises were to be heard, because they fate in moses seat, then
it is also a good or better proofe, That these dumbe ministers
doe not sit in moses seat, and therefore are not to be heard and receiued
as ministers. In the Church and assemblyes of the Iewes,
there could be 
                     〈…〉
                   dumbe ministerie suffered, as an ordinarie
office and calling.
               Deut. 33. 10. For herein consisted their ministerie, To
teach Iaacob the iudgements of God and Israel his lawes, to put
incense before his face, and the burnt offering vpon the altar And
so the dumbe minister can haue no office nor calling in the
Church seeing there is no such ministerie, nor parte of ministerie,
as to be a reading minister. Furthermore if Master
Cartwright saye, that the Bishoppes and their officers are
the Church, and that therefore the dumbe ministers are
called by the Church: First it is to bee shewed, that Master
Cartwright can not prooue them to bee the Churche,
yea it was prooued before, that they are not the Churche
of God.
            Then also he is against him selfe herein, for he confessed
before, That the dumbe ministers are thrust vpon the Churche,
and howe then can they bee called by the Churche: Thyrdely,

if they were called, and then both the maner of calling bee
altogether blasphemous and wicked and the office whereto
they are called, is none of the church offices and callings of
what weight or authoritie shall their calling be? Shall wee
haue strange offices and ministeries in the Church, which
God hath not appointed? or shall wee giue any authoritie
or reuerence vnto them, because men account of them? shal
the blasphemie and wickednesse of a number, though they
be named the Church, make me any whit the more, to receiue
a dumbe minister, because they doe wickedly and
blasphemously call and authorize him. Nay, I ought not to
followe a multitude to doe euill.
               Exod. 23. 2. For it is not as Master Cartwright
would haue it, that the moe which sinne in a matter,
the lesse the sinne is: but rather it is the more grieuous, and
more to be abhorred. And Paul giueth this libertie to Tim
                     •
                  
                  thie,
That though other men euen the Elders and people shoulde
choose any vnmeete minister,
               1. Tim. 5. 22. 
               yet hee shoulde not partake with
them in their sinne. And if in the acte of chusing, the authoritie
of the church is not to be regarded, when it shamefully
abuseth her authoritie, then also in the wickednesse & sinne
that is wrought by the choyse, it is lesse to be regarded. For
the reading ministerie is abominable wickednesse, and as it
first ouerthrewe the Churches of God,1. Tim. 3. and brought in Antichrist,
so it is still the doore and high way to all ignorance,
dissolutenesse, and all wicked practises and customes.
Wherefore let Master Cartwright laye away his fonde distinction
that they are ministers, though they be vnlawfull
ministers. For if the reading ministerie be no office nor calling
appointed by christ, then is it an office of Antichrist:
And why then shoulde he sticke so much on the worde minister, if
they be Antichristian and deuelish ministers? And what will he
make of the Church? It is indeede the house of the liuing
God, the piller and grounde of trueth. But Master Cartwright
will haue it to presume aboue Christ, and so will
make it an Antichrist. For if it ordeine strange ministeries
and offices in the church, which christ and his Apostles neuer

coulde doe nor woulde do, doeth it not presume aboue
Christ? Christ and his Apostles coulde not thrust,Luke 9 5. no not
lawfull ministers vpon any congregation.Mat. 10. 13, 14. Neyther coulde
he commande any Congregation or Church to receiue vnlawfull
ministers, and take them for their guydes. Yet by
Master Cartwrightes saying, we may receiue such: and if any
such be thrust vpon vs, we must account their ministery
to be sanctified, for the Churches sake which calleth them▪
Surely if the Church doe vsurpe and chalenge, such a power
of ruling, and such a holines in sanctifying, which christ
neuer had: it becommeth the church of Antichrist, and
quite ouerthroweth the kingdom and priesthood of christ.
            But let vs see further what M C. sayeth. He pleadeth for
the dumbe ministers, by comparing them still with the
Scribes and Pharises, also with the priestes and teachers in
the olde lawe, with the chiefe Priestes at Christs comming,
and with vnsufficient and vnable Magistrates. He wil haue
them to haue as lawfull a calling and ministerie as any of
these. The Scribes sayth he, taught vntruely & were deceiued
in the chiefe groūds of religion, & yet were to be heard
of the people: therefore our dumbe ministers are as lawful
ministers as they. Likewise he saith of the priests & of magistrates
that some of the priests were dumbedogs, & some
false teachers, and some had not so lawful calling, also that
some Magistrates are not lawfull & sufficient Magistrates
and yet neither the Scribes nor the priestes nor the magistrates
were to be reiected as no ministers nor Magistrats.
What true or false doctrine there is in all this, we will shew
by and by. But graunt it true which he sayth of the scribes,
Priestes, and Magistrates: namely that they were so euill,
as he sayeth, or taught such false doctrine, yet he him selfe
hath giuen the answere before, to condemne him selfe: For
he sayde that the Scrybes were not to bee heard, but in that
they taught trueth: and that our dumbe ministers were to
be heard and receiued so farre, as they can giue vs any thing
that is of Christ. Nowe it is shewed that a reading or dumb

ministerie is not of Christ, therefore we are not to receiue
or heare such a ministerie. Lykewise the Scribes when they
preached trueth, were to bee heard and receiued, therefore
these being no preachers, are not to be heard nor receiued.
The same may be sayde of Magistrates, that what duetyes
they are able and sufficient to doe, therein we may receiue
some good by them, therefore the dumbe ministers hauing
no ablenesse nor sufficiencie to that calling, are wholy to be
reiected. If he say that the reading of common seruice is
some ablenesse and sufficiencie of a minister, hee knoweth
well ynough that that is no parte, nor duetie of the ministerie.
For though it bee written That the Leuites reade
in the booke of the Lawe,
               Nehem. 8. 8. 
               and gaue the sense, and cause the people
to vnderstande the reading.
               Actes 15. 21. And againe in the Actes that Moses
was preached being read euery Sabbath: yet wee must not
thereby vnderstande a bare reading onely, neither a reading
of a stinted forme of seruice. For the order was, as appeareth
in Luke and in the Actes chap 13.Luke 4. 17. 
               to reade the Law and word of
God and then to preach vpon it.
               Actes 13. 15. And therefore as appeareth in
Nehemiah They read in the Booke of the Lawe, and preached
the sense and vnderstanding thereof to the people. And therefore
in Timothie,1. Tim. 4. 13. 
               Reading, exhortation, and doctrine are ioyned together.
If Master Cartwright doe further alleadge, that the
dumbe ministers haue some ablenesse or sufficiencie to minister
the Sacramentes, he likewyse knoweth that it is no
parte nor duety of the ministerye,Deut. 33. 10. to reade a consecration
of the Sacramentes,Eccles. 4. 17. neyther to minister the sacramentes,
without preaching,Mat. 28. 19. and much lesse without the power
and abilitie to preache.Actes 2. 42. This is manifest in the olde Lawe
as in Deuteromie, Ecclesiastes, and in other places. Likewise in
Newe Testament, as in Matthewe, Actes and sundry other places.
By all which places it is euident, That though preaching
may sometymes be without the present Acte of ministring the Sacramentes,
yet the Sacraments might neuer be ministred but of
preachers and with preaching. But nowe marke howe fondely
hee compareth dumbe Ministers to vnable or vnsufficient

magystrates, which shoulde rather bee compared to
Trayterous and vsurping Rebelles. For as anye vsurper
were wholy to bee reiected and withstoode, if hee shoulde
get from Her Maiestie her royall dignity and crowne, or
laye clayme thereunto: So also are these minysters to bee
reiected, which vsurpe a kyngdome and gouernement in
the Churche: when as they ought not to bee counted
brethren, nor members in the Churche. It agayne Master
Cartwright doe saye, that vsurping Traytours maye
geue vs our ryght, and wee are to take it, at theyr
handes: Wee aunswere, that this is the questyon, whether
the readyng of seruyce in that manner, and theyr
mynistring of Sacramentes bee ryght or no. Fyrst wee
shewed before, that such Sacramentes so mynistred, and
suche a readyng of Seruyce were execrable thynges
and also none of our ryght. But if they were our ryght,
yet a man is to take his ryght from vsurpyng Traytoures
by force of armes, if hee bee able. Or if hee bee not
able, hee shoulde rather loose his righte, then doe suite
and homage to a Traytour. In deede the Lordes Sacramentes
are our ryghte, and thankes bee to our Lorde
GOD, wee may haue them by other meanes, then by
the Dumbe Mynisters. And though wee coulde not,
yet wee shoulde not take our ryghte on a thyefe to iustyfie
his theeuerye.Iohn 10. 1. 
               For these hyrelynges are theeues and
robbers comming in by the windowe, as it is written. So wee
shoulde first followe the Lawe on them, to thrust them
out of the sheepefolde, and then see if wee can get our
right For if all such Ministers were excommunicate from
among the brethren, wee shoulde knowe the better, both
what were our ryght, and howe to come by it. Againe
Master C. distinguisheth, that to be able to teache is not of
the substance of a minister, but onely of a lawful minister,
also that to be able to iudge true iudgemēt is not of the substance
of a magistrate, but onely of a lawfull Magistrate

Such lyke sopperyes as these not worthie the answering, we
haue answered before. But here agayne we answere, that
the discipline of the Church and of the common wealth
are vnlike in this, that vngodly men, may bee sometymes
lawfull officers and magistrates in a common wealth: and
therefore Heathen Kynges, yea Idolatrous kinges and princes
are lawfull Magistrates at this daye▪ Otherwyse wee
shoulde condemne our owne Kinges and Queenes, which
heretofore haue bene Popish and Idolatrous, as beeing no
lawfull Magistrates: But in the Church of God, this holdeth
not. For if any be a wretched liuer, or an Idolater, hee
can neither be minister nor lawfull minister in the church:
yea he is no parte, nor member of the Church. Againe we
say, that if any be an vnlawfull minister, hee is a Minister
quyte out of the Church, as we prooued before, and then
what hath the churche to doe with hym? Master Cartwright
will needes haue hym to bee a minister, and we are
content: for he shall bee a minister, not for the Churche,
nor to haue any medling in the Churche, but for Satan and
for the children of Satan. Further wee answere accordyng
to hys manner of reasoning that to auoyde Idolatrye, or to
be no Idolater is not of the substance of a mynister but of a
lawfull mynister: for he may be a minister though he be an
Idolatrous minister. But shall wee therefore say that dayly
massemongers commyng openly from the masse, to mynister
the Sacramentes, in the same order that our dumbe
mynisters doe, shall be receyued of the brethren, or that
the brethen shall receyue the Sacramentes at theyr handes?
And yet agayne wee answere that if a man bee not a lawfull
minister, hee hath no essence nor substance of a mynister:
except we saye hee hath the substance of a deuelish
minister. For the lawfulnesse of a minister, and of his ministration,
is the essence and substance of a minister, and of his ministring.
Paul saith,Rom. 4 15. 
               that where no lawe is, there is no transgression.
He meaneth that because there is a lawe, therefore the breach of
that lawe, is the essence and substance of sinne and transgression.

The lawe saith he is it that causeth wrath: For it maketh sinne
to be sinne. Wherefore as that which is vnlawfull or against
the lawe of God, hath the being and essence of sinne: so it
must needs folow, that the lawfulnes of anything is the being
the essence & substance of the same & therfore also that
the lawfulnes of ministers is the essence, & substance of ministers.
And so we see how vayne his distinction is, that a
mā may haue the substāce of a minister, & yet be no lawful
minister. I would not so readily vse such schoole tearmes &
words, as is essence, substāce, & being, if I were not forced
thereto by his vngodly subtleties. And surely except god in
iudgement haue blinded his eyes, he may well perceiue thē,
not only to be vngodly, but altogether childish & vnlearned
            Nowe we come to answere other matters, which fall out
of the former proofes. As that he saith, the Scribes were altogether
deceiued in the Messiah. He might rather saye,
they were ignorant, in some mysteries of the Messiah, then
all together deceiued. And so Paul saith of them, That had
they knowen,
               1. Cor. 2. 8. 
               they woulde not haue crucified the Lorde of gloríe.
And Peter also saith That the people did it of ignorance,
               Act. 3. 17. 
               as also
did their gouernours. Yea the Apostles them selues were a
long time ignorant in some mysteries of the Messiah. And
Christ testifieth that many Prophetes and righteous men desired
to see and heare those thinges which the Apostles sawe and
heard,
               Mat. 13. 17. 
               but did not see nor heare them.
               Luke 10. 24. Yea saith Peter,
               1. Pet 1. 12. 
               The Angels
desire to beholde these thing concerning the sussering and glorye
of Christ:
               1. Tim 3. 16. And therefore Paul calleth this a great mysterie,
that God sho
                     •
                  ld be manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spirite,
seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the
worlde, and receiued vp in glorie. The Scribes and Pharises
knewe that the Messiah shoulde come,Mat. 22. 4
                     •
                  . 
               that he was the holy
one & annointed of God,
               Iohn 4 25. 
               as appeareth by their answere to Christ.
The woman of Samaria knewe that hee shoulde be the annointed
Prophet, and tell them all things. All the Priestes and Scribes
knewe that he was borne King of the Iewes,
               Mat. 2. 6. 
               that he was the gouernour
and high Shephearde of Israel that shoulde feede the people.
               
They knewe the prophecies that were of him, that are
written in Daniel,
               Dan. 7. 14. 
               in Micah,
               Mith. 4. 7. 
               in Isaiah,
               Isa 7. 14. &c. 
               in Ieremie and the rest.
               Ioh. 6. 14. 15.
               Both they and the people coulde readily rehearse such prophecies
at their fingers ende,
               Ioh. 12. 34. 
               as where he shoulde be borne, whose sonne he
was, what was his office, what great workes he shoulde doe, what
saluation he shoulde worke to his people, what sufferinges he should
endure, and what shoulde be his glorie. But Master Cartwright
sayeth, They knewe not that Iesus was the sonne of God, neither
howe the Godhead and manhoode shoulde bee together as in one.
I answere that no more did the Apostles, for a tyme: neyther
can any man search this mysterie to the deapth. For
Thomas and Philippe knewe not,
               Iohn 14. 5, 8. 
               as we may reade in Iohn, How
Christ shoulde ascende into heauen to his father, and come againe,
that the Father shoulde be in the sonue and the sonne in the
Father. Peter also and the rest,Iohu 16. 17. were ignorant in such mysteries
as appeareth in other places.Ioh. 13. 37. 
               Yea they dreamed of a
worldly kingdome and a worldly deliuerauce,
               Luke 24. 21. 
               which shoulde be by
Christ,
               Actes 16. 
               as is manifest in the Actes and in Luke. Wherefore
though they beleeued not that that Iesus which was then
come in the flesh, was the Sonne of God, yet they beleeued
and knewe the prophecies. Namely that he was to be called
Immanuel, that is God with vs. Againe they knewe another
prophecie of Isaiah, That he shoulde be called by Name,
Wonderfull,
               Isa. 7. 
                     •
                  4. 
               Counseller, 
                     •
                  he mightie God &c. that he sho
                     •
                  lde sit
vpon the throne of Dauid,
               Isa 9. 6. 
               and vpon his kingdome, and his gouernement
shoulde haue none ende. They knewe of whome
that prophecie was giuen in the fourescore and nynthe
Psalme,Psal 89. 26. 
               Hee shall crye vnto me
               Psal. 2. 7. 12., thou art my Father, my God,
and the ro
                     •
                  ke of my saluation, also I will make him my first borne,
higher then the Kinges of the earth. Therefore they coulde
not bee ignorant, that the Christ was the Sonne of God.
They knewe also that they were to trust in the Sonne, as
it is written, Thou art my Sonne, this daye haue I begotten
thee. K
                  •
               sse the Sonne least he be angrie, and ye perishe
in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly burne, Blessed
are all that trust in him. So they well knewe that as hys

wrath was destructiō, so to trust in him, was blessing and salutiō.
sTherefore it is not truely sayd, that they were altogether
deceiued in the Messiah. Rather it is true that they were
ignorant but in these two poyntes. First,Ioh. 6. 51. 
               howe that particular
man being so poore despised
               Ioh. 10. 3
                     •
                  ., and afflicted, shoulde be the Messiah,
and secondly howe he being man shoulde be God also, and
come downe from heauen, to be Manna for the people. So then,
so long as they helde the generall fayth and beleefe, concerning
the Messiah, and were ignorant, whether that
particular man was the Messias, I say this ignoraunce for
the time was no open ouerthrowe of any grounde of Religion.
For the Apostles were commaunded not to preache
Christ particularly to bee the Messiah,Mat. 16. 20. till after his resurrection.
And the fayth of the holye Fathers before time
suffised to saluation, though particularly they knewe not
Christ,Heb. 1
                     •
                  . 13. 39. neither receiued the promises, as sayeth the text,
But sawe them a farre off, and beleeued them, and receiued them
thankefully. Whereas the wordes are, that they receiued not
the promises, and yet receiued them thankefully, it is
meant that they receiued not the particular perfourmance
of those promises in Christ, but onely the bare promises
that were afterwarde to be fulfilled. In this fayth they
dyed▪
                sayeth the text,verse 3
                     •
                  . and yet no doubte they were saued.
Therefore it was not this particular ignorance that condemned
the Pharisees, but their frowarde refusing of a
further knowledge. If Ma-ster Cartwright say that they
being so frowarde, yet the faithfull did ioyne with them,
it is manifest to the contrary.Actes 2. 40. 
               For the holy Ghost commaunded
them to saue them selues from that frowarde generation: and so
they did. For they ioyned with the faithfull onely,
               Actes 5. 13. 
               and of the other
sorte, sayeth the text, meaning them which beleeued
not, durst no man ioyne him selfe to them. And the man
whome the Pharisees did cast out,
               Iohn 9. 35. 
               or excommunicate, chr
                     •
                  st tooke
him vnto him as his disciple. Whereby it is manifest that
Christ both despised and condemned all communion in
the Church, with such of them as were persecuters.
            
               
Wheseas Master Cartwright sayeth, that the Scribes and
Pharises taught iustification by workes, he hath graunted
before, that preaching false doctrine, they were not to bee
heard: and therefore the dumbe ministers, being no preachers
at all, are not to bee heard. But if they taught that
doctrine, yet they taught but a true doctrine, except they
taught it as our Papistes doe at tthis day. For the Scripture
sayeth. That the man that shall doe the workes of the lawe, shall
liue in them,
               Gal. 3. 12. or haue life by them.Rom. 10. 5. So then hee that can keepe
the Lawe,Ezek. 20. 11. without breach of the lawe,Deut 30. 12. shall be iustified by
the Lawe. But Master Cartwright can not prooue, that it
was a common doctrine among the Pharisees, that any man
coulde keepe the Lawe, without breach thereof. Yea there
is proofe to the contrary. For the chiefe Priest did once euery
yeere offer a sinne offering, to make an atonement for him selfe,
for his house,
               Leuit. 16. 6, 21. 
               and for all the people.
               H
                     •
                  b. 9. 
                     •
                  . Likewise were sundry other
offeringes and sacrifices obserued,
               exod. 30. 10. 
               both for the sinnes of the priests,
and of the people: which doeth plainely prooue, that by one
common doctrine they acknowledged all to bee sinners,
and to haue neede of the grace and mercie of God. What
then is to be meant By those heauie burdens,
               Luke 11, 46. 
               which they layde
on mens shoulders.
               Mat. 23. 4. 
               Master Cartwright sayeth, They were the
burdens of the morall lawe, that is, the dueties of righteousnesse,
which all men perpetually ought to obserue and doe. Surely this
burden, both Christ him selfe, and all the Apostles and prophets
doe lay on vs more straightly then euer did the Pharisees.
For what strayght commaundements doeth Christ
geue,Mat. 5▪ 
                  
                     •
                  9. &c. 
               Against vnaduised anger,
               Mat. 5. 28. 
               reproching, offences, against lust
of the heart, wanton lookes, and all occasions of sinne. Also against
swearing, against reuenge, against hatred, against hypocrisie,
against distrustfulnesse, and a number such like. And he
threatneth in the fift of Matthewe, That for breaking the
least commandement,
               Verse 19. 
               a man shall bee thrust out of the kingdome
of God. And howe often is the burden of the Lorde, the
burden of the Lorde, repeated in the Prophetes? wherefore
that burden or yoke is rather meant, which is named

in the Actes, That they tempted God to lay a yoke on the disciples
neckes,
               Actes 15. 10▪
                
               which neither they, nor their fathers were able to
beare. This burden was the ceremonies of the olde Lawe,
which were more intollerable to others, then to the Scribes
and Pharises. For they being most of them Priestes and
Leuites, were not to bring their tythes, first fruites, and offringes
to Ierusalem, as did others, from all quarters round
about. For they dwelt at, or about Ierusalem, especially
those whome Christ rebuketh, or else came to Ierusalem to
minister in their course. And they tooke tythes and payed
none,Leuit. 18. 29. saue onely the tenth parte of the tythes that were
brought them. They did very straightly looke to their
tenthes, and to all clensings, purifyings, vowes and offrings
&c. for they were their liuing and maintenance. Wherefore
it being a great trouble and burden to others, to come from
all places of the worlde, to Ierusalem euery yeere, as the
Lawe then did bynde them, also to pay their vowes and
their tenthes and first fruites, and to obserue their purifyings
&c. and no trouble at all to the Scribes which kept at
Ierusalem, no maruaile though Christ say they layed heauie
burdens vpon other mēs shoulders, but would not touch them, them
selues with the leact of their fingers. For there being an hundreth
occasions in the yeere,Leuit. 15. 12. 13, 14 &c. whereby the people might become
vncleane,Colos 2. 21. as by touching,Nom. 19. 11, 12, 13. &c. 16. tasting,Leuit. 5. handling,Rom. 9. 32. by the
death of any that should dye by them by diseases, by ignorances
and escapes &c. they were to bee cleansed by the
sprinckeling water, and to bring their offeringes to Ierusalem.
But Master Cartwright might haue alleadged a more
likely proofe then these, out of the Romanes: namely That
Israel sought not righteousnesse by faith, but as it were by the
workes of the Lawe: for they haue stumbled at the stumbling
stone. For answere hereto, we shewed before, that the Israelites
made a profession of their faith in the Messiah, euen till the
tyme, that he plainely shewed him selfe: and then they reiecting
him, and yet beleeuing that he was still to come, their faith became
as no faith: they beleeued in a Messiah which was to come,

but they stumbled at him which was come. And so he was vnto
them that stumbling stone, and rocke of offence. And so this
worde (as,) or (as it were) is well added of Paul. For hee
meaneth, that their doctrine and profession, was not openly
nor directly to seeke righteousnesse by the bare Lawe,
but by their rebellion against the Messiah that was come,
they did as much and as they tearme it, indirectly. So as it
were they sought righteousnesse by the Lawe, when they
kept the ceremonial law, without the Christ that was come,
though not simply without the Christ they looked for▪ yea
they 
                  •
               eleeued that the ceremonies did still offer and represent
Christ vnto them, & so made profession that to keepe
the ceremonial law, was to keepe their faith and beleefe in
Christ But they hauing refused Christ cōe alreadie, and christ hauing
abolished that law, they might well be said to seek righteousnes
without faith in christ. Thus it is manifest that the doctrine &
sacrifices of the Iewes was to haue righteousnes and atonement
by Christ, whome their sacrifices did signifie: but
their deeds and practise in refusing Christ, was as much, as
to seeke righteousnesse by the law. Nowe those which refused
christ,
               Actes 5. 13. 
               and beleeued not in him,
               Actes 2. 40. 
               were vtterly separate as was
shewed before from the communion and fellowship of the churche.
And therefore this matter is altogeter against him.Luke 18. 9. 
               As for
that place of luke, he abuseth it too much: for the parable of a pharise,
which speaketh of matters, as though they were, when in deede
they were not, he alleadgeth for proofe of all the Pharisees
doctrine. First, the fault of one Pharise if he had bene faultie,
can not prooue them all faultie: then also the parable
of a fault, doeth shewe it to be no fault committed, but imagined
or supposed, as if it were committed. Thirdlye
Christ in that place, mindeth not to rebuke any doctrine of
the Scribes and Pharisees, but as the text sayeth, he spake a
parable vnto certaine, which trusted in them selues, that
they were iust, and despised others. None are named to
teeche any such doctrine, but certaine are rebuked for trusting
in themselues, wherefore the like proofe to this, might

I alleadge against him: namely that very many in England
both preachers, and others doe trust in their riches, or
power, or wisedome or good workes &c. Therefore the
preachers in Englande doe teach men to trust in thēselues.
But as this proofe is fonde, so the conclusion that followeth
is according▪ For he concludeth that the dumbe ministerie
is as lawful and good, as the ministerie of the Scribes:
which taught vntruely, saith he, in the chiefe grounds of religion.
Although he cannot proue such vntrue doctrine, yet
howe doeth it followe, that their ministerie, which faileth
in all poyntes, shoulde bee as good as theirs, which fayleth
but in some poyntes. For the dumbe ministers wee
prooued, to haue no parte nor worke in the ministerie,
And the Scribes hee confessed before to sit in Moses seate,
to teache true doctrine, to haue a calling by the Churche.
Agayne they must needes edifie more, which preache
much trueth, then they whiche are no preachers at all.
But the Scripture is playne, that if anye preache muche
trueth, and yet doe preache heresies withall, they are to be
auoided: as it is written,Tit. 3. 10. Reiect him that is an heretike,Mat, 18.
after once or twise admonition. And though the Churche
is to admonishe such, yet if it will not or can not, then any
man particularly hath this libertie to admonishe, except
for his scornefulnesse and obstinacie he be vnworthie.
And then we are forbidden to receiue them to house,2 Ioh. 10.
or to bid them God speede.Rom. 16▪ 17. And howe then shall we take
them for our guydes and pastours in the Church, or say (Amen)
to their prayers? And here followeth that vntrueth
to be refuted, which he addeth in these wordes, that the true
Prophets are neuer founde to haue forbidden the people
to come to the sacrifice of the false prophets,Isa. 56. 10. and of the
priestes that were dumbe dogges, neither to bring their sacrifices
vnto them. First euen that place of blinde watchmen
and dumbe dogs, which hee quoteth amisse, is against
him selfe.Hag. 2. 13▪ 14. For there was a Lawe, that the priestes being vn
               
                  ••
               tane,
they might neither touch nor eat of the holy things: if they

did,
               Leuit. 22. 5, 6. 
               then those thinges were polluted.
               Nom. 6. Nowe to drinke wine or
strong drinke was a pollution both of the Nazarites and
Priestes:Leuit. 10. of the Priestes I say,Malal. 1, 7. when they came into the
Tabernacle of the congregation to offer sacrifice.Isa 52. 11. Howe
then shoulde the people partake in the Sacrifices with
Priestes that were common drunkardes.Nom. 19. 
               For the people are
commaunded not to touche any vncleane thing:
               Leuit. 22. and therefore
those sacrifices being vncleane, howe shoulde the people
haue any thing to doe with them? Nowe suche drunkards
were those dumbe dogges which hee nameth, as is there
mencioned: they were greedie dogges, which sayde, Come, I will
bring wine,
               vers. 11. 12. 
               and we will fill our selues with strong drinke, and to
morowe shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Wherefore
being such, howe coulde they put difference, as it is
commaunded in Leuiticus, Betweene the holy and the vnholy,
and betweene the cleane and the vncleane.
               Leuit. 10. 10. And howe then
shoulde not all their sacrifices be polluted? There be maplaces
which shewe, that the priestes polluted them selues,
and the holy thinges: as in Ezekiel, Her priestes desile myne
holy thinges,
               ezek. 22. 
               they put no difference betweene the holy and prophane,
neither discerne betweene the vncleane and the cleane, and
in Hagga
                  •
               ,Hag. 2. 15. 
               that which they offer here is vncleane:
               Mal. 1. and in Malachie,
Ye offer vncteane bread vpon mine altar &c. Also in
sundry places, as is quoted before, commaundement is giuen
not to touch any vncleane thing: Wherefore it is a
flat commandement euen to all the people, not to touche
those polluted sacrifices of the Priestes, not to communicate
nor partake with them therein. Therefore in his own
place quoted out of Isaiah,Isa. 56. 9. is that terrible iudgement pronounced
both against priestes and against peeople, though
onely the sinne of the priestes or watchemen is named.
The wordes are these, All yee beastes of the fielde come to deuorr,
euen all ye beastes of the forest. And then followe these
wordes, their watchemen are all blinde &c. as who say, that
the people, because they did partake with such watchemen,
they shoulde also perish with them▪ If Ma-ster Cartwright
               
say, the pollutions we speake of, were by Idolatrie:
let him knowe that Malachie spake to those, which were
no Idolaters, which also had a generall reformation from Idolatrie:
Likewise Haggai prophecied in a time of reformation,
and spake to those which were no Idolaters. And Ezekiel in that
Chapter, mentioneth no Idolatrie, but rebuketh other wickednesse,
as it were seuering it from Idolatrie. For in the next Chapter,
he toucheth their sinne of Idolatrie more particularly. And
to those that accounted so much of the Temple, and of the
sacrifices, as Master Cartwright doeth of his Churches and
Sacraments,Isa. 66. 3. 
               Isaiah saith thus, The heauen is my throne saith the
Lord, and the earth is my footestoole, and so he proceedeth to
rebuke their vaine bragge of the Temple, and then commeth
to their sacrifices, saying, He that killeth a bullocke, is as
if he slewe a man, he that sacrificeth a sheepe, as if he cut off a
dogges necke: he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swynes
blood: he that remembreth incense, as if he blessed an Idol: by
which wordes it is plaine that he rebuketh euen those, that
detested Idoles, and swynes blood &c. and telleth them,
that their sacraments are no sacraments, they are vncleane
and polluted, as the most vile filthinesse, which they themselues
abhorred. If he say, that yet to the godly in those
dayes, the sacrifices were lawfull and good, I aunswere that
the godly had uo medling with such wicked men, nor with
their sacrifices. For in the seconde verse after hee speaketh
thus to the godly,Verse 5. 
               Heare the worde of the Lorde, all ye that
tremble at his worde, your brethren that hated you, and cast you
out for my Names sake, sayde, let the Lorde be glorified: but hee
shall appeare to your ioye and they shall bee ashamed. So then
there was a great separation betweene the righteous and
the wicked in those dayes: in so much that the righteous
forsooke all fellowshippe in their sacrifices, and the wicked
cast them out from among them. If Master Cartwright say
that the righteous forsooke not their sacrifices, but were cast
out from them,Isa. 59. 15. it is answered in another place That while
they refrained from euill, they made them selues a pray to the wicked.

So then the cause why they were cast out was, because they
woulde not partake with the wicked in their wickednesse. If
Master Cartwright saye that that was for other wickednesse,
but not for their refusing to partake in the sacrifices,
It is,
               1. Sam. 2 17. 
               said in Samuel That for the wickednesse of the priests,
men abhorred the sacrifices. If he say againe, that they did euill
to abhorre thē, he can not prooue it: & it is euident that
they were of the better sorte that did so. For in Malache it is
written, that they which feared the Lorde, spake euery one to his
neighbour,
               Mal. 3. 16. 17, 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               cōcerning the abuses and wickednes of those dayes: and
the Lord sheweth the badge and marke of all his flocke and people,
namely that they should returne & discerne betwene the righteous
and the wicked: betweene him that serueth God, and him that serueth
him not: As who say, that euery one of the righteous
had libertie and were commaunded, to haue no communion
with the wicked in the Churche: and howe then
shoulde they be ioyned with them in the neerest communion,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3 4.
namely in the Sacramentes. And in the same
Chapter it is prophecied, That the offeringes of Iudah and
Ieerusalem shoulde bee acceptable to the Lorde, as in the olde

                     •
                  yme,
               Mal. 1. 10. 
               aud in the yeeres afore,
               Mal. 2. 8, 9, 10, 13. and that was, when the sonnes
of Leui (which figured all the righteous shoulde bring
offeringes vnto the Lorde in righteousnesse. For he shewed
in the Chapters before, that while open and grosse wickednesse
was incurable among them, both the priestes and
Leuites brake the couenant, and also the people, & the offerings
were no more regarded, neither receiued acceptably at
their hands.1. Sam. 
                     •
                  . As for the sacrisices of Elkanah and his wiues,
they were offered by the ministerie of Eli, as appeareth in
that place, and not by his wicked sonnes. Nowe Elie was
rather negligent, in correcting his sonnes, then a grosse
transgressour, and therefore might Elkanah the rather
partake in the sacrifices with him. But wee reade in the
Psalmes,Psal. 15. 4. That a vyle person is contemned in the eyes of
righteous: howe then shall a ryghteous man, receiue the
Sacramentes with such, as with brethren in the Churche?

               Dauid prayeth that hee might not commit wicked workes, with
men that worke iniquitie,
               Psal. 1 41, 4. 
               and that he myght not eate of their
delicates: and howe then woulde he eate of their sacrifices,
which are the chiefest delicates. If hee saye, that Dauid
woulde not eate common bread with such, it is euident
that hee daily did so, in the house of Saul. And this matter
is before made plaine. And in the Prouerbes it is written,
They that forsake the Lawe prayse the wicked,pro. 28. 4. but
they that keepe the Lawe set them selues against them.
Howe shall they set them selues against them, when they
ioyne with them as brethren in the Sacramentes. Iudah
was sayde to defile the holinesse of the Lorde, because
some in Iudah did marrye the daughter of a straunge
God: yea and this was counted a synne, transgression,Mal. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Ezr. 9. 1. Nehem. 9. and
abomination committed by all Israel and Iudah, and Ierusalem,
though some onley had marryed such women.
Wherefore were they all guiltie of transgression, but because
they did not, or would not redresse such wickednes.
For it had bene the duetie of euery one, as appeareth in Ezra
and Haggai, to haue offred no oblatiōs, nor to haue partaken
with any such in the sacrisices, till such opē wickednes,
had bene taken away.Hag. 2. 15. Otherwise Haggai woulde not haue
saide, that all the workes of their handes, and that whiche
they offered there was vncleane: neither would Ezra haue
rent his clothes, nor pluckt off the heare of his head, and of
his beard, nor haue saide that they all were before the Lord
in their trespasse, and therefore could not stand before the
Lord because of it. And surely their sin of marrying strange
wiues, did but figure out our sinne of mingling and intermedling
the Churches: For the daughters of Antichrist, I
meane those wicked prelates & popish officers are yet married
to our churches: The papists & wicked men are thrust
into our churches to receiue the sacraments with vs. Their
discipline is the nurture & lady mystres ouer our churches.
If M. C. aske what proofe we haue, that their marriage, I
meane of the Iewes, was anye figure or Ceremonie,

let him reade that of Paul to the Ephesians, where Paul
calleth marriage a secrete or mysterie,Eph. 5. 32. and sheweth there,
that marriage was a signe or figure of the ioyning together
of Christ and his Church:Song. 6 8. Reuel. 21. 9. also in the song of Salomon
this is manifest, and in the Reuelation and sundry other
places. Dauid sheweth with whome the godly did partake
in the sacrifices, when he saith, I haue not haunted with
vaine persons, neither kept companie with the dissemblers,
I haue hated the assemblie of the euill, and haue not cō
               panied
with the wicked, and then followe these wordes, I
will wash mine handes in innocencie ô Lord and compasse
thine altar.Psal. 26. 4. Which wordes doe teache vs, that when we receiue
the sacraments, we can not wash our handes in innocencie,
except we receiue them apart from the wicked. For
the order of the Iewes was to partake in the sacrifices, familie
by familie, as we may reade in sundry places. And
therefore they might more easily auoyde the companie of
the wicked. And the Iewes contended against Peter,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . because
he went in to men vncircumcised,Act. 1
                     •
                   3. & had eaten with
them, which sheweth howe straite they were, for auoyding
all company with the wicked. It is lawfull indeede to
eate with Publicanes and sinners as Christ also did, but yet
to eate the Lordes supper with opon vnrepentant &Marke 2. 15. wretched
persons is not lawfull. For as I may not offer myne
owne oblation,Mat. 5. 23. when I remēber that a brother hath ought
against me,Mat. 9. 13. much lesse may I partake in another mans offring,Hose 6. 6.
when I haue ought against him.Mat. 18. 15. Yea mercie and pitie
in seeking to reforme him is preferred before sacrifice.
So that, except he be obstinate and a scorner, I am gentlie
to admonishe him, and if he be yet hardened in his sinne, I
am as Iude saith,Iude 
                     •
                  3. to saue him with feare, pulling him out
of the fire▪ what is this feare which shoulde saue him, but
to make him afraide, by sharper rebukes, and refusing to
partake with him in the Sacraments. For he will be afraide
of nothing, so long as I take him for a brother, and ioyne
with him in the sacraments. But this is strange that Master

Cartwright sayeth, that the true prophetes did not forbidde
the people, to communicate with the false prophetes in
the sacrifices. For commandement is giuen,
               Deut▪ 13. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 
               not onely not to communicate
with false prophets,
               Deut. 1
                     •
                  . 2. 
               but euen to kill them,
               Luke 17. 23. 
               and our hands
to be first against them.
               Zechn. 13. 3. 
               yea though they were onr brethren,
               Gal. 1. 8. 
               or
our owue children, or the wife that lyeth in our bosome, or our
friende, which is as our owne soule: yet our eyes may not pitie
him nor shew mercie vnto him, saith the text. If Master Cartwright
say that this was commaunded for Idolatrous prophets,
why then did he not make that exception. But wee
haue shewed before, that for heresie also, the false prophets are
not to be bidden God speede, and are vtterly to be auoyded. yea
they are to be put to death as well as the other,
               Deut. 18. 20. 
               as againe it is
written in Deuterononie 18. 20. And it is testified in Nombers,
               Titus 3. 10.
               against the people,
               2. Iohn 10. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               that they shoulde make them fringes,
               Rom. 16. 1
                     •
                  . 
               that when
they looked vpon them,
               Nom. 15. 39. 
               they might remember all the commaundements
of the Lorde and doe them, and that they sought not after
their owne heart, and after their owne eyes, after the which they
went a whoring▪
                which wordes doe teache vs, that all heretikes
and false prophets doe goe a whoring after their owne
heartes, and are as euill,
               Ierem. 23. 16. 
               as Idolaters.
               Deut. 17. 12. And wherefore is it cō
               manded,Gal. 1 8.
               that the man which hearkeneth not to the voyce of the
high Priest, (which 
                     •
                  igureth the voyce of Christ in his Churche)
shoulde die? which wordes doe shewe, That false prophetes
that will not be reformed, are to be 
                     •
                  ad in execration and auoyded
of men. And howe then should the people partake with
them in the sacrifices. Yea the Iewes had that custome, 
                  •
               s
it appeareth from their forefathers,Iohn 9. 22, 34, 35. and from the former
Prophetes, To excommunicate the fals
                     •
                   Pro
                     •
                  hets and those that
beleeued them, and therefore they did wickedly excommunicate the
blinde man, that beleeued in christ. And the custome of punishing
false prophetes,Iere 29. 26. is alleadged in Ieremie, though wickedly
and by a false prophet. And whereas it is commaunded
in Ieremie,Zech. 13. 6. Iere. 23. 16. Ie
                     •••
                   27. 9. 14, 15
                     •
                   16, 17, 18 
               That the people shoulde not heare the wordes of
the false prophetes, is it not also a commandement, that they should
not partake with them in the sacrifices? For the sacrifices and

sacraments are but a seale to the worde that is preached.
So the false prophetes hauing a false worde and a false
message, if the people shoulde partake with them in the
sacraments, they did thereby seale vnto their false message,
as if it were true.
            Againe that anye dumbe dogges, which coulde not
barke did minister the sacrisices, Master Cartwright can
not prooue.Deut. 33. 10. yea before we haue prooued the contrary,Eccle. 4. 17.
               For the sacrifices were alwayes ministred as is shewed before,
               Leuit, 1. 4. 
               by
Priestes that coulde preache and did preache.
               Chap. 3. 2. 
               The occasion for
which the sacrifice was offered, was shewed before. The sinnes of
those that brought the sacrifice, was confessed ouer the head of
the Sacrifice &c. All these thinges are manifest in the olde
Lawe. Indeede there were dumbe dogges, among the priestes (for
there were diuers cities, which belonged to the Priestes
onely) yet none snche being able,
               Chap. 4 4. 
               nor vsing to minister the sacrifices,
               Mal. 2. 7, 8.
wee speake not here of Idolatrous sacrifices) I saye
it is follye to imagine▪ that the people did bring their sacrifices
to such. But yet if they did bring, we haue prooued before
that they ought not to haue done so.
            If Master Cartwright saye that the Churche indeede
might refuse the false prophetes and put them from the
sacrifices, but not euery particular man in the Churche:
I aunswere that the question is not of forbidding and debarring
from the sacrifices, but of withdrawing our selues
from wicked companions in the sacrifices. And so it followeth
that if the whole Churche ought not to communicate
with such in the sacrifices, then no part nor member
of the Churche ought to communicate: and if the whole
Churche doe sinne and commit wickednesse by communicating
with suche: then if any amongest them will refuse
to communicate, they shall doe well, and shall not
sinne thereby. That the whole Churche ought not to communicate,
but to cast out such from amongest them, it is
prooued before.Phil. 1. 17, 18. But here is that place of Paul to be answered,
which the aduersaryes lay against vs: whiche is

that some preache Christ of enuie and strife, and some also
of good will, and Paul reioyceth that Christ is preached
all manner wayes. By which wordes they woulde gather,
that we may communicate in the Churche with false teachers,
false prophetes, heretikes, and vngodly wretches.
Howe shamelessely they gather this,Phil. 3. 2▪
                euen Paul in the same
Epistle answereth them: for he biddeth them beware of
dogges, beware of euill workers: beware of the concision.
Woulde Paul haue dogges and euill workers to communicate
in the Churche? Nay doeth he not call them concision
from the Church: meaning that if they preached
circumcision, they must needes be cut off from the Church,
and others also with them. And so their circumcision,
shoulde rather be concision, that is a cutting and renting of
the Churche in sunder. Paul is so farre from reioysing in
such preachers,Verse 18. 19. that in the eighteenth verse he geueth warning
of them, with weeping teares, and calleth them enemies
of the crosse of Christ, belligods, proude and worldly
men, and appointed to damnation.Gal. 5. 12. And Paul would not
onely not suffer the churche to communicate with such,
as is largely prooued before, but wisheth they were euen
dead and destroyed which so did disquiet the churche.
What is then to be meant by Paules ioy, that Christ was
preached all manner wayes? Surely this, that so the church
and the discipline thereof were kept vpright, we neede not
care for the enemies thereof. yea and if in the churche also,
the doctrine of hypocrites doe more good; then their secret
faultes can doe hurt, we are therein to reioyce. For Paul

                  •
               peaketh of the enuie and contentious minde of such preachers,
and not of anye grosse wickednesse that brake foorth
by them. Further if some be deceiued in doctrine, and bee
otherwyse mynded then the trueth is,Phil. 3. 15. God shall reueile
the same vnto them sayeth Paul: he meaneth so long as
they are weakelings and not obstinate enemies. For ignonorance,
so long as it is not a sotted nor wilfull ignorance,

nor ioyned with other grosse wickednesse, is to bee borne
with. But if any man abuse his ignorance so,M
                     •
                  t. 5. 19. that he breaketh
but the least commaundement, and teacheth men so,
as Christ hath tolde vs, he shall be called the least in the
kingdome▪ of heauen: that is, he shall be cleane cast out of
the kingdome or if any man by his ignorance or false doctrine
be contentious, we haue no such custome, saieth Paul,
neither the Churches of God. Yea the custome of the
Church is▪
               1 Cor. 11. 16. Rom. 16. 17. as it is written againe, To marke those diligentlye,
which cause diuision amongest vs, contrary to the trueth we haue
learned▪ and to auoyde them. Howe then shoulde Paul reioyce
in contentious preaching? Surely as Paul reioyced, so
Christ desired to haue contention in the worlde. Contention
I say in the worlde,Luke 12 49, 50, 51. Mat. 10. 34. but not in the Church. For I came
not sayeth Christ to giue peace on earth, but rather debate.
I am come, saith he, to put fire on the earth, and what is my
desire if it were alreadie kindled? For from hencefoorth
there shall be fiue in one house deuided, three against two,
and two against three. The father against the sonne, and the
sōne against the father &c. Now there is a lawful ioy in this
cōtention, not that mē shuld be so wicked, nether that such
contention shoulde be among the true professors, but that
the warfare against wickednes is begun, and that the treuth
worketh and preuaileth thereby: This was Pauls ioy, and
this should be our ioy,1. Cor. 11. 20. if mē in the world fall out, contend,
and disagree about the Gospel: for then shall the trueth be
sifted and boulted out, and the Church of Christ shalbe
builded, and growe the more mightely. But Paul discommendeth
contention in the Church, and saith, that when
they come together into one place, with such dissention among
them, this is not to eate the Lordes Supper. And
here also is that place answered, that some men did build
hay or stubble in the spirituall buylding,1. Cor. 3. 13, 14. 15. & so their worke
cānot abyd the fyer of Gods word, but shall burne, yet they
shalbe safe thēselues Paul thereby rebuketh their vaine eloquence

& other insirmities in preaching, as being but ha
                  •
               e
and stubble that shall burne, but they them selues being purified
from such infirmities as it were by fire, shall be safe.
yea and though some be false apostles,2. Cor. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . yet if they worke so
deceitfully, and so cunningly transforme them selues, that
none can prooue them to be obstinate false teachers, nor
charge them with open grosse wickednesse, they are to bee
suffered as brethren in the churche. But it is be
                  •
               ere sufficiently
prooued that if any be an obstinate heretike, or an open
wicked wretch, he is not to be suffered.
            Againe the aduersaries doe set the practise of the Apostles
and brethren against vs,Act. 1. 224. which did communicate, as
they say, in the offerings and sacrifices of the wicked Iewes
and persecuting priestes.Mat. 8. 4. And Master Cartwright bringeth
in Christ, who commanded the leprous man, purged from
his leprosie, to shewe him selfe to the priest, and to offer his
oblation. To them both we answere, that neither the Apostles
& brethren did communicate with the wicked Iewes
and persecuting priestes, neither also was the leprous man
commanded to communicate in that manner. For they
were of the brethren, as is plaine in the text, with whome
Paul did contribute in that matter of purifying. And it is
written, that a great companie of the Priestes, were obedient
to the faith.Act. 6. 7. And therefore no doubt of it, the Apostles
made choise of the priestes, as they did of those foure
brethren, with whome Paul did contribute & other priests
besides the high priest might accomplish the common seruice
of the sacrifices,Heb. 9. 6, 7. 
               Hebrewes 9. If they say that the sacrifices
and oblations were sanctified in the name of the wicked
hie priests, we denie it: For the beleeuers did know that
Christ the high Priest was come alreadie, and therefore in
his name they tooke the sacrifices to be sanctified, and not
in the name of the other priestes. Moreouer it is manifest,
that they did not communicate, neither offer any offering,
but rather that they shoulde haue done it, and were letted
by the vproare before the dayes of purifying were ended.Actes 18. 18.
               
And it seemeth that Paul knewe by the spirite and by the
prophecies that went on them,Actes 2
                     •
                  . 22. 23. that such an vproare should
fall out,Actes 21. 11. and therefore also knewe that the offering shoulde
be letted. If here againe they obiect, that the sacrifices them
selues, were fulfilled in Christ, and also abrogate, and yet
for the churches sake were tolerated, I aske them what they
would gather hereby, or what vantage they would take against
vs? Forsooth they would iustifie thereby a tollerating
of our horrible abuses and disorders. But how cā they,
by those things which God commandeth, warrant those
things which God neuer cōmanded. Againe they are fowly
deceiued, as touching the ceremonial law. First because they
thinke the accomplishing or fulfilling of the ceremoniall
law, to be a present and vtter abolishing thereof, without a
certaine testimonie and preaching to the people, that it is
abolished. Secondly for that they make no difference betweene
the law disanulled: and the forbidding thereof, being
disanulled, also betweene the acte and manner of abrogating
the law, & the law already abrogated. Also because
they will haue the new lawe stand in force, before it can be
duely proclaimed and receiued in steade of the old. And so
to the Hebrewes it is written, that the old testament being disanulled,
               Heb. 8. 13.
               is ready to vanish away▪
                wherby it is ment, that it could
not at once be taken away. It was accomplished & fulfilled
in Christ, yea it was also abolished in Christ as the head, yet
by degrees and measure it was abolished and taken from
the body. wherefore it was vanishing▪ and yet not vtterly
vanished▪
               H
                     •
                  b. 3. 7. Psal. 95. 7. It stoode in some force, because the new testamēt,
was not yet sufficiently proclaimed and preached to the
people. And therefore it is sayde.Heb. 4, 7. 
               To day if ye will heare his
voyce. By these wordes, To day, he appointed a certain time,
saith the Apostle, & so he sheweth that time to be appointed
for receiuing the further & better promises, also a better
testamēt & a better professiō, thē was the former. So that
we see it was lawful for the Iewes to hold stil their ceremonies
& sacrifices,Heb. 7. 18. till they might surely know the first commādement

to be disanulled, because of the weakenes thereof.
For what faithful subiect wil forsake the old lawes of his
prince, till he be assured that newe lawes are proclaimed
which abrogate the olde.Heb 9. 16. Indeede the newe Testament or
new Lawe tooke place and was established at the death of
Christ, as the Apostle prooueth. yet by degrees it tooke
place in the Churches, as Christ also teacheth, where hee
sayeth,Iohn 12 3. And I, if I were lift vp from the earth will drawe
all men vnto mee, meaning that at his death hee established
a newe Lawe and Testament, by which men should
bee drawen vnto him, not that they were drawen at once
in a moment and all together. For the vayle or couering of
the.2. Cor. 3. 14. 15. olde Testament was first to bee taken away. By this
vayle no doubte Paul meaneth the ignorance of the Iewes,
whereby they did cleaue so much to the old law & ceremonies.
And therefore the Lord sayth in another place,Isa. 25. 7. that he
will destroye in this mountaine, the couering that couereth
all people, and the vayle that is spredde vpon all nations.
For the Temple that stoode on the mountaine, with the
ordinances thereof, was as a vayle to blynde the heartes of
the Iewes▪ which dwelt among all nations. And therefore
Christ did foreshewe the destruction of the Temple,Mat. 24. 2.
which came to passe about fourtie yeeres after:Iohn 4. 21. A great
parte of which tyme, it was still permitted to the Iewes to
holde the olde Ceremonies. If they obiect that the vayle
of blindenesse was sinne, and therefore to holde the ceremonies
was sinne, I aunswere, that it was no vayle of
blindnesse, to those that were willing, ready, and forwarde
to receiue the Newe Lawe and Testament when
it was offered. If againe they obiect that their willingnesse
and forwardnesse appeared not, seeing the Gentiles so
quickely reiected the olde lawe, and they in so long time
reiected it not: wee aunswere, that all the beleeuing Iewes
did straightway reiect it in part, though not wholly: but
some of them also reiected it wholy euen in shorte time,

yet they were but fewe, and no maruaile. For the Gentiles
had neuer receiued the olde lawe, and therefore might the
more readily imbrace the 
                  ••
               we. but the Iewes were alwaye
zealous of the olde Lawe,Actes. 21. 20. and therefore coulde not so suddenly
be reclaimed from their former zeale. Further that
distinction or difference betwixt the acte and maner of doing
any thing▪
               Heb. 2. 8. and the deede alreadie done, appeareth by
that place in the Hebrewes: where it is said, thou hast put
all thinges vnder his feete: in which wordes the acte done,
is put for the doing thereof. For yet we see not, (saieth the
Authour) all thinges subdued vnto him. but the worke
was in haude, as it were, it was doing and prospered, till all
thinges shoulde be subdued. Euen so we may say that the
olde lawe was abolished. or taken away, at the death of
Christ: that is, it was in abolishing, or it was readie to vanish
away, and to be vtterly abolished yea in Christ the
head, it was abolished, and in the members also it was
readie to be abolished.Rom. 14. 1, 2, 5. And therefore Paul giueth this distinction,
that some brethren are weake in faith, and are
not yet perswaded in their mindes, that the ceremoniall
lawe is abolished▪
               Vers. 14. others haue knowledge. Now Paul reasoneth,Vers. 23.
that in such matters concerning the obseruation of
such ceremonies, euery mans faith or knowledge must bee
his rule. For to him that iudgeth any thing vncleane, to him
it is vncleane. Therefore he that doeth any thing in suche
matters, against his knowledge or conscience, he sinneth.
For whatsoeuer is not of faith or knowledge is sinne, saieth
Paul. So then our answere is true, that the ceremonies of
the olde lawe, were not vtterly to be remoued, but by faith
and knowledge of the full abrogation thereof. Otherwise
Paul woulde not haue said, that he which obserueth a day,
or he which eateth not vncleane meates, obserueth the day
of the Lorde, or eateth not the meate to the Lord. He meaneth,
according to his owne interpretation verse. 18. vers. 4.Verse 4.
that they serue Christ in these thinges,Verse. 18. and are acceptable
vnto God, and also to be approoued of men. And therefore

also they that were stronger, and had further knowledge,
were to beare with the weaker,Verse 3. 4. 13. 22. and to applie their
knowledge and iudgement,1▪ Cor. 8. 9. that they put no stumbling
blocke nor occasion to fall before their brethren. Againe
we haue a further answere by these wordes of Paul. That
some thinges may be done, vpon iust occasion, as when we
are sure that we serue God therein: and some thinges are
simply sinne, which may neuer be done vpon any occasion.
Such are our vyle abuses and vngodly disorders, which are
not as the ceremonies of the Lawe, that by occasion might
be obserued or not obserued: as to make differēce of times
or of meates: but they are altogether forbidden by the word
of God, and therefore not indifferent as they terme them.
And though some thinges in them selues,Rom. 14. 14. as they are creatures,1. Tim. 4, 4.
are rather cleane, good, and lawfull, then (as they
terme them) indifferent, yet their vse, or rather abusing in
such manner and order, is not lawfull and good, neither indifferent.
            And here againe is another obiection to be answered,
because when 
                  •
               ing Hezekiah did celebrate the Passeouer,2. Chron. 30. 17, 18, 19.
there were many in the congregation, that were not cleansed,
and yet did eate the Passeouer. And thereby they doe
gather, that wicked wretches may partake with vs in the
sacraments. That place▪ plainely sheweth, that it was onely
a ceremoniall vncleannesse, and no wickednesse in the
people.verse. 19. For the people as the wordes doe testifie, prepared
their whole heart to seeke the Lorde God. againe the same
place answereth it selfe: that they were not clensed according
to the purification of the sanctuary: whereby is ment,
as it is written in Nombers,Nom 9. 10. that they were to keepe the
Passeouer, notwithstanding such vncleannesse. For it could
no way be remedyed. before the time of the Passeouer appointed.
And againe that ceremonie of vncleannes,Nom. 19. 20. was cō
               manded
because of the sanctuarie, which might not be polluted.
Nowe therefore they onely eating the Passeouer in
their houses or tentes, and not comming to the sanctuarie,

their ceremoniall vncleannes was no wickednesse in them.
For the Priestes them selues,2. Chron. 29. 34, as the text declareth,
                  
                     •
                  . Chro. 30. 16. were not
suffered to come into the Sanctuarie or Temple,Marke 7. 15. being not
yet cleansed. And yet also there is a further answere. For
that the ceremoniall vncleannesse was no sinne, so long as
it was not by their carelessenesse in auoyding it, or if it had
bene sinne, yet it was to be counted a smaller escape or an
infirmitie, and no grosser wickednesse. And then seeing it
was openly rebuked, and openly confessed, and prayed for
by the King▪ and also healed in the people, (For the Lorde
healed the people saith the text,) I say, seeing the matter
stoode so, howe shal any man excuse or tollerate thereby,
our intollerable disorders, which are also incurable. For if
escapes, or open infirmities are not so to bee borne with,
but that they must be openly rebuked and mended, before
the offenders can communicate in the sacraments, Then
much rather are open grosser sinnes to be first redressed,
before the sinners be suffered to partake in the sacraments.
But Master Cartwright bringeth a place in Ieremie, for defence
of suspendings, which the Bishops vse nowe a dayes:
or at least for tollerating of them that the preachers should
take and giue ouer their callings, as the Bishops and their
officers doe appoint them. Why doeth he, so carelessely falsifie
the Scriptures.Ierem. 36. 5. First he saith that Ieremy was suspended
from preaching, and then he woulde prooue that Ieremie
obeyed that suspension, thirdly he sayeth that Ieremie
was at libertie of his bodie, and fourthly that he would not
preache in the Temple for making a tumult. All whiche
things are vtterly false, and haue no shewe of trueth in thē.
For first it is plaine in the chapter he quoteth, that he was shut
vp:
               Ierem. 32. 2. and therefore was not at libertie of his bodye: and the
32 chapter sheweth that Ieremie was shut vp in the court of the
prison. Then also imprisoning of a man doeth shewe a violent
withholding of a man from preaching, and not a suspending.
Further that Ieremie would obey no suspendings,
it is plaine by the charge and message he had from the

Lorde.Ier. 1. 10, 18. 
               For he was set ouer the nations▪ and ouer the kingdomes,
(as is written) and was made an yron pillar, and walles of brasse
against the king, the princes and the priestes, and was not to bee
afraide of their faces, least the Lorde did destroy him before thē.
Indeede it is true as we haue prooued before, that we are not
to preach to the vnworthie,
               Hose 4. 4. 
               as to scorners, and persecuters. For
there is a time when the wise man shall keepe silence, when scarce
any is to rebuke, or reprooue another. But when Ieremie was
shut vp, there were of the princes that tooke his parte. For
by their meanes no doubt▪ did Ieremie get out of the prisonIere. 56. 19.
court, and so hid him selfe with Baruch. There was no such
bondage of suspendings, as Master Cartwright would tolerate:
and though there were, yet Ieremie obeyed them not,
but onely gaue place to the tyrannie of persecuters, As for
the tumult he speaketh of,Actes 23. 6. we know that Paul him selfe,
though he sought peace, yet he cared more, for his safetye,
and to witnesse the trueth, then he did for to raise a tumult.
And Ieremie also ceased not to preache still, notwithstanding
that a tumulte,Ierem 26. 
                     •
                  . and much stirring had bene among
the people, and priestes, and princes and Prophets, and all
for his preaching.
            Whereas Master Cartwright sayeth, that Christ liued in
the corruptest times of the Churche, and when things were
most confused, and fewest steppes of any lawfull calling to
be seene, he is therein fowly ouerseene. For those were the
dayes,Zech. 1
                     •
                  . 10. wherein the Lord did powre, vpon the house of Dauid
& vpon the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the spirit of grace
& of compassion.Zech. 13. 2▪
                wherein also he did cut off the names of
the Idoles from amongst his people, as againe it is prophecied:
so that they were no more remēbred. and he did cause
the false prophets,Luke 18, 9. & the vncleane spirits to depart from amongst
thē.luke 2. 21. They had the true worship of God,Mar. 1, 40. the true safices,Act. 10. 2
                     •
                  .
the order of the priestes and Leuites,Iohn 4 9. & their callings
according to the Law of Moses, The church was separated frō
the wicked, frō the sect of the Saduces, frō the idolatrous Samari
                  
                     •
                  ans:
There were very many good men & women, as Zacharie the

Father of Iohn Baptist and his wife,Mat. 3. Simeon and Anna,Luke 3.
and Nathaniel and many other. all which I neede not to
recken vp. For there were great multitudes that heard Iohn
Baptistes doctrine, and were baptised of him yea among the Pharisces,
there were those that touching the righteousnesse which is
in the lawe were vnrebukeable.
               Phil. 3. 6. 
               They were as it appeareth, most
of them Leuites, openly called and authorised to preach by the Elders
aud people in the Synagognes. And surely that it is but a
vaine exception, which Master Cartwright maketh of the
high Priest,Nom. 20. 28. 
               That he was made a yeerely officer, and came in by
Simonie into his office. For Eleazar was made high priest, while
Aaron the high Priest yet liued.
               1. King. 2. 35. 
               And Zadok was made high
Priest,
               1. King. 1. 42. 
               and Abiathar and his sonnes put from the priesthoode,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 2. 30.
               when as yet the couenant of the priesthoode pertained by the lawe
vnto Abiathar and his house. But necessities and iust occasions
did oftentimes make change of the ceremoniall lawes,
and yet no corruption nor abuse came thereby. Wherefore
for aunswere I say, that the priesthoode was not made a
yeerely office, but that by course euery yeere two priestes
did execute the office. And this seemed to be tollerable by
the Lawe, seeing that if one priest shoulde be sicke, or letted
by some greater occafions, the other might be in his
steade. As wee shewed before, that Eeleazar was chosen high
Priest,
               Iohn 18. 13. 
               while Aaron yet liued, and Zadok in Abiathars steade.
and yet were there not two high Priestes in the office at once, but
onely one at once was to execute the office. Also there seemed to be
much doubt and controuersie, to which of the p
                     •
                  iestes, the priesthoode
did belong (as also we may reade in Iosephus.) And
therefore two chiefely standing for it, there were two chosen to it.
And because the lawe of God did not suffer two at once to bee in
the office, they did succeede one another in the execution of the office.
Againe seeing they were of the sonnes of Aaron, and called
after the order of Aaron,
               Heb. 5. 4. 
               no doubt their calling was lawfull and
good, Otherwise if any at that time, had bene lawfull high
Priestes, and yet not lawfully called as was Aaron, then
the Apostle woulde not haue set downe this for a generall

trueth, That no man taketh this honour vnto him selfe, but
he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Neither let him here
shift off our answere, by his fonde distinction of the essence
of a priest, and of a lawfull priest, which before is refuted.
As for Symonie wherewith he chargeth the high Priestes,
hee can not prooue it against them. For if the Romanes ouerruling
them, did grieuously exact their tributes and paiments
both of Christ himselfe,Mat. 17. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . as we may reade in Matth▪
and of the high priestes: it was no more Symonie in the
priestes, then it was in Christ to pay them their exactions.
For the priesthoode was their right. seeing it pertained vnto
them, being the sonnes of Aaron. yet can not Master
Cartwright prooue that they payed any monie when they
tooke their right, or if they did, that they thereby bought
their right, and not rather payed an exaction, which the
Romanes demanded when they tooke their right. But suppose
that secretly they gaue bribes to the Romanes, & delt
by Symonie, yet that being hidden and not manifest to the
people, they were to be taken of men as lawfully called to
that office. For if the Lawe and common tribute exacted
monie of them, they might pay it as well as Christ. If the
officers did exact any besides lawe, they did it secretely, lest
they them selues should be condemned by lawe: and so it
is manifest that no symonie could be laid to their charge.
            And therefore no maruaile though Christ bad the man
shewe him selfe to the high Priest. For before the high
priestes became open persecuters, there was a lawfull communion
to be had with them. But this communion was afterward
broken, and made vnlawfull through their open
wickednesse. Also it is false, which Master Cartwright saith,
that Christ did reuerence the high Priest,Iohn 18. 2
                     •
                  . and gaue him accountes
of his doctrine. For he gaue him no accountes, and
answered him so roundly, that one of the officers whiche
stoode by, smote him with a rodde. Also his aunswere is
false cōcerning that place in Hoshea,Hose 4 6. that the Lord would
refuse the priestes, for being any more his priestes: seeing

they were without knowledge, of which wordes he sayeth,
that the prophet rather giueth a rule to be followed in their
election or deposition, then howe farre they may be vsed.
Nay the Prophet there speaketh nothing of electing them,
or deposing them by men▪ but rather of the plague or destruction
that shoulde come vpon them. yea hee sheweth
that through the ignorance of the priestes all wickednesse
and idolatrie reigned,Verse 9. and therefore he saith that there shal
be like people like Priest, meaning that they shall haue a
like destruction. Now Master Cartwright dare not say, that
all abominable wickednes and Idolatrie reigning, and the
priests them selues being wicked idolaters, I say, he dare not
affirme, that they helde the couenant, or were the people, or
church of God. For before he hath said the contrary. And
howe then dare he say, that such priestes, were yet priestes
vnto God, and were not deposed from their priesthoode,
when as their owne wickednes and idolatrie did depose
them. For that whole chapter of Hoshea is altogether against
their wickednesse and idolatrie. And let M. C. knowe
that our open grosse sinnes & abuses, being not curable by
the discipline of the Church, are as euill as Idolatrie: as Samuel
the Prophet doeth witnes,1. Sam. 15. 23. saying, that rebellion is as
the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression (he meaneth trāsgression
which is stoode in, and wil not be mended) is wickednes
& idolatry. But this matter is made manifest before.
            Now followeth the last part of his letter, & the last matter
in controuersie, as whether by communicating with a
reading minister, we do communicate with their impietie,
& establish their ministerie. M. C. herein doth more shamefully
erre, then if he should, with the bishops, altogether iustifie
such reading ministers. For he might better say, they
were lawfull ministers, and that their ministerie were lawfull,
then that he should confesse them to be vnlawfull ministers,
& yet iustifie that we may receiue them, as hauing
the essence, and substance of ministers, and partake in their
wicked ministerie, without impietie or establishing their

But he may playnly see (except his eies of vnderstanding be
vtterly darkened) that if any do vsurpe, as traitors, against
her maiesty, then they also that come vnder their vsurped
rule and gouernment, being once free from it, are also trayters
together with them: So likewise those men vsurping a
ministery, which Christ neuer gaue them, neyther sanctified
to be in his Church, both they doe wickedly, and they
also, that wil come vnder theyr ministery, doe establish theyr
wicked ministery, and partake with them in theyr impiety.
If a man of the winde, (sayth the prophet) and false fellowe
doe he saying,Micah. 2. 11. I will prophecie vnto you of wine and of
strong drinke; he shall euen be the prophet of this people.
Yea why not, sayth Master Cartwright, if the Church doe
call such a one, is it his sinne onely, sayth he, and not theyrs
that receaue him. And the prophets, sayth he, doe not lay it
to the peoples charge, though they communicate with such.
Doe they not indeede? doth not this prophet Micha laye it
to theyr charge?Zech. 13. 3. doth not also Zecharie shewe how vnlawfull
it was to communicate with false prophets, where he
sayth, that when any false prophet shall yet prophecie, his
father and his mother that begate him, shall saye vnto
him, Thou shalt not liue: For thou hast spoken lyes in
the name of the Lorde: and his father and his mother that
begate him, shall thrust him through, when hee prophecieth.
But the trueth of this matter, I haue prooued before.
Let vs further examine his wise reasons. He confesseth that
if by communicating with him, we doe make him minister,
then we are guilty of his wickednes. But we make him not
minister sayth he, though we communicate with him. But
I demaunde, should we haue such ministers, if no parishioner,
nor other did communicate with them? Woulde
there be any magistrates, if there were no subiectes to bee
vnder theyr guiding, or any master, if there were no
seruants? So then as the hauing of seruants and subiects, to
cōmunicate in the same houshold or kingdom, doth make

masters and magistrates, so to haue parishioners to communicate
with such ministers, doth make them such ministers,
and also establish their ministerie. If Master Cartwright
were not voide of common reason in this matter, he would
neuer affirme such absurdities. But before he graunted as
much in effect, that the church which receiueth and calleth
a minister doeth especially make him minister: and therefore
herein he is contrary to him selfe.1. Chro. 29. 22. And therefore it is
written,Ierem. 23. 21. that the congregation of the people, made Salomō
king, and Zadok high priest. Indeede if the false prophets,
or reading ministers doe runne of them selues onely, and
were not called nor receiued of any, neither had any office
nor ministerie in the Church, then the deuill onely, might
be said to make them ministers, but the parishioners receiuing
them for their ministers, and taking them to be called
to that office by the Church, as Master Cartwright teacheth
vs, and yeelding them selues to be their flocke and charge. I
say, those parishioners together with the diuel and his officers
do make them ministers. As for partaking with the impietie
of the minister, we haue prooued before, that if anye
wickednes be open, and the church will not redresse it, it is
guiltie of the wickednes committed. neither ought it to alleadge,
that it can not redresse it.1. Cor 5. For it hath the power of
Christ,2 Cor. 10. to iudge those that are within, & those strong weapons
of the spirituall warrefare, which can cut off all wicked
disorders in the church. Otherwise as we haue shewed,
it is not the church of God. Paul sheweth that except we
purge out the olde leauen we can not be a newe lumpe to
the Lord, neither keepe the Lordes feastes. he sheweth his
meaning in that place, that they suffering such a grosse offender
amongest them, were guiltie of his wickednesse, and
coulde not partake in the sacraments, but it must needes be
done with the leauen of wickednesse▪ and not with the vnleauened
bread of sinceritie and trueth.M
                     ••
                   1. 13. And therefore in
the next epistle it is shewed,2▪ Cor. 7▪ 11. that they all repented and sorrowed,
as being guiltie of his sinne, whom they had no sooner

excommunicate.
            And why was king Hezekiah afraide,2. Chron. 30. 17, 18, 19. and all the people,
For the ceremoniall vncleannes of some, but onely that
they feared, least they all were polluted thereby, and the
Passeouer not accepted. And therefore that vncleannesse,
which the Lawe also did suffer, and which was without
sinne, as we haue shewed, was openly confessed, and healed
by prayer: least the keeping of that feast should be wholly
vncleane. Howe much more then shal open grosse wickednesse,
when it breaketh forth, in the Church, make them all
polluted and guiltie thereof, if they refuse and will not redresse
it. Finally his similitude of receiuing goods or landes
of a mans father being a murtherer, is vaine. For the sacraments
which the reading ministers doe geue vs, are neyther
his sacraments, neyther the Lords, as we prooued before, but
are polluted pledges of a wicked communion. Againe wee
may not receiue golde of a thiefe, to iustifie his thieuerie.
And wee haue shewed that such ministers are theeues and
robbers, and can not as Fathers giue vs the Lordes holye
thinges. Likewise is that answered of communicating with
adulterers whome we can not (as he saith) auoide. For if
their sinne be open and prooued, then both all the Church
and euery one of the Church, ought and may auoyde them,
I meane their fellowship in the sacraments. If their sinne
be secret and not prooued by witnesses, then the question
is not of them.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            An ANSVVERE VNTO A
LETTER OF MASTER HARRISONS
BY MASTER CARTwright
being at Middleborough.
            GRACE and peace &c. Beloued for so much as I left
you the choyce for the first conference, whether you would
haue it in writing or by speech of mouth; I attended some
dayes for your answere of that matter: which because it
was not returned, I esteemed that you held you still to the request of
your letters, which was to receaue some thing from me by writing.
For answere therefore, so it is that your letters affected me diuersly:
For where your first page had raysed me vnto some hope for
the reuniting of your selfe, with the rest of your company vnto vs,
from whome you haue thought good to sunder your selues. The second
page which layeth forth the conditions of our peace, did cast
me, and as it were beate me from it againe; howbeit the mercy of
God vpholding me in some good hope of profiting you▪ or receauing
some profite from you. I thought to cut out this time out of my
weightiest and most necessary busines, wherein I might gieue you
that contentment which the Lord hath inhabled my hand vnto.
Vnto you not vnwilling to come vnto vs, the passage (as it seemeth)
is stopped in diuers respectes: The short whereof, is the receauing
without publique repentau
                  •
               ce of those which come from the Churches
of England, where because in the outwarde profession that
the lawes of that lande doe iustifie, there appeares vnto you no
lawfull assemblies of the Churche of Christ: your feare is least
in vniting your selues, with such you shoulde be vnequally yoked,
and made fellowe members of some other body then of that whereof
Christ Iesus is the head. First therefore if it bee shewed that
the ordinary assemblyes of those which professe the Gospel in Englande
be the Churches of Christ, it seemeth that the way will bee
paued and plained for mutuall entercourse betweene vs, thus therfore
it seemeth it may be perfourmed, those assemblyes which haue
Christ for their head and the same also for their foundation are
Gods churches, such are the assemblyes of Englande, therefore

&c. the assumption is euidēt in that by beleeuing that christ it our
righteousnes we are made members of his body & thereby at liuely
stones laide vpon him, as vpon a foundation, we growe into one
spiritual house with him, now that they haue the like precious faith
with vs, is conuinced not onely by their owne professiō, but also by
the testimonie of the spirit of God, who by manifold graces powred
vpon thē, euen vnto an apparant sanctification of nombers of thē,
do beare them witnes that they be members of the body of christ,Rom. 8. 14.
who as the head hath partaked vnto them his holy spirite,Esa. 59. 
                     •
                  1. th
                  •
               y that
haue perfourmed vnto them the speciall couenant which the Lorde
hath made with his churches of powring his spirit vpō thē & putting
his words in their mouthes are the churches of God: but such
are the assemblies in England as touching the spirit of God it hath
bin said before, whereupon also it followeth that he hath likewise
put his word in their mouthes, considering that the spirit of God is
not giuē but by the word, & seing that the Lord in mercy hath set
vp diuers burning lamps in those assemblies whereby light is conueyed
more or lesse into all the parts almost of that land, it seemeth
that the church of England should receiue iniury if it should not be
accounted among the golden candlesticks which seeme to keepe out
darknes & might from the Lords sanctuary, vntill such time as the
day starre spring & Lucifer do rise in our hearts. If you say all
do not beleeue the gospel truely which professe it, the same exceptiō
lyeth against all other churches how reformed soeuer, if that there
be fewer faithfull in our churches then in others, the trueth of the
chnrch standeth not in the nomber, for if there were but in euery
church one truely and vndissemblingly faithfull, al the rest holding
the faith of our Lord Iesus christ in wordes onely, yet shoulde all
those churches be vnto vs the churches of God, and if you say the
assemblyes, as it were all the branches or armes of the candlesticke
haue not lightes set vpon them, the greater nomber of them being
dumped with dumbe ministerie, notwithstanding by the way you
confesse those assemblyes vpon whome the Lorde hath set the lampe
of a preaching ministery are the churches of God, whiche seemeth
to cast downe that hill which standeth in the waye against
our reioysing, wherebye you can not afoorde vs the Name

of gods churches because we haue not the discipline by him appointed,
nowe for the other, whether they haue some glimpse of knowledge
by the dumbe ministerie or no, may afterwardes in another
place be considered for the present I answere, that euen in those
congregatiōs forasmuch as they both haue and might haue by some
former ministrie or means which the Lord hath vsed towards thē
receiued faith standing therby in our sauiour christ as in the shaft
of a candlesticke they cease not to be a branch in the Lords candlesticke,
and being members of the same body they may well receiue
some supply of their want from the light that shineth in the next
branch vnto them, for if euery assembly being without a lampe of
the ministry shuld by & by be holden to be broken from the shaft of
the church candlesticke, then at euery vacation of the ministry and
whensoeuer by death the Lorde shoulde put out one of his lightes,
it shoulde followe that that assembly by the fall of their minister
into the graue, shoulde from the hyest heauen fall into the graue
of hell, but you will say peradventure, that an assembly that hath a
dumbe minister is in worse case then that which hath none at all,
if that be graunted, yet followeth it not therefore that the assembly
which yesterday being without a dūbe minister was the church
of God, shoulde to day by hauing such a one set ouer them be the
Synagogue of Satan and here me thinkes whilest you go about to
make nothing of the dumbe ministrie you ascribe more force to it,
then it hath▪ for you make him not so much as a guide or an head
of the church in that those which before in all equall iudgement
were to be deemed members of Christ, by hearing them shoulde
suddenly become the members of antichrist, I do not therefore yeeld
vnto you, in that you saye they are the chiefe alwayes in the
synagogues, our Sauiour Christ in whome those companies do beleeue
being the chiefe with whome through faith they growe to be
one body, which rather then by hearing the dumbe minister to bee
one with him, say therefore that it is a fault in them to heare such
a minister thrust vpon them, yet that it is an apostacie from God
and an vtter falling away from the Gospell, I see not with what
great apparance of trueth it can be spoken. Moyses when diuers
of the people claue vnto Korah, Datham and Abiram, forsaking

willingly the lawfull and ordinary ministry of the Aronites, did
not therefore cast them forth from the Lordes hoste; and should the
churches of God, for hearing a dumbe minister which is thrust vpon
them, forthwith be reputed for runnagates from the Lorde. Againe,
the Lorde is in couenaunt with that people to whome he
gieueth the seales of his couenant; this he doth to our assemblies in
England, therefore they are the Lordes confederates. Yf you say
that the seales set to by the dumb ministery are no seales, (which afterwarde
commeth to be examined) yet you thereby confesse that
those which are ministred by sufficient ministers are the true and
vncounterfaite sacramentes of the church: whereby it falleth againe,
that you seeme to hold that the churches in England are not
true churches of Christ, because they haue not his commaunded
discipline. Hereunto may be added the iudgment of all the churches
of Christ in Europe, all which gieue the right hande of
societie in the house of God, vnto the assemblies which are in England.
Which argument of the churches authoritie, albeit it be not
so strong as it will enforce, yet ought it to staye all sodayne and
hasty iudgments vnto the contrary, and so long to cause silence vntill
the cause be rightly on both sides debated, and the contrary of
that which the churches holde, doe through the lightnesse sonne of
the trueth thereof breake foorth, and if it be meete to proceede
softly, and as it were with a leaden foote to the excommunication
of one onely member of the Church of God, there ought verily to
haue bin great consultation taken, when the Churches of two
whole Ilandes shoulde haue bene cast out, (especially when they
be holden in by voyces, not of diuers persons, but of all the churches,
to whome the knowledge of their estate hath come.) And if
there were but one man worthie to be excommunicate, yet if the
greater parte of your assembly, woulde not yeelde consente thereunto,
I holde it that the order of the discipline requireth, that the
rest are to beare the person whome they can not remooue. And
therefore although the assemblyes of Englande had deserued thorough
want of discipline, and of a teaching ministerie, to bee cast
out from the accompt of the churches of God, yet being holden in by
the most voyces of the Churches them selues, they ought to haue

bene so farre borne withall, as the communicating with them
shoulde not make them guiltie of a falling away from the Lorde.
Nowe I come to those two reasons whereby you thinke you maye
iustly holde the assemblies in Englande for no churches of God.
And first of all to the reason of the discipline, for the want wherof
you giue them all without exception the blackestone of condemnation
from being the churches of christ, where it is to be vnderstoode
that as in a man there are certaine partes essentiall and such
as without which the man can not stande, and other some seruing
either to his comelinesse or to his long continuance, so it is in this
matter, there is the foundation christ, whereupon it is necessary
that by fa
                  •
               th the assemblies be laide, which groweth vnto the
Lordes building, without the which it can not bee his church,
which thing being, whatsoeuer is either wanting of that which is
commaunded, or remaining of that which is forbidden is not able
to put that assembly which by faith is layde vpon Christ, from the
right and title of being the churche of Christ, for faith can admit
of no such thing, which giueth an vtter ouerthrowe and turning
vpside downe of the trueth. By this title of the faithfull, the Apostle
in his epistles noteth out the Churches of God, it being all
one with him to say to the faithfull or to the Saintes, as to the
Churches of such a place, whatsoeuer wanteth vnto this, or is
more then ynough, it wanteth or aboundeth to the disgrace and
vncomelinesse, or to the hassarde of the continuance and not to the
present ouerthrowe of the churche and although besides faith in
the Sonne of GOD there may be many thinges necessary for
euery assembly, yet be they necessary to the comely and stable being
and not simplye to the being of the churche: hereupon the people
of Israel which neglected for the space of fourtie nine yeeres the
holy Sacrament of circumcision and the Passeouer also, (as it seemeth)
one onely time excepted, seased not therefore to be the churches
of God and to haue the Sanctuarie amongest them. And in
this respectes the Dutch assemblyes whereof the greatest parte in
high Germany, which besides the same Name of discipline which
is common to our churches, are grossely deceiued in the matter of
the Supper are notwithstanding holden in the roule of the churches

of god. In this respecte also certaine assemblyes of our profession
which hauing the vse of the discipline permitted vnto
them, are not suffered to haue the vse of the Sacramentes of the
Lordes Supper are no therefore when the Lordes churches are
mustered and their Names written and enrouled vp, cast out as
vnfit to remaine in any accompt of the Lordes hoste without anye
parte of that order and discipline which the Lorde hath appointed.
I graunt there can be no churche of christ for that without
some parte of it there can be no faith in Iesus christ, it is a piece
of that discipline of our Sauiour christ that there shoulde be certaine,
which shoulde be chosen out of the rest to preache the gospell,
by preaching whereof the churches are gathered. Where
therefore there is no ministerie of the worde there it is playne
that there are no visible and apparant churches. it is another
parte of the discipline of our Lorde, that the rest of the body of
the churche shoulde obey those, that are set ouer them in the Lord.
Wheresoeuer therefore there is no obedience of the people giuen
to the ministers that in the Lordes name preach vnto them, there
also can be no churche of christ, but where these two be, although
other pointes wante, yea although there be some defect in these,
that neither the ministers doe in all pointes preach as they ought,
nor the assemblyes in all pointes obey vnto the wholesome doctrine
of their teachers, yet doe they for the reason abouesaide retaine
the right of the churches of god.
            This may be made by plaine similitude from the body of man,A foppery.
whereunto we are alreadie entred, for if any man shuld haue both
his hands & his armes cut off his eyes put out &c. yet as lōg as the
head standeth and other vitall parts, he is to be accompted a man,
although a maymed man: euen so it is in the assemblie, as long as it
holdeth the head, how defectiue it is otherwise, yet it hath the due
and right of the church of god, and although a man shoulde haue
sixe fingers on one hande and but three one another, & albeit they
shoulde stande where the mouth doeth, yet all this deformitie should
not hinder from being truely holden to be a mā, although it would
be great deformitie in him on the other parte if he had no head at
all or that there were no naturall coniunction of the partes

one with another; but a whole and through displacing of euery
parte, from his proper state then verely coulde he not be deemed to
haue either the proportion of a man or his life, so likewise if an
assembly either holde not the head which is Christ Iesu or be nothing
els but a confused multitude without any parte of that order
which the sonne of God hath appointed, the same is iustly crossed
out of the accompte of Gods churche, was not Ierusalem after
the returne from Babylon the citie of the great King, vntill snche
time as Nehemias came, and builded vp the walles of the citie: to
say therefore it is none of the Church of god, because it hath not
receiued this discipline, me thinkes is all one with this as if a man
woulde say it is no citie because it hath no wall, or that it is no
vineyarde because it hath neither hedge nor dyke. It is not I grant
so sightly a citie or vineyarde nor yet so safe against the inuasion
of their seuerall enemies which lye in waite for them, but yet are
they truely both cities and vineyardes. There remaineth the other
point which is against those assemblies onely which haue a dumbe
ministerie, wherein that parte of your conclusion that the assemblies
where they be are none of the Churches of god is before answered.
There resteth that part of your conclusion, whereby you
inferre that the Sacramentes ministred by them are none of gods
Sacramentes, and therefore that a man may not receiue anye of
them at their handes, here first I agree with you that their ministerie
is vnlawful and to them selues without repentance a certain
matter of destruction, especially in those vnto whome the knowledge
of this corruption is come, to the churches where they be presently
hurtefull, and in the ende without remedie deadly, but that
they are no ministers of god so far as to receiue the good thinges
they offer vnto vs that I suppose I may not well yeelde vnto, the
grounde hereof I take from the former parte of my answere that
for so much as they are allowed by the churches of god they ought
vntill remedie may be founde of so great disorder to be heard and
receiued so farre as they can giue vs any thing that is of christ,
and for this cause our Sauiour christ commanded that the Scribes
shoulde be heard in that they taught truely,Mat
                     •
                  h. 23 2. which honour our sauiour
christ woulde neuer haue giuen vnto them, vnlesse the

churche calling had mooued him thereunto▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
                had it bene
lawfull for the people otherwise to haue hearde them▪ for it is euident
that their vnfitnesse and vnlawfulnesse in the ministerie although
another way was as great, as it is in our reading ministers
they were all together deceiued in the Messias, for neither knewe
they that Iesus was the christ, nor yet that the christ whome they
looked for shuld be the sone of god,Iohn 9. 22. but held him for a bare & nakedman.Mat. 22. 42. It appeareth also that they taught the iustification which
is by the lawe of workes not onely in the eighteenth of Luke but
euen the very selfe same place where our Sauiour commaundeth
this audience vnto them, for speaking of the workes of the morall
Lawe, which they woulde not touch with one of their fingers, hee
saith that they layde them vpon the peoples backes, as burdens
which coulde not be borne, whereby our Sauiour besides the Pharisticall
pride and Lordlinesse in teaching signifieth that they
taught them to iustification, seeing that if they had onely taught
them as testimonies and fruites of faith they had not bene vntollerable,
but as our Sauiour saith an easie yoke, and as Saint Iohn
sayeth,1. Iohn 5. not grieuous or heauie▪ Now the dumbe ministerie is not
farther off from the institution of a lawfull ministerie,Matth. 11. then to
teach vntruely in the chiefe groundes of Religion, neither is the
edifying of the church respected in making lawes for the ministerie,
lesse hindered by a ministerie teaching false thinges, and
that in so waightie pointes, as by an vnpreaching minister, and
according to this saying of our Sauiour christ, we may see what
the practise of the Prophetes had bene before, who although they
had oftentimes to doe both with false teachers and Priestes that
dumbe dogges and not able to barke,Isay 58. yet giuing the people warning
of their corruptions and insufficientnesse, threatning also the
casting them from the ministerie in the good time when the Lorde
shoulde haue pitie on his Church, they are neuer founde to haue
forbidden the people to come to their sacrifices, or to bring their
sacrifices commaunded by the lawe vnto them, yea our Sauiour
that liued in the corruptest times of the Churche, and when things
were most confused and fewest steppes of any lawfull calling to be
seene, yet commaunded the man whome he purged from his leprosie

to shewe him selfe vnto the priest, where it is to be obserued,Matth. 8. that
he saith to the priest generally without willing him to make choise
of a priest better instructed or affected vnto the trueth then the
rest, but indifferently vnto the priest, the high priest albeit hee
was at that time contrary to the Lawe made a yeerely officer, although
he entred in by Simonie and rewarde vnto the Romanes,
yet▪ notwithstanding we see our sauiour bare him reuerence for
his office sake and as before his Iudge in spirituall causes gaue an
accompt of his doctrine, we haue another example of reuerence
vnto such rulers euen in thinges that were done by them wrongefully▪
               Ierem. 36.
for Ieremie being as it appeareth suspended for a time from
comming into the Temple and albeit at libertie of his body woulde
not, least as it seemeth be should make a tumult enter into the temple,
and therefore hauing written that which he had to say, sent
Baruch to reade his sermon in the temple, moreouer when a magistrate
is not able to doe some parte of his office, as for example being
able to doe the dueties which are to be perfourmed in peace is
insufficient for mortall offences, yet no man refuseth to take that
which he is able to giue, because he is not able to doe all that is required.
Euen so endeuoring to our uttermost to a sufficient ministerie,
I woulde thinke in the meane season, that the good thinges
that they are able to giue vs may be taken at their handes and if
any say that it is of the substance of a church minister to be able
to teach, and therefore he is no minister that hath not that habilitie,
it may be answered that it is of the substāce of a good & lawfull
minister of God, but not simply of a minister, whereunto it is
sufficient to haue the church calling as it is of the substance rather
of a lawfull magistrate to be able to iudge betweene his subiectes
then simply of a magistrate whome the election of the people, or of
other to whome his choise belongeth, maketh a magistrate of the
Lorde although he be no lawfull or sufficient magistrate as therefore
we take him for a magistrate which for the ignorance of his
charge may be called an idoll magistrate. Euen so it seemeth that
he may bee holden for a minister which hath the Churches calling
albeit he be not able to doe the principall charge of that ministerie.

Neither doeth the place of the Prophet 
                  〈◊〉
               , whiche
sayeth,Osee 4. 6. because they haue refused knowledge they shall bee no
Priestes vnto him stande against this the Prophet rather giuing
a rule to followe in the election or disposition of them then shewing
howe farre they may be vsed, finally to that which is obiected
of communicating with their 
                  〈◊〉
               , in taking any thing at
their handes, I answere first that the same might haue bene laide
to the peoples charge vnder the Lawe, which is neuer done of the
Prophetes. Secondly if by communicating with him we shoulde
make him minister, I graunt that a piece of his guilte would sticke
to our fingers, but when that is not, I see not howe by receiuing
the sacramentes of him which partake more vnto his wickednesse
then the sonne is partaker of his fathers murther, because he receiueth
of his fathers gifte, some parte of his owne landes and moueables
and so much there then here as the father giueth his owne
thinges, where the dumbe minister doeth onely dispence the giftes
of the Lorde, wherefore it may bee rather feared least in refusing
the Sacramentes offered by him, we put the Lorde awaye from
vs, whose they be then in taking the Sacramentes at his handes to
bee parteners of impietie, which is the meanes, and can take no
holde of the Sacramentes in any sorte. For euen as not able to auoyde
him I may communicate with a minister that is an adulterer
without being partaker of his adulterie. Euen so also may I
communicate with a dumbe minister, and yet neuerthelesse be free
from his impietie. Thus haue you my aunswere written not without
the feare and trembling your selfe make mention of, whereby
it will not be harde for you to vnderstande howe both our holy
desires of being vnited together may be perfourmed. And although
I write in good assurance especially in the former parte as
touching the rightfull Title of the Churches of Christ to be due
to the assemblyes in Englande, yet remembring (besides the common
frailtie of our whole race) special breaches & decayes in my selfe I
wil willingly hearkē vnto any (much more vnto you whō the Lord
in mercie hath bestowed good graces vpon) shewing better thinges.

For which cause if further conference be needefull, I must thorough
businesse be inforced, to reserue it to conference by word of
mouth, sometimes after dinner. And thus with my most humble
prayers vnto the Lorde our God for his holy spirite whereby wee
may be able to discerne the thinges that differ to our vnoffensiue
walking in the sight of all men, euen
vnto the daye of the
Lorde I bid you
Farewell.
            
         
      
   