
      
         
            
            
            A COMMENTARY VPON THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES, WRITten firſt in Italian by Antonio Brucioli, and now tranſlated into Engliſh by Th. Iames fellow of New colledge in Oxford.
            
               Greater is he that prophecieth, then he that ſpeaketh diuers tongues, except he expound it, that the Church may receiue edification.
               
                  1. Cor. 14. v. 4.
               
               Come and eate of my meate, and drinke of the wine that I haue drawen.
               Prov. 9. v. 5.
               
            
            LONDON Printed by R. F. for Tho. Man. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOmas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great ſeale of England, Thomas Iames wiſheth increaſe of health, wealth and prosperitie in this life, and endleſſe ioy, happineſſe & immortality in the life to come.
            
               SAint Hierome complained of the multitude and abuſe of writers in his time. Salomon to ſhew the vanity of mē in writing of bookes, beginneth one of his bookes with Vanitie. Vanitie of vanities (ſaith Salomon the Preacher) vanitie of vanities, and all is but vanitie: and as he beginneth his booke ſo he endeth it, as if from the beginning vnto the ending, 
                  •
               here were nothing but vanity in all other

bookes, the holy Scripture onely excepted, no part or parcell whereof may be guilty of the leaſt thought of vanitie in the world; the holy Ghoſt being in the holy ſcripture as the ſoule is in the bodie, all in all, and all in euery part. And therefore in the later ende of his booke to leade vs vnto the beginning of true wiſedome, he pricketh men forward and exhorteth them to the diligent reading of Gods words, the words of truth, by comparing them vnto prickes and nailes faſtned by the maſters of the aſſemblies. To auoyd Saint Hieromes complaint, & follow Salomons godly exhortation, the Author of this preſent treatiſe vpon the Canticles, did exerciſe him ſelf from his infancie in the ſtudie of Gods word, the which he read ſo earneſtly and eagerly, as if (as Saint Auſtin ſaith) he could neuer haue read it ſufficiently, though h
                  •
                ſhould haue begun neuer ſo ſoone, and liued neuer ſo long. But finding the ſcriptures by his owne experience ſo written in diuerſe places (though all Scripture be written for our inſtruction) as if i
                  •
               
               
were not written, as it was ſayd of certaine bookes of Ariſtotle: in ſo much that when the Eunuch readeth, Philip had need to ſtand by & interpret. He thought it good, for the good of the Church and glorie of God, to beſtow the greateſt part of his time, partly in tranſlating the Bible into his mother tongue (which he did moſt exactly) partly in writing ſuch a commentarie vpon the Bible, as might in doubtfull and hard places fully ſatisfie and content the minde of the religious reader. Now there are many which haue written vpon the Bible learned and godly commentaries in all tongues & languages, many more now (thanks be to God) in theſe later dayes, thē in former times: but of all late writers, there is none (for any that I haue ſeene or heard) which may be compared with this Brucioli, for abſolute and exquiſite knowledge in the tongues, great reading in the Fathers, ſhortneſſe and plainneſſe in deliuering of the meaning of the holy Ghoſt, and laſt of all ſuch ſoundneſſe in Religion, & integritie of doctrine, as may ſeeme admirable

in any man, but in Brucioli and Italian, wonderfull beyond the degree of
                  •
                admiratiō. For ſurely as it ſeemed ſtrāge
                  •
                vnto the Iewes, that out of Galile ſhould come any good: ſo it is no leſſe ſtranges vnto ſome, that Italie ſhould affoord vs any good; Italy being the cage of vncleanneſſe, and ſeate of Antichriſt. But God, the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Iewes, the God of Italians as of Engliſhmen, no accepter of perſons, or reſpecter of place, hath euen in Italie many (peraduenture thouſands) which haue not bowed their knees vnto Baal, electing ſome out of each nation & countrey, to make vp the ſumme of his elect. Now as God in his mercie hath ſtirred vp ſome to defende his glorie in other countreys, ſo hath he raiſed vp this Brucioli to be a principall ſetter forth of his glorie in Italie, which that man of ſinne the Romane Antichriſt perceiuing, hath therefore laboured to ſuppreſſe and aboliſh his painfull labours: but man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. For as they haue bene forbidden twiſe, ſo twiſe haue they

bene printed, and that in no other place then Venice, dedicated to men of the contrary religion, which (it ſhould ſeem) he profeſſed, and ſubmitted to the cenſure of our holy mother the Church: prouided that out of the Scriptures and Fathers they ſhould be able to refute his doctrine, which out of thē both he had moſt learnedly cōpiled. The time wherin he liued I find not certainly ſet downe of any: but this is moſt certaine, that he liued about the time of Conradus Pellicanus, ſome 70 or 80 yeares ago, and that Pellican did verie much profite himſelfe by Brucioli, or Brucioli by Pellicans writings: which is the more probable, by how much the more Brucioli hath in his Cōmentary, beſides that which is out of Pellican tranſlated into his books word for word in diuerſe places. The order & method which he obſerued in his Commentarie is ſuch as deſerueth to be imitated of all men that labour in this buſineſſe, in eaſie and facill places of the Bible, either to be altogether ſilent, or very ſhort and briefe: in harder places to be

more plentifull and copious, in no place ſpending paper and inke in idle and vnprofitable queſtions, ſuch as tend not to edification. As to diſpute the caſe in this Commentarie vpon the Canticles, whether of the three bookes which Salomon wrote, he wrote the Canticles in the firſt or ſecond place, as the Iewes imagine, or laſt of all, as all the Latine writers do conſent. Whether there be more perſons then foure, or whether this book be meant literally of Pharaohs daughter, or myſtically of the Church: theſe queſtions being farre aboue the reach of the commō ſort of people, he omitteth purpoſely. And becauſe all writers with one voyce conſent that the Church is meant by the Spouſe, he ſo taketh it without any further adoe, inſtructing vs in theſe points of religion, neceſſary to be taught of him and vnderſtood of vs. That the Church here militant conſiſteth of two parts, a viſible and an inuiſible: that in the Church Chriſt muſt beare rule, and not Peter; that Gods word muſt be heard, and not mens traditions: finally he teacheth

vs the neceſſitie of faith, and fruite of good workes: theſe are the principall points which he handleth in this booke, euery where ioyning with them matter of comfort and exhortation: and thus much for Brucioli and his Commentary. Now for my ſelfe and my tranſlation, I could haue wiſhed that others which haue the gift of interpretation, wold haue taken the worke in hand, but ſeeing they haue bene ſlacke in this buſineſſe, I haue for that exceeding great loue which I beare vnto t
                  ••
                workes of this learned man, a ſtranger, but not from the faith, tranſlated this booke of the Canticles, with that minde which he wrote it, to the glorie of God and benefite of his Church. In tranſlating of it I haue not yeelded word for word, but ſence for ſence, and ſentence for ſentence. For the text I haue not followed mine Authour, but taken the authorized tranſlation in our Engliſh Bibles, for that it is a matter of great difficultie, and not for a young man to tranſlate: and is beſides warranted by Fulke againſt the Papiſts, and

learned Maiſter Hooker againſt our aduerſaries at home; only I haue noted the differences which are not many, either by the ſide of the booke, or in the text of the Commentarie. This ſmall labour of mine, I am bold to preſent vnto your Lordſhip (right Honorable.) Others for other reſpectes, out of the treaſures of their wits and induſtries, haue preſented you with greater volumes: my ſelf being young in yeares and poore in wit, do offer vp into your hands, all that I haue as yet prouided, which is at the moſt but a poore Orphans mite. Which I do in this reſpect onely; for that honorable regard which your Lordſhip hath of learning & religiō, which are the loadſtones to draw the hearts of men vnto you. For which cauſe my ſelf being as yet vnknowne vnto your Lordſhip, am moued to ſue vnto the ſame for protection; for protection for my ſelfe, and defence for mine Author, a meere ſtranger; the title of your office and vertuous diſpoſition to others doth promiſe vs great comfort. For ſeeing God hath made you a Keeper, and

that as it is here in the Canticles, of many vines, and that you haue kept your vines ſo, that of the frute thereof hath bene made wine right comfortable vnto many drooping hearts in this land, what remaineth there in me, but to be confident in your Honors kind acceptance of this booke, and to beſeech God the true keeper of Iſrael, which neither ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth, long to preſerue your Honour in health, to the maintenance of learning and religion, the preſeruation of her Maieſtie, and vniuerſall good of this land.
            
               
                  Your Honors in all dutie, Thomas Iames.
            
         
         
            
            The Tranſlatour to the courteous and Chriſtian Reader.
            
               A Chriſtian I preſume thou art that readeſt this booke, curteous I call thee, becauſe I hope to find thee ſo: it is as much as I deſire, and ſurely no leſſe doth mine Author deſerue His name is Brucioli, by birth an Italian, his countrey (as I gueſſe) Florence, and therfore a ſtranger; if a ſtranger, intreat him as a ſtranger, that is, gently & kindly, and know that it is thy dutie, if it be not thy curteſie ſo to do: for there is a dutie which belongeth vnto ſtrangers, commanded in the Law, and commended in the Goſpell. As a ſtranger by birth, ſo good muſt be done vnto him in generall, but as he is not a ſtranger frō the faith, ſo we are bound to ſhew him ſpecial fauor: for ſo the Apoſtle S. Paul
                     •
                  
                willeth vs for to do; Do good (ſaith he) vnto all men, but eſpeciallie or chieflie to thoſe which are of the houſhold of faith. Of this houſhold was Brucioli, and not of that other houſhold of good workes, where none but merit-mongers and ſuperarrogant or ſuperogating Papiſts dwel. Reade his Commentarie, and thou wilt confeſſe as much: there is often mention of faith, of iuſtification by faith only, of faith and iuſtification by imputation: ſtill faith comes in, as if our

actions were as inſipid and vnpleaſant without faith, as the old ſacrifices were vnſauory without ſalt. The Law requireth ſalt in all ſacrifices, Brucioli requireth faith in euery action: he maketh it the ſubiect of his diſcourſe, brings it in in euerie chapter, in euerie page, yea almoſt in euerie line, as if it were the center wherunto all the lines of his commentarie muſt of force haue bene drawne. Embrace his booke therfore in thine hands, and entertain his doctrine into thine heart. Scorne him not becauſe hee is not attired after the fine Italian faſhion, for this were to accept of him for his good apparrell and not for his good partes, which Saint Iames noted for a fault in the Iewes. Brucioli is now in England & not in Italie, & therfore muſt be contēt with ſuch apparrel as our coūtry affords, he hath the beſt that could be gottē for him, for indeed it is all that could be gotten, either he muſt haue this or none, & better this then none, for I hope it is good & ſtrong, though it be not very coſtly & fine: the fineſt thredes be not euer the beſt, for thē ſpiders wold vndo weauers & ſpinners, & be ſet a work more thē they be, & yet I cannot ſay but they work too faſt many times: but alas it is in ſucking ſoure out of ſweet, & drawing forth poyſon from hony. Theſe creatures I do not like, the Lyon naturally hateth the mouſe, the ſheepe

a wolf, & naturally I do abhor theſe men frō my very heart, & therfore if any ſpider come vpon my book, it ſhall be lawful for any mā either to ſweep, or els to blow him away, for he is but a light perſon of himſelfe, and eaſily blowne away that ſpendeth his time in this ſort, how heauy ſoeuer hee prooue to others. They ſay there be no ſpiders in Ireland, their houſes are built of ſuch a wood as breedeth none: O that England were as Ireland in this reſpect, and that all our houſes were built of this kind of timber, then would the houſe of God go better forward then it doth, and we ſhold be fitter men to be temples of the holy Ghoſt thē we are: but now the world is as ful of theſe wicked creatures, as euer Egipt ſwarmed with frogs: there was no houſe, no place in Egypt but there were frogges to be found: there is no place, no houſe almoſt in Englād where there are not ſome of theſe venimous ſpiders to be found: a man ſhal find thē euery wherein citie & fields, in beds and at boord, in court & country. If a yong man write, they ſay his head is too greene: if an old man, they ſay his beſt is paſt: if a mā of middle age, they ſay at that time his body is more fit for actiō, then his mind is apt to contēplation: ſo that neither old, nor yong, nor middle aged writers can pleaſe thē, & no maruel, for I thinke they cannot pleaſe themſelues. But chiefly theſe ſpider-catching Zoiluſſes do ſhoot the

venime of their tongues againſt painfull tranſlators of bookes which ſeeke other mens profits, & not their owne, reaping not the fruit of that which they haue ſowne, and like candles ſpending thēſelues to giue others light. But what ſaith M. Momus with his crue of carping knights, theſe men mar all with their tranſlations, it was neuer well with vs (that is, that are learned) ſince ſo many books were tranſlated into engliſh, their labor were better ſpared thē imployed, they corrupt bookes, miſinterpret writers, are enemies vnto the cōmon wealth, & enemies to all good learning. If this be all they haue to ſay, they ſay in word ſomewhat, in effect nothing: for either they take that for a ſalt, which is not ſo indeed, or els they knowe not how to diſtinguiſh the abuſe frō the thing, & ſo ſpeake againſt they know not what. Tranſlators haue their faults & abuſes as well as other men, as when they tranſlate fooliſh & vnprofitable, or wicked & vngodly books, or els miſtranſlate & miſinterpret books, and then the abuſe proceedeth either of malice or of ignorāce: if of malice their reproofe is iuſt; if of ignorance, blame thē not, vnles it be affected: for the beſt that is may miſſe in a ſtrāge language, whē no man knoweth all in his owne tongue. And thus far reacheth their complaint againſt the abuſe of tranſlations, which may in no wiſe be excuſed. As for the harme that cōmeth by making learning too cōmon, mē of cōmon

iudgement may by vulgar examples eaſily refute them. The ſunne & moone, fire and water are profitable, & yet common: the Philoſopher ſaith, Bonum quò communius, eò melius: good the commoner it is, the better it is: if it bee true in philoſophie, it is true in diuinity, & therfore S. Paul wiſheth that all men were learned as hee was, and that all men could ſpeak with diuers tongues as he did, &c. I would that theſe men which think they haue S. Paules learning, had S Paules zeale (ſo it were according to knowledge) to ſeeke other mens good and not their own; for now marchāts do not monopolize the goods of a citie more thē theſe do appropriate vnto thēſelues the learning of whole vniuerſities, & whē they haue it, what do they with it, but keep it vnto thēſelues? Becauſe I wold not be of this odious ſect of men (moſt curteous & Chriſtian reader) I haue at vacant times trāſlated according to that meaſure of knowledge which God hath giuen me, both this book and ſome others, as the hiſtorie of the Ieſuits, & Morall Philoſophy of the Stoickes, which with permiſſiō of my ſuperiors, I mean ſhortly to publiſh, if God wil, and health permit me ſo to do. Take this booke in good part: accept of my good wil, fault pardon & amend, whether they be the Printers or the tranſlators: the preface is the Authors & not mine, it eſcaped both me & the Printer before I was aware, the reſt read corrected in the latter end of the booke.
         
         
            
            The Preface to the Booke.
            
               THis booke of the Canticles is a holy and admirable booke, very ſpirituall, full of myſteries and most hidden ſenſes; whereby it is moſt euident, that they haue bene not a litle deceiued, which go about to diminish the credit and authoritie thereof: for becauſe herein are contained, ſundry enterchangeable diſcourſes, and dialogues of mutuall loue betweene the bride and the bridegrome, therefore forſooth haue they thought it good to call this booke in queſtiō; as if it were not an vſuall matter with the holy Ghoſt in the holy Scripture, to ſet down the ſincere and vnfained loue of God and the Church, vnder the figure of chaſt and holy wedlocke: as alſo to diſcouer the force of wickedneſſe and Idolatrie, by the ſimilitude of the adulterous woman, as it is to be ſeene in the ſecond and third of Ieremie,

and in the ſixteenth Chapter of Ezechiel. Beſides all this, there are certaine places in this booke, whereby no otherwiſe then as it were by certaine beames and lights, this point is made ſo cleare and manifeſt, that we may very well ſay without any maner of doubt or wauering at all, that this Treatiſe is not carnally and literally, but ſpiritually and myſtically to be vnderſtood. In ſuch ſort, that I hold this for an vnfallible and certaine truth, that there are comprehended and contained in this ſmall booke, the exceeding great affection and loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and the holy Church of the faithfull beleeuers, the neceſſarie vſe of the word of God, the profite and pleaſantneſſe thereof, the efficacie of faith, and heat of charity. Furthermore we learne to know what are the operations of the ſpirit, and what are the works of the flesh: & briefly, that which doth any maner of way cōcerne or reſpect the Church; and all this, vnder the figuratiue talk and communication betweene the Bridegroome and the Spouſe. Now Christ is the Bridegroome, as it is in the 3. of Iohn verſe 29. He that hath the

bride, is the bridegrome, and the Church is his ſpouſe. Hoſea Chapter 2. Thou shalt call me Iſhi or my husband, & I wil marry thee vnto me for euer. And this ſpouſe is attended on with her young maidens, that is to ſay, with the particular ſoules of the faithfull, which do follow after the odoriferous and ſauery ointments of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. And the bridegrome likewiſe hath his friends that do follow & accōpany him, to wit, the true Bishops, & ſincere Prechers of the word of God, which he cals vnto him to eate & drinke, & make merry with him. Theſe men heare the voyce of the Church, that is to ſay, the words of Chriſt. Neuertheleſſe, this is not ſo to be vnderſtood, but that all the faithfull may rightly terme thē
               ſelues frēds of the bridegrome. The title or inſcriptiō is the Song of Songs, as if therin were contained ſongs which did farre exceed all other ſongs, in plenty of holy myſteries, and they are called the ſongs of Salomon, or Salomons ſongs, becauſe hee writ them being inſpired by the holy Ghoſt of the true Salomon Ieſus Chriſt. VVe reade of many Canticles or ſongs in the ſcripture, as

the ſong of Moyſes, Deborah, Ioſua, Anna, Dauid, Abacuck, and others, but this booke compriſeth not one onely ſong which Salomon ſong, but there are many ſongs herein contained, all written in one book, but concerning one matter, and one argument; wherin are expreſsed moſt truly the charitie, faith, loue, ioy, delights, and diuerſe kinds of benefits (not without vehemēt & earneſt affections) wherewith our moſt louing & merciful redemer doth follow his elect with inexplicable graces, by the grace & fauor of the almighty God. So that they being ſtirred vp by the holy Ghoſt, do with certaine vnſpeakeable affections of loue, regard, behold, and approch neere vnto the diuine grace and bountie of God: deſiring moſt earneſtly and deuoutly to be commended, approoued, and daily more and more eſteemed and fauoured of him: in ſuch ſort that if there be found any error or fault in their liues and conuerſations (as ſpots and blots or wennes in their forheads do ſometimes happen) yet that they may not be refuſed or reiected for this or the like things, or have any cauſe to diſtruſt his mercifull

kindneſſe or louing fauor, but that the falling out of louers, may be the renewing of loue. For louers being iealous one of another are mutually and ſuddenly prouoked vnto wrath, & as ſuddēly reconciled and pacified, and afterwards they become greater friends then they were before. This then is the principall intent and purpoſe of this booke. This is the ſong of God the ſpouſe, vnto euery faithfull ſoule, and generally vnto al the Church. Neither are we to look for any preciſe order in this dialogue or cō
               munication, which is not vſuall amongſt perfect louers, where all things how ſoeuer and where ſoeuer done, are taken in very good part, where, euen errors, ignorances, and miſtakes are accepted of, and laught at, and where quarrels, contentions, ſtrife, anger, and blowes alſo many times, are heard of, approued, and in moſt friendly ſort admitted. And in this booke, there be foure ſundry ſorts of perſons to be obſerued of vs. The bridegrome, and the friends of the bridegrome; the ſpouſe and her young damſels or waiting maides, and as the bride ſaith one thing, and the bridegrome another:

ſo the young virgins that waite on the ſpouſe, and the friends of the bridegrome, are brought in ſpeaking contrarie and diuerſe things, yet all of them betokening godly & kind affections. Now by the bridegrome we may (as we have before declared vnto you) vnderſtand Chriſt, by the ſpouſe the Church, by the friends of the bridegrome the Preachers of the Goſpell, & ſuch as shew vs the way vnto Chriſt, and direct vs vnto his eternall marriage, and heauenly banquet. The young virgins are the faithfull ſoules, which do alwayes accompany the Spouſe, and we muſt note, that the Spouſe doth alwayes long to bee in the houſe, bed, or other ſecret and inward place, with her welbeloued, according vnto the cuſtome of women, and the bridegrome, after the manner of men, calleth the Spouſe foorth into the vineyeard, or abroad into the fields, or vnto ſome ſuch places: becauſe ſo it is, and it is moſt true, that the Church of it ſelfe would willingly (if ſo be that it were poſsible) bring vp her children in quiet reſt and tranquility, but he on the other ſide, thinketh it good to exerciſe her

with many tribulations, and perſecutions, to the ende that she may the better come vnto the conſideration of eternall things, and alſo that if matters do happen well and happily, yet, that amiddeſt her proſperity she may not bee too far delighted with the pleaſures and entiſing baits of this preſent world: but alwayes hope, and grone after an heauenly countrey.
            Thus endeth the preface, the Commentarie followeth.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               The firſt Chapter of the Canticles.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 Let him kiſſe me with the kiſſes of his mouth: for thy loue is better then wine.
                        
                           2 Becauſe of the ſauour of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointmēt powred out: therfore the virgins loue thee.
                        
                           3 Draw me: we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we will reioyce and be glad in thee: we will remember thy loue more then wine: the righteous do loue thee.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  
                     THe wordes of the Spouſe are theſe: Let him kiſſe me. Where firſt of all we muſt conſider, what is the meaning of theſe kiſſinges which the Church doth ſo earneſtly deſire and long after. A kiſſe is a teſtimonie of friendſhip, loue, and goodwill, therfore the Church deſireth a kiſſe of our Sauior, that is as much

as to ſay, to purchaſe and obtaine his friendſhip, loue and goodwill. Her requeſt is then that her ſinnes may be forgiuen her, and that ſhe may reobtaine the fauor of God by him, ſhe confeſſeth her ſinnes vnto God, crauing pardon for the ſame, and ſhe calleth for the Goſpell, becauſe ſhe would faine heare the comfortable and pleaſant voyce of remiſſion of ſinnes▪ pronounced through Ieſus Chriſt: and the ſpouſe requeſteth the amiable kiſſes of the bridegromes owne mouth, to ſhew & teſtify the great deſire which ſhe had to heare Chriſt alone, and no other ſpeake, & to make knowne the vehemencie of her goodwill towards him For it had bene ſufficient to haue ſaid: Let him kiſſe me: but the loue of faith, & holy delight of the ſoule, made her adde theſe wordes, with the kiſſes of his mouth: as if ſhe ſhold haue ſaid, The greateſt thing that I can wiſh for in this world, is to obtaine the loue & fauor of God, which I ſee I can not obtain by any other, but by thee my Sauior Chriſt. For I know this, and am moſt certainly perſwaded of it, that I ſhall neuer be able to cō
                     paſſe my ſaluatiō by the merits of my works, but by thee alone, when it ſhall pleaſe thee to vouchſafe me the benefite of thy ſweete kiſſes, that is to ſay, of thy grace and loues. For thy loue is better thē wine. Here the ſpouſe yeeldeth a reaſon, why ſhe wold ſo willingly

be kiſſed of him, becauſe his loue is better thē any precious thing whatſoeuer, which ſhe expreſſeth by wine. Where by the way we muſt note, that by his loue is meant the doctrine of the Goſpell, and the graces which the bridegroome brought into the world with him: eſpecially if we conſider, howe much this doctrin which ſo proceedeth from the loue of the ſpouſe, is better then that wherewith ſhe was ſuſtained and comforted before the coming of the bridegrome, and therefore ſeeing the abundant grace & goodwil of this her bridegroome towards her, ſhe breaketh forth into theſe words: Thy loue is better then wine, that is to ſay, aboue that doctrine wherewith ſhe was comforted of the auncient fathers: ſo that this is the ſenſe of the whole verſe: I deſire the kiſſes of thy mouth, that is, I looke for my redemption at thy hands, becauſe thy precepts and inſtructions are milke and food to nouriſh me vp vnto eternall life, and they are better then the Law, which ſtrikes vs downe to the ground with remembrance of our ſinnes, and aboue all other doctrines which do not ſtrengthen but kill the ſimple and weake ones, as wine, which either killeth young children, or elſe maketh them drunke. Thus then the Church being inflamed as the ſpouſe towardes her bridegroome, crieth out continually, Let him

kiſſe me with the kiſſes of his mouth. That is to ſay, let the Bridegroome himſelfe, come to teach and inſtruct, to ſaue and deliuer mee, neither let him teach me any longer by the mouth of the Patriarkes and Prophets, but let him come himſelfe to informe mee with the words of his own mouth, and ſo be content to receiue the kiſſe of my mouth: that is, let him not deſpiſe mee, or turne away his face from me, ſeeking & asking after the way of ſaluation. And this was then fulfilled as we do verily beleeue, when ſitting on the mountaine he taught his diſciples, whē ſpeaking as the Bridegrome is woont to do vnto the ſpouſe, he ſaid: Bleſſed are the poore in ſpirit, for theirs is the kingdō of god: & many other things which follow there in the ſame chapter. Here he gaue the Spouſe his Church a kiſſe, and opening his mouth promiſed vnto his Apoſtles, that is to ſay, vnto his ſpouſe the Church, the ioyes of the kingdom of heauen. Here I ſay, the Bridegroome ſheweth his loue towards his ſpouſe, better thē wine, that is to ſay, then the doctrine of the Lawe, or any other doctrine: becauſe the very inſtructions of the new teſtament, do make all thoſe which ſhall be borne againe of water and of the ſpirit, fit for eternal life, which the Law was not able to bring to paſſe.
               
               
                  
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the Bridegroome.
                  
                     
                        
                           2 Becauſe of the ſauour of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment powred out: therefore the virgins loue thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     Becauſe of the ſauour of thy good, &c. What is that thou ſayeſt, ô deareſt Spouſe, of the name of thy Bridegroome and welbeloued? That it is like vnto an odoriferous ointmēt, poured forth, which being preached & publiſhed abroad throughout the whole world, doth yeeld a moſt ſweet ſauour in the elect of God: and laſt of all becauſe this Bridegroome doth moſt entirelie loue vs, & ſhew his mercy towards vs, to the end that hee might take the Church to be his ſpouſe, and make his great name knowne abroad which is cōmō vnto him with the father & the holie Ghoſt: he tooke fleſh vpon him, becauſe the ſpouſe ſhold run vnto him with greater cōfidencie & boldneſſe for help & ſuccour. This ſpouſe looked for his comming a long time, in the end he came, and at the preſence and voice of the Bridegroome, ſhe reioyced that he deſcēded that ſhe might aſcēd: & ſhe did run in faith behind him, to be partaker of his ointmentes: for afterwards when the eternall Bridegroome of the Church was made fleſh, as the ointment of his name was

ſpread abroad and powred out throughout the world, the young virgins, that is to ſay, the ſoules of the elect, did find the ſent therof to be exceeding pleaſant and ſweet, the holy Ghoſt ſo working, and bringing it to paſſe, and foorthwith they were delighted with the bridegrome, and beleeued in him, whom, after the maner of married women, they do loue moſt entirely and ſyncerely: and by the ſweete ſmelling ointments are to bee vnderſtood, the wholſome gifts of the holie Ghoſt, whence come theſe hot and zealous words of faith, hope and charitie: and theſe yong damſels, which I told you before were the ſoules of the elect, renued and regenerated in Chriſt, the filthineſſe of the olde man being put away, inflamed with theſe three vertues or gifts of God (as I called them) do loue and imbrace this welbeloued bridegrome, perceiuing that by him, and through his meanes they haue obtained full remiſſion and pardon for all their ſinnes, and purchaſed vnto themſelues theſe giftes of the holy Ghoſt, whence come theſe words: The loue of God is ſpread abroad in our hearts, by the meanes of the holie Ghoſt, which is giuen vnto them.
               
               
                  
                  The ſpouſeth ſpeaketh vnto the bridegrome after this maner.
                  
                     
                        
                           3 Draw me: we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we will reioice and bee glad in thee, we will remember thy loue more then wine: the righteous do loue thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     Draw me. The Church of the faithful crieth out and ſaith, ô good God draw me vnto thee by the grace of thy election, to the end that after we haue a litle ſmelled & felt this ſweet odour, wee may be fully vnited vnto thee. And thus both the ſpouſe and her maidens, being allured with the wonderfull pleaſant odour of the bridegroms ointmēts, do runne after him whom they loue, & this, word to draw, ſignifieth a kind of violence or force, as if a man were to be haled with ropes out of ſome deepe pit: for the ſpouſe as long as ſhe liueth in this world, hath the fleſh which reſiſteth God drawing, but God which draweth her is able to ouercome it, & therfore the ſpouſe when ſhe is drawne deſireth him that hee would neuer ceaſe to draw and to pul her vnto him: knowing full wel, that otherwiſe ſhe ſhold wāt of her rock & ſtrēgth, becauſe indeed, he that is not drawen periſheth, the holy ghoſt teſtifying thus much, that no man cōmeth vnto the father vnles the father draw him. We will run after

thee. So then the ſoules of the elect, ſo made by faith, and the virgins and damſels of the ſpouſe, whoſe mindes are vndefiled and vnſpotted, do ſay vnto the bridegrome, we will run after thee. As who would ſay, the ſauour of thy ointments, doth ſo forcibly draw vs vnto thee (although the fleſh be vnwilling & refuſe to run after thee with the ſpouſe) that wee cannot chuſe but do whatſoeuer thou commandeſt vs, for thy ſpirit maketh all things, ſeeme they neuer ſo hard & vnpoſſible, poſſible, pleaſant and eaſie to be borne.
               
               
                  The words of the ſpouſe vnto the young virgins.
                  
                     The king hath brought me in. Chriſt heareth the petition of the ſpouſe, graunteth her requeſt, and draweth her after him: he bringeth her into his chambers, that is, into quiet places, ſuch as are true peace, quietneſſe, and ſecuritie of Chriſtian iuſtice, & inward ioyes of the kingdome of heauen: and in theſe chā
                     bers are hidden the ſecrets of God, that is to ſay, the truth of his word. And in theſe chā
                     bers or cloſets of the kingdome of God, the church is to cōſider thoſe hiddē things which neither eye hath ſeene, nor eare heard, nor hath entred at anie time into the heart of man: that is, which cannot be comprehended by any ſence of fleſh, becauſe the peace therof

paſſeth all vnderſtanding: and the ſpouſe ſpeaketh vnto the yong virgins, that is, the Church of Chriſt ſpeaketh vnto her faithful which are regenerated in Chriſt: and ſo indeed we ought all of vs humbly to beſeech our bridegrome Chriſt, that it would pleaſ
                        •
                      him to help and ſuccour vs, running after him for ſuccour & help, by reaching out him hand vnto vs, & keeping vs from falling. Becauſe, that vnleſſe he put to his helping hand we are not able to ſtand vp vpō our feet, much leſſe to run about. And finally, the yong m
                        ••
                      being admitted into the reſt and quietnes o
                        •
                      the aforenamed chābers, do ſpeake after this maner of wiſe vnto the bridegrome: We wi
                           •
                         reioyce & be glad in thee. As if they ſhould haue ſaid, We deſire to reioyce and be glad in thee alone, and in no other: & furthermore they ad theſe words: We will remember thy loue more then wine: that is to ſay, to the end that we may truly reioyce, and that our ioy may not be a vaine or tranſitorie ioy, we will remember thy louing kindneſſe & amiable comforts vnto vs ward, that is, we will call to mind, how for our ſakes, miſerable & mortall men, thou tookeſt fleſh, & ſufferedſt for our ſaluation; and laſt of al, becauſe they promiſe to approch neere vnto their only bridegrome Chriſt, they commend & praiſe him brieflie, ſaying, the righteous ſhall loue thee. The wicked praiſe & extoll wicked things,

neither can any thing pleaſe them but that which reſēbleth the filthy cogitatiōs of their wicked hearts, & therfore it is no praiſe, but rather a great diſpraiſe & diſgrace to be commēded of the wicked, but to be ſlaundered & backbited of thē, it is the greateſt praiſe and cōmendation in the world. Therfore it is for the credit of the bridegrome, that he is loued of the righteous. But let vs heare what thoſe righteous mē are, which he here ſpeaketh of, they are thoſe which are reſtored againe into that former righteouſnes wherein man was created at the firſt, & which he loſt by ſin: & he ſaith the righteous loue thee, becauſe it is not poſſible for any man to loue God, vnles he be firſt brought backe againe vnto that righteouſnes, which he declined from, by reaſon of the crookednes and peruerſnes of ſin. Wherfore it is not without cauſe, that they are called crooked and peruerſe men, which ſeeke after earthly things, and they righteous which ſeek heauenly and celeſtiall things.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           4 I am black ô daughters of Ieruſalem, but comely as the tents of Kedar, and as the curtains of Salomon.
                        
                           5 Regard ye me not, becauſe I am black: for the ſunne hath looked vpon mee. The ſonnes of my mother were angrie againſt

me: they made me the keeper of the vines, but I kept not mine owne vine.
                        
                           6 Shew me, ô thou whō my ſoule loueth, where thou feedeſt, where thou lyeſt at noone: for why should I be as she that turneth aſide to the flocks of thy companions.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the yong virgins.
                  Laſtly, becauſe ſhe that would ſo faine be made partaker of the bridegroomes ointments, muſt needs be partaker of his calamities and aduerſities: therefore the ſpouſe by her owne example inſtructeth her virgins, ſaying, O daughters of Ieruſalē, that is to ſay, O ye faithful ſoules, I am blacke, as who ſhold ſay, you haue ſmelled the ſweete ſauour of Chriſts ointments, you haue bene admitted into his chambers and ſecret places, and all things pleaſe you, becauſe you ſeeke by all maner of meanes to glorifie the bridegrome, ſaying, the righteous loue thee: but now my darlings, I muſt tell you of one thing more, you muſt ſtudy and indeuour as much as in you lyeth, that you do not depart and ſlide away from that righteouſnes, which you haue obtained and attained vnto, either for feare of any aduerſity, or croſſe which ſhal be laid vpon you by the wicked, & which you muſt

needs ſuffer and endure wil you nill you. For (marke you) I my ſelfe which am the Church and his deare ſpouſe, as long as I liue in the fleſh, why I my ſelfe am blacke and as a caſtaway, afflicted of the reprobate and carnall minded men, notwithſtanding in the ſight of God and iudgement of my deareſt bridegroome I am comely and faire. And ſo indeed the Church is made blacke and duskiſh, that is to ſay, deformed & vnhandſom by the aduerſities of her oppreſſiōs, but is notwithſtā
                     ding beautiful and welfauored by reaſon of the comelineſſe & ſeemlineſſe of her vertues: & this is ſaid in regard of the words before going, the righteous loue thee. For becauſe ſhe would ſhew her righteouſneſſe, and ſtrengthen the weake hearts of the faithfull, which in this place ſhe calleth daughters of Ieruſalē, that is, daughters of the heauēly country: ſhe ſpeaks vnto them after this ſort: Maruel not to ſee me blacke with oppreſſions, for I am faire and beautifull in the deſire of heauenly things: true it is, that I am black with the ſtudie of humility, but faire in the practiſe of vertues, I am black in the eyes of fooles, but faire in the vnderſtanding of the wiſe, blacke with the remembrāce of my ſins, but faire in the contēplation & beholding of heauenly matters, black vnto thoſe who liue wickedly & diſorderly, by ſetting before their eies

the terrors & horrors of eternal puniſhments: faire vnto all thoſe which liue righteouſly & holily, by promiſing thē the ioyes of heauē, & euerlaſting bliſſe: black in the vility & humility of my body: faire in the ſanctity & holines of the ſoule: blacke here vpon earth, but ſhall be faire in heauen: blacke in ſuffering of momentary and temporary euils, faire in expectation of eternall & euerlaſting goods. S. Paul was black, whē he was almoſt ſtoned to death, but on the contrary ſide, he was faire & amiable, when he was caught vp into the 3. heauens: in the deformitie of his blacknes, he ſaid theſe words, We are the very excrements of the world, and ſweepings, as it were, of all men: in the pride of his beauty he ſaid, The vail being takē away, we ſhal behold the glorie of God. As the tents of Keaar. Keaar was one of Iſmaels ſons, frō whence the people of the Scythians were deriued, which dwell in tents which are in outward ſhew dark & obſcure, but within they contain many precious and coſtly things, and euen thus & no otherwiſe fareth it with me, ſaith the ſpouſe, now at this preſent. For I am outwardly afflicted, & ſeem to the eyes of mortall men obſcure, abā
                     doned and deſpiſed both of God & man, although indeed, both in reſpect of the bridegroms ointmēts wherwith he hath annointed me, as alſo in regard of that reſt of mind and

peace of cōſcience which he hath grāted vnto me▪ I am within ful of beauty & pleaſure: thus thē, I am within my ſelfe a ſinner, an abiect or caſtaway, but in my husband and bridegrome Chriſt, iuſt & glorious, in my ſelf & of my ſelf black, in him faire & beautiful. As the curtains of Salomon. Here it is takē for that vaile which he made in the tēple, & as thoſe curtains within the temple were moſt fair, ſo my beauty & hādſomnes is hiddē, internal, & incloſed within me, becauſe the ineffable▪ & vnſpeakeable peace & graces of my bridegrome, are ſecret & vnknown to the world, but known to me: for I content my ſelfe with thē, knowing that the blacke clouds of my ſins, & iniquities of my perſecutions & tribulations ſhal ſoone fade & vaniſh away. Regard ye me not. The ſpouſe being very careful for her yong maidēs, & fearing leaſt they ſhould be diſcouraged, becauſe ſhe told thē that her beauty did not outwardly appeare, cōforteth & ſtrēgtheneth thē with theſe cheerful ſayings: Do not you cōtemne or forſake me, becauſe my light is ſomewhat obſcured & darkned, or becauſe I liue in aduerſity, & ſeem vnto the world to be a reprobate and caſtaway ſinner, becauſe the ſun looketh vpon me, but what ſun? our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, the true ſunne of iuſtice, which is the true light that lighteneth euery man that cōmeth into the world. Iohn. chap. 1. And this is ſaid becauſe euery

ſoule that ſtādeth in the heat of this ſun muſt needs become blacke, becauſe of the exceeding great glory of his light, that is, muſt needs truly hūble & proſtrate her ſelf before his face acknowledging that al her works, euē the beſt of them are nothing els but darknes & ſinne: notwithſtanding in the ful confidence of her husband, ſhe perſeuereth & cōtinueth in doing wel, but truſteth not in her merits or weldoings, but reioyceth in them, becauſe the Sun doth blacken & darken thē, whileſt that ſhee frō time to time doth mortifie the old man, by humbling her ſelf, & voluntary ſuffering of al maner of perſecutions. The ſonnes of my mother were angrie againſt me. And what is this mother but Eue the mother of all the liuing, aſwel the iuſt as the vniuſt: and the vniuſt haue euer ſince the beginning of the world, oppoſed themſelues againſt the iuſt, becauſe they hate thē which are ruled by Chriſts lawes, & ſo periſh in the reprobrat ſence of the fleſh: & theſe are of the wicked ſynagogue of Satā, which do ſtil perſecute, vexe, & contradict the ſpouſe, whence it cōmeth that ſhe is grown ſo blacke & brown. They made me the keeper of the vines: as if ſhe ſhould haue ſaid: I haue obtained this by my perſecutions, that I am made keeper of more vines, that is of more churches, bicauſe the firſt Church was founded in Ieruſalem, & that which followeth. But I kept not mine owne vine,
                     
is not to be vnderſtood of the mind, but of the place: for although the citie be ruinated and deſtroyed: yet neuertheleſſe, the integritie of faith remaineth inuiolable for euer and euer, ſo that this is the meaning; he kept not that place, that is, hee retayned not that place where the vineyard ſhould haue bene, and where it was planted at the firſt, being rooted by God the father, out of that barren and vnfertile ſoyle, and planted in a more fertile place among the Gentiles. So the Church is this vine, or elſe by this you may vnderſtand the ſoules of the faithfull, which are planted in faith, rooted in charitie, trenched about with the furrowes of good diſcipline, repayred with the teares of the penitent, and watered with the wordes of the Preacher: and hence commeth it, that they doe ſo abound in all manner of diuine fruit, that is to ſay, in gladneſſe and holy deuotion. In like maner we may ſay, that faith is the vine, the branches vertues, the grapes good workes, the wine deuotion. Moreouer the vineyard is religion, the husbandman the father, the ſonne the vine, and the iuſt the branches thereof. God the father is the huſbandman, becauſe he digges and ditches it in confeſſion and contrition, proynes it with ſprinckling of teares. And indeed the Sonne is the vine, becauſe he is the foundation of

religion, becauſe no man can lay any other foūdatiō but that which is already laid, which is Chriſt Ieſus, by whom euery building doth grow vp to be a holy tēple. The brāches are the righteous which doe ſhoot & ſprout out of the vine Chriſt, and are full of ſappe and moyſture.
               
               
                  The ſpouſe vnto Chriſt.
                  
                     Shew me. Chriſt is all in all vnto them that beleeue, a king, a ſunne, a keeper of vines, a ſhepheard, & notwithſtanding he cōtinueth alwayes to be their bridegrome & welbeloued, to whom the ſpouſe flieth for ſuccour & helpe: & ſeeing that ſhe is not able to keepe her vine any lōger, ſhe referreth the care therof vnto her husband Chriſt. Moreouer, ſhe hath many litle goats about her, that is, many yong ones which are but ſimple fellowes, nouices, & vngrounded in faith, which ſhe would faine haue fed with the precious and wholeſome bread of Chriſts word, and not with the poiſoned doctrine of men. And this is the cauſe why ſhe makes her recourſe vnto him, knowing that he is the true ſhepheard of her ſoule, ſaying, O thou whom my ſoule loueth, ô ſonne of loue & charitie, and this charitie is God, that is as much to ſay, as, ô thou my deare bridegrome & husbād Chriſt, whō my ſoule loueth, whom I can not chuſe but loue moſt entirely & dearely: ſhew me where

thou feedeſt, where the ſonne of righteouſnes feedeth and reſteth himſelfe, I meane Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne of God, which neuer ſetteth, hauing alwayes a meridian brightneſſe ſhyning round about him. And the Church knoweth the time, that is to ſay, the noonetide, at what time the bridegrome doth reſt & take his repaſt, but ſhe knoweth not the place where. Alſo ſhe knoweth, that with the lanterne of the word it is not poſſible to find him, vnleſſe it pleaſe him to manifeſt and ſhew himſelfe by opening the hidden ſenſes and darke myſteries of the ſcriptures with his key: and this knowledge alſo can not be gotten, vnleſſe it be obtayned by the ſpirite of the bridegrome, and therefore ſhe requeſteth him that it would pleaſe him to make himſelfe knowen vnto her, and ſhew her where he feedes & abides. And euen now he feedeth her, whileſt that he lighteneth, reioyceth, and inflameth her, which is in the heate of the day, to wit, at noone, or midday. So that we are not able to endure the great glorie of his face, vnleſſe wee be couered with the vayle of his fleſh, which he tooke; and euen now we do reſt vnder the ſhadowe of his wings, by being made partakers of his heauenly graces. For why ſhould I be. And what is that the ſpouſe requireth here in this place, vnleſſe it be that Chriſt ſhould

ſhew her theſe things, leaſt that ſhe ſhould be compelled to turne aſide to the flockes of his companions. But what are theſe companions, but the faithfull, & chiefly thoſe which haue any office or ſuperioritie ouer the reſt. But of theſe there be ſome true, ſome lying and falſe brethren. The true brethren do not gather the flockes vnto themſelues but vnto Chriſt, neither doe they make themſelues heads of the Church, but humbly ſubmit both themſelues and their whole flockes vnto Chriſts gouernment, acknowledging him to be their Lord and head: and they are very much afraid leaſt the flockes ſhould follow them, and therefore they doe ſtudie by all manner of meanes how to preuent theſe ſayings, I am of Paul, and I am of Peter, I am of Barnabas, and I am of Apollo. But their onely care and deſire is, to bring euery one to ſay and confeſſe thus much, I am of Chriſt. Now contrariwiſe, they which are the falſe followers and companions of Chriſt Ieſus, do not leade or gather the flockes vnto their bridegrome Chriſt, but vnto themſelues, making themſelues heads and ouerſeers ouer thoſe flockes: wherefore, the true Church ſaith, I will not turne aſide to the flockes of them which are called thy companions: chuſing rather to do any thing then this, becauſe, that if the flockes do follow any other ſhepheard

but thee, they muſt needes periſh and be deſtroyed: and theſe flockes do wander and go aſtray, becauſe during the time of their abode here in this wicked world, they can find no reſt or peace, but are alwayes troubled & diſquieted in mind, and therefore the ſenſe and meaning of theſe words is this: I doe heartily deſire thee (ô my God and Sauiour) that it would pleaſe thee, and none but thee, to take the paines to teach mee thoſe things which it is meete for me to know, to the end that my iudgement and minde may not bee offuſcated and darkened with the cloudes of errors and hereſies, but that my vnderſtanding may be lightened with the truth of thy word, which ſhineth as cleare as the Sunne doth at noone day: ſo that I may not fall into any error or falſe opinion, being miſled & miſguided by them which make profeſſion of great knowledge and wiſedome, and which continue to cōpare their doctrine and the precepts of their fond hearts, with the truth of thy word.
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        
                           7 If thou know not, ô thou the faireſt among women, get thee foorth by the ſteppes of the flocke, and feede thy kiddes by the 
                              •
                           ents of the shepheards.
                        
                           
                           8 I haue compared thee, O my loue, to the troupe of horſes in the chariots of Pharaoh.
                        
                           9 Thy cheekes are comely with rowes of ſtones, and thy necke with chaynes.
                        
                           10 VVe will make thee borders of gold with ſtuds of ſiluer.
                        
                           11 VVhiles the king was at his repaſt, my ſpikenard gaue the ſmell thereof.
                        
                           12 My welbeloued is as a būdle of myrrhe vnto me, he shall lie between my breasts.
                        
                           13 My welbeloued is as a cluſter of camphire vnto me, in the vines of Engedi.
                        
                           14 My loue, behold thou art faire: behold thou art faire, thine eies are like the doues.
                        
                           15 My welbeloued, behold thou art faire and pleaſant, alſo our bed is greene:
                        
                           16 The beames of our houſe are Cedars, our rafters are of firre.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the bridegrome vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     If thou know not. Chriſt aunſwereth the Church, and teacheth her all thoſe things which ſhe before had demaunded of him: he

ſaith vnto her, O thou the faireſt among women, that is to ſay, among the Churches, becauſe the Church & congregation of the faithfull howſoeuer it ſeeme in the ſight of men to be blacke and contemptible, yet notwithſtanding the only begotten ſonne of God Chriſt Ieſus, eſteemeth and iudgeth her to be fairer and better, then all the Synagogues of the wicked. O wonderfull great beautie and fairenes, which God himſelfe doth ſo greatly commende and approoue, by calling her the faireſt among women. Indeed other women are faire, becauſe they are Gods creatures, who is moſt glorious, & admirable in all his workes: but thou O my Spouſe, exceedeſt them all, becauſe thou art to be preferred before them all, becauſe thou art adorned with my beautie, in regard whereof he ſayth vnto her, O thou the faireſt among women, if thou know not of thy ſelfe where I feed & reſt at noone day, then go foorth out of thy ſelfe, & renounce thy ſelfe and all things elſe for the loue of me, beare thy croſſe particularly, and truſt not to thy owne opinion or workes at all. Furthermore, depart from the flockes of my companions, and from the dregs & filth of humane traditions: and laſtly, lay aſide all truſt and confidence in the fleſh, otherwiſe, neuer hope to find the place where I do feed and reſt my ſelfe at nooneday, becauſe he is

not worthie of my loue, that for the loue of me is not content to forſake all things, and himſelfe alſo if neede be. At length he ſheweth where his feeding and abiding is to wit, in the footſteps of the flocks of the Church, and neere the tabernacles of ſhepheards: of theſe flockes are all they which we know to be of the Church, and their footſteps are thoſe things which we read of them to haue bene gratefull and acceptable vnto God, and theſe are the ſteppes of the Patriarkes, Prophets and Apoſtles of the true faith in the word of God, & all thoſe things which God doth worke and bring to paſſe in them by charitie. And we muſt follow after thoſe ſteps where he feedeth and lyeth, becauſe he comforteth all them, which truely feede on him in their hearts by faith, and he granteth them true peace of conſcience, which is as much as to reſt and feede with Chriſt. The litle goates, and the feeble and weake hearted are thoſe which beleeue in the Lord. The ſhepheards may be tearmed, thoſe whom he ſendeth abroad with authoritie to preach the Goſpell, who by publiſhing abroad among the people the ſincere word of God, do miniſter and giue them food of eternall life, by giuing them the bread of Gods word in due ſeaſon, which if they did not, they would not be accounted true ſhepheards and miniſters

of the word, and their tabernacles are the Churches, neare which the flockes of the elect children of God do graze and feed, and the paſtures are the immaculate wordes of God, and this is the food which Chriſt commanded Peter to feed his ſheepe withall.
               
               
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     I haue compared thee, ô my loue, to the troupe of houſes. He compareth the bleſſed ſpouſe of the moſt victorious king Chriſt, vnto the troupe of horſes: that is to ſay, vnto the Angels, becauſe no man of any vnderſtanding in the world doubteth, whether they be the meſſengers and miniſters of Chriſt. Wherefore Chriſt ſpeaketh as it were, after this ſort vnto the ſpouſe, ô my deare ſpouſe, the time was when thou waſt in a miſerable caſe, the priſoner and bondſlaue of the Diuell, and therfore as farre eſtranged as might be from me; but loe, I haue now ſet thee at libertie, I haue freed and redeemed thee out of the hands of the diuell, and by the vertue of my word and ſpirite, I will ſo glorifie thee that thou ſhalt be like vnto the glorious companie of Angels. But wherein? In the Chariots and power of Pharaoh the king of Egypt, that is to ſay, the Prince of darkeneſſe, the diuell, ſinne, death, and hell it

ſelfe, all which things I haue ouercome for thee, that thou ſhouldeſt truſt and beleeue in me. And this is ſpoken to this end and purpoſe, that we ſhold know that all thoſe which are without Chriſt, are but as it were horſes which draw in the Chariot of Pharaoh, that is to ſay, are vnder the rule and guiding of him, which driues the Chariot, to wit, the Diuell: but as many as are of Chriſt, & hold with him, they are put into Gods coach, that is to ſay, are altogether ruled and gouerned by him. Therefore by the notable troupe of horſes of God, we muſt needes vnderſtand the Church, by reaſon of the multitude of mē that are contained in it, and of ſtore of ſpirituall armour and weapons of faith & iuſtice, and for the inuincible force and ſtrength of the ſpirit, and noble victorie ouer her enemies. Thy cheekes are comely. Finally he commendeth his owne workes in the ſpouſe, becauſe the ſpouſe is not otherwiſe faire or cō
                     ly, but as ſhe is faire and beautifull in her husband Chriſt. And whereas it is ſaid, thy cheekes are comely, wee are to conſider the cheekes as they are in the head and face, and the head of the ſpouſe is the husbād. Now as the beautie of the cheekes doth principally appertain vnto the head, and thē afterwards vnto the reſt of the members: ſo the beautie and glorie of Chriſts cheekes, which is the

head of the Church, do firſt of all belong vnto him, and ſecondly they appertaine vnto his members, that is to ſay, vnto the ſpouſe, becauſe Chriſt is the honour and glory of the ſpouſe, whoſe necke are the Preachers and teachers of the Church, which are adorned & beautified with chaines & ſundry iewels, that is to ſay, with the doctrin of the Goſpel, from whence come theſe goldē chaynes, that is to ſay, true wiſedome, which leades a man vnto eternall life, and theſe chaines are pointed with points of ſiluer, wherby is ſignified godly learning, and zealous charitie, wherewith the faithfull people & Church of God are pricked and inflamed both to the glorie of God, and benefit of the elect.
               
               
                  The Spouſes words vnto Chriſt.
                  
                     Whiles the king. The bridegrome cōmendeth & extolleth his workes in the Church, now ſhe returneth al the glory backe againe vnto him, confeſſing that his workes are admirable in her eyes, and that all her beautie commeth from the glorie of her husbande Chriſt, and that ſhee receiueth from him all thoſe gifts and graces which are mentioned in the verſe immediatly going before. Wherfore ſhe ſpeaketh vnto him as vnto a third perſō, ſaying, Whiles the king was at his repaſt my ſpikenard gaue the ſmell thereof. Spiknard is a litle herb, but hath a great ſmel, by which

is to be vnderſtood the humility of the faithfull, becauſe they confeſſe thēſelues to be ſinners, and that they are nothing of thēſelues, notwithſtanding they go onward alwaies in well doing, whēce it is that they yeeld a moſt pleaſant ſauour of a good report, which doth inuite & draw others to do the like: and this precious ſpiknard which hath ſuch a perfect ſmell, is not to be gotten but when Chriſt is at his repaſt, and his repaſt is the Church, & ſecure minds of the faithfull Our Spikenard then is our humility, which then ſendeth foorth a moſt ſweete and pleaſant ſmell, moſt acceptable vnto God, a ſmell indeed of good works, when Chriſt the king reſteth in vs: otherwiſe it is but the ſtinking ſmell of hypocriſie, and a ſauour of death vnto death.
               
               
                  The words of the ſpouſe concerning her ſelfe.
                  
                     My welbeloued is vnto mee as a bundle for myrrhe. Surely it is a great cōmendation for the bridegrome that without him the ſpouſe hath no ſmell at all. And therefore this is her meaning, ſhe knoweth that ſhe doth fully poſſeſſe & enioy Chriſt, & that Chriſt muſt alwaies dwell with her as a bundle of myrrhe, which is bitter, but hath a moſt excell ēt ſmel in it ſelf, & hath this power, to keep things frō being corrupted. And verily the ſpirit of the bridegrome doth bring to paſſe theſe

things in the godly. Firſt of all he ſendeth thē bitterneſſe, becauſe the ſword of griefe ſhold pierce their ſoules: ſecondly he poureth forth the ſauour of the ſweet oyntments: thirdly & laſtly he keepeth & preſerueth thē from corruption, by beſtowing eternall life vpon all thoſe which beleeue & truſt in him. Ioh. 3.14 And as Moyſes lift vp the ſerpent in the wilderneſſe, ſo muſt the ſonne of man be lift vp, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh but haue eternall life. And indeed this ſame mirrhe▪ is a bitter thing, ſignifying hard and grieuous tribulations: but ſeeing that all theſe things are to come vnto her for her louing husbands ſake, ſhe gratifieth & cheereth vp her ſelf with theſe words, hoping that god will giue her the grace manfully & couragiouſly to endure al things, & therfore ſhe calleth not that an armefull or a whole burden which ſhe is to ſuffer for Chriſt, but a handfull, bundle, or rather to ſpeake more properly, a bundelet, & wel ſhe may call it a bundelet, that is to ſay, a litle bundle, becauſe the afflictions of this world are not worthy the glory which ſhalbe reuealed vnto vs hereafter. My welbeloued is as a cluſter of camphire. Chriſt the only begotten ſon of God ceaſeth not to praiſe & extol his welbeloued ſpouſe, & he termes her to be like vnto a moſt precious & ſweet cluſter of camphire, which is a

kind of aromaticall tree, & it is all one, as if ſhe ſhold haue ſaid, my welbeloued husband is like vnto a moſt delectable cluſter of ſome excellēt vine which groweth in the vineyard of Engedi, to the which there is no vineyard in the world that may be compared, becauſe the cōfort which we receiue by the holy ghoſt doth far ſurmount all earthly cogitations & delights, & the conſolations & cōforts of the ſpirit are theſe, to know that God is fauorable vnto vs, and to haue the loue of God almighty incloſed within our harts & cōſciēce▪
                  
               
               
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Bride.
                  14 Behold thou art faire, behold thou art faire thine eyes are like the doues. The Bridegrome cōmendeth the happy ſtate of the ſpouſe i
                        •
                      this, that he doth worke and bring to paſſe great matters in her, & herein conſiſteth her beauty chiefly, that ſhe hath doues eyes
                     ▪ that is to ſay, a moſt right ſenſe & vnderſtanding of Gods ſpirit, which may be very fitly takē for a doue, becauſe it appeared vpō Chriſt in the ſhape & ſimilitude of a doue, & it is as much in other words, as if the bridegrome ſhould ſpeak after this ſort vnto the bride: doubt not my deareſt deare of any diſpleaſure of mine, becauſe I am very wel pleaſed with thee, I reckon thee to be moſt beautifull & faire, howſoeuer thou maieſt ſeeme to thy ſelfe to haue

a blacke & ſwart coūtenance, becauſe thou pleaſeſt me right well, & this loue of mine doth not come by any nature of yours, but by grace frō me. I deſire not ornaments of gold, or looke for any coſtly apparell: that which I deſire and looke for, is doues eyes eyes of ſimplicity, or ſingleneſſe of faith, and perpetuall chaſtitie, and that nothing may pleaſe thee, but me. I ſay, I deſire honeſt and plaine dealings and meanings, not crooked and deceitfull eyes.
               
               
                  The Spouſe ſpeaketh vnto her husband.
                  
                     My welbeloued behold thou art faire and pleaſant. She that before was prayſed of her husband for her eyes, doth now moſt ingenuouſly & plainly confeſſe that he is altogether faire and beautifull. The ſpouſe as long as ſhe liueth in the fleſh, hath ſome deformitie or indecorum in her, by reaſon of the fleſh: notwithſtanding ſhe is beautifull with the beautie of her husband, and ſhee hath doues eyes, but not as Chriſt hath, becauſe he is wholy and ſoly, & in euery part of him moſt beautifull and amiable, but to the faithfull onely, who alwayes & at all times are exceedingly much delighted with the ſight of him, as alſo with his wordes. And it followeth, Alſo our bed is greene, whence it is manifeſt, that all things are cōmon betweene

the bridegrome & the bride, and what other thing is meant by this greene bed, but the euer flouriſhing peace which we obtaine by Chriſt, and by the houſes the particular Churches of his kingdome: and alſo we may hereby vnderſtand the faithfull people of God. In euery one of theſe houſes a man ſhall finde a moſt ſweet bed of peace, whereon the holy Ghoſt doth oftentimes repoſe and reſt himſelfe. The beames of this houſe are of incorruptible and wel-ſmelling Cedar, that is to ſay, they containe the ſoliditie and ſtableneſſe of true faith in Gods words, which both of them remaine for euer, becauſe it is not poſſible that faith ſhould faile, and be vtterly aboliſhed out of Gods kingdome, or that one iot or title of his words ſhould not be fulfilled. And here by the way, let the induſtrious reader diligently obſerue this, that the Church ſpeaketh vnto the bridegrome, and inuiteth him vnto the quiet reſt and repoſe of his bed, becauſe ſhe knoweth full wel that all kind of reſt and quietneſſe without him, is grieuous, miſerable, and vngodly: wherefore ſhe ſayth, Our bed is greene, or our peace or the peace which is common vnto vs both, is flouriſhing, greene, pleaſant, ſweet, and delectable: as if ſhe ſhould haue ſaid, that both of vs are to lie in the ſelfe ſame bed, which bed, is furniſhed and prepared

ready for vs, therefore you muſt take me into the bed to you, that is, all the pleaſure that I take muſt needes proceed and iſſue out from you, and ſo the Church doth ſhewe vs what an earneſt deſire ſhee hath to reſt with Chriſt, and therfore ſhe ſaith with Peter: It is good for vs to be here. And that which followeth in the latter end of the chapter, Our rafters are of Cypreſſe, is a type or figure of the elect, which by contemning & deſpiſing of all earthly & temporall things, grow to be eternall and incorruptible, as are our Cypreſſe or Cedar trees.
               
            
            
               The ſecond Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 I am the Floure. roſe of the field, and the lillie of the valleys.
                        
                           2 Like a lillie among the thornes, ſo is my loue among the daughters.
                        
                           3 Like the apple tree among the trees of the foreſt: ſo is my welbeloued among the ſonnes of men: vnder his shadow had I delight, and ſate downe: and his fruit was ſweete vnto my mouth.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Bridegrome.
                  THe words going before in the latter end of the firſt chapter where the bed of the

Church is called a flouriſhing greene vnſpotted bed, and a bed to bee deſired, are very eaſie to be vnderſtood by the beginning of this chapter, becauſe ſhee is not ſayd to flouriſh by reaſon of the floure, whoſe greenneſſe and beauty doth ſoone fade and decay, but indeed becauſe her flowers are chieflie her husband. Eſay. chap. 11. There ſhall bud forth a braunch out of the root of Ieſſe, & of the root therof ſhall ſpring a flower, and the flowers therof ſhall be the flowers of honeſty and honour. Therupon it was wel & truly ſaid of him, I am the flower of the field, which budded forth out of the root of Ieſſe, a pleaſant & delectable flower of the field, that is to ſay, of the whole world, and chieflie of the elect of the Church: and laſtly, hee addeth the lillie of the valleyes, and what other thing may be vnderſtood by the lillies of the valvalleys, but the ſyncere and faithfull people, which do truly proſtrat & humble thēſelues, becauſe theſe valleyes ſhall be filled vp, exalted, and oppoſed againſt the hilles, that is to ſay, againſt the proud, of whō 
                     Eſay ſpeaketh thus in his 40. ch. & 4. ver. Euery valley ſhall be exalted, & euery mountaine & hill ſhal be made low: and the glory of theſe valleys conſiſteth in their lillies, to wit, in their righteouſneſſe, innocencie, and whiteneſſe Chriſt, which depoſeth the mighty, proud, & vnbeleeuers

from their ſeat, & exalteth the humble and meeke: and ſo the ſpouſe ſpeaketh of himſelfe much after this maner, I am made vnto the elect as a moſt pleaſant flower of the meadowes, whoſe beauties they do keepe and preſerue, and the grace of whoſe bountie and ſweetneſſe they do ſmell and perceiue, which is to be gathered with ioy of mind & without any peril or danger of thornes at all. And finally, I am the lillie of the valleys, that is, all pleaſure, ſweetneſſe and delight vnto my elect: and Chriſt may fitly be called a flower, becauſe whiles he weedeth vp the thornes of ſinnes, hee doth not a litle decke and adorne the hill of his ſpouſe, and beautie of his iuſtice. Like a lilly among the thornes. The name of lillies is oftētimes taken in the ſcripture for the beauty of the faithfull, which is hid and had in Chriſt. Hoſea chap. 14. verſ. 6. I will be as the dewe vnto Iſraell, he ſhall growe as the lillie. And ſo Chriſt calleth the ſpouſe by the name of a lillie, as who would ſay, As much as the lillie ſurpaſſeth the thornes, ſo much doeſt thou exceed all other daughters that is to ſay, al other Churches & congregations of the wicked & reprobate: & as the lillie which groweth vp among the thorns is pricked of thē, yet notwithſtanding flouriſheth & increaſeth: ſo it is neceſſarie or requiſite that the godly Church ſhould bee

pricked, afflicted and tormented with the reprobate Churches, but neuertheleſſe the holy Ghoſt will ſo worke in her, that ſhe repelling the fiery darts of ſin with the ſhield of faith, ſhall in the end become more glorious for her perſecutions, and ſo dayly profiting and increaſing by means of my gift and protection ſhall neuer leaue off to bring foorth ſeede or corne vntill ſhe be brought and layd vp quietly in the barne. Like the apple tree among the trees of the forreſt. Theſe words of mutuall cōmendation & praiſes of the holie Ghoſt are very ſtrange, comfortable, and full of truſt confidence in God: for ſee how the ſpouſe according to her power doth mutually as it were, repay prayſe and commendation vnto her bridegrom Chriſt by ſaying theſe words, Like the apple tree amōg the trees of the forreſt: ſo is my welbeloued among all the ſonnes: to wit, of God, that is to ſay, of the Angels & faithfull people. Verily thou only art holy, righteous and good, & from thee proceed thoſe euerlaſting fruits which we enioy, and not of themſelues: thou commendeſt me for my flower, which notwithſtanding thou thy ſelfe diddeſt cauſe to growe vp by the grace of thy holy ſpirit, but I muſt needes glorifie thee for thy fruit, which is better then all the flowers of the world.
               
               
                  
                  The words of the ſpouſe vnto the virgins.
                  
                     Vnder his ſhadowe had I delight, and ſate downe. What ſhadowe is that, I pray you, which the ſpouſe ſhould ſo greatly delight in, vnleſſe it were the ſhadowe of Chriſt her husband, becauſe he is the onely delight and hope of the faithfull. They which enioy true peace and tranquility of mind, and truſt onlie to Gods protection & grace, may be truly ſayd to ſit vnder his ſhadow. Wherfore the peaceable and quiet ſpouſe of Chriſt willing that all her maydens, that is to ſay, all the ſoules of the elect ſhould haue the benefite of Chriſts peace, which is ſo neceſſarie for thē, doe pronounce the Goſpell of peace vnto them, as if ſhe ſhould haue ſaid: You ſeeke & mourne after peace, but many there are (God wot) which ſeek it where it is not to be foūd, for they know not where to find it. Come ye therefore and learne of me, by my example I will ſhew you where you ſhall finde this admirable and eternall perfection, and neuer miſſe of it. I my ſelfe was as carefull as any woman in the world could be to find it, and I was cōtent to endure any thing, ſo I might attaine vnto it. I asked for her many times, and oft, I did faſt and pray, watch and torment my body for the want of her, but ſhee

was not to be found any where but vnder the ſhadowe of thy wings, which I ſo much deſire. And hence it is that ſhe ſaith, that he is ſo among all the ſons, as a fruitfull appletree is among all the trees of the wood. Drawe neare therfore and approch vnto this happie, bleſſed and moſt ſweet ſhadow, and vnder it you ſhall be ſure to obtaine perfect peace & reſt, although it be in the middeſt of tribulations & aduerſities, becauſe our husband Chriſt is our only appletree or tree of life, which bringeth forth fruite of eternall life, that is, true vertues and holy workes in all thoſe which lie vnder the ſhadow of it, expecting the fulneſſe of time, when they ſhall receiue of the fulneſſe of his liberalitie, the apples which he ſhall command them to take of Gods benefits and graces, that they may bee food vnto them of euerlaſting and happy life.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           4 He brought me into the wine celler, and loue was his banner ouer me.
                        
                           5 Stay me with flagons, & comfort me with apples, for I am ſicke of loue.
                        
                           6 His left hand is vnder mine head, & his right hand doth imbrace me.
                        
                           7 I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalē,

by the roes and by the hindes of the field, that ye ſtirre not vp, nor waken my loue, vntill she pleaſe.
                        
                           8 It is the voice of my welbeloued: behold he commeth leaping by the mountains and skipping by the hilles.
                        
                           9 My welbeloued is like a roe, or a yong hart. Lo, he ſtādeth behind our wall, looking forth of the windowes, shewing himſelfe through the grates.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  He did not onely bring me vnto this tree of life & true felicity, which yeeldeth vs a defence frō the heat of the Sun, & alſo pleaſant fruit: but furthermore, he brought vs into the wine celler: by this wine is meant the word of God: the houſes or cellers which contain this wine, are the holy books of both the old & new teſtaments, where Chriſt bringeth the Church as into a celler, when he informs her in the right vnderſtanding of the Scriptures. Wherefore after that the ſpouſe had once taſted of the pleaſant drinke of euerlaſting truth, and therewith comforted and cheered vp her ſelfe in the ſpirit, preſently ſhe declareth the benefits of her husband vnto her maydens and young virgins, becauſe ſhe would inuite thē by litle & litle vnto the

loue of him, and ſo cauſe them to run after him, and ſhe ſaith: The king brought me in, as if ſhe ſhould haue ſaid: His wine is ſo pleaſant and good, that I would willingly haue you brought into his cellers to taſt of the goodnes therof: and ſhe continueth her old vaine of ſetting forth her husbands glory, ſaying thus, And loue was his banner ouer me. What banner was that which was lifted vp ouer him? the banner of loue. Well then loue is the banner which draweth all thinges after her, with her wonderfull and ſtrange giftes of inſinuation and allurement, & Chriſt continually commendeth vnto his Church the gift of loue and charity, in ſuch ſort, that he cannot with greater tokens of kindneſſe teſtifie his loue and kindneſſe to vs wards.
               
               
                  The ſpouſe ſpeaketh vnto her damſels.
                  
                     Stay me with flagōs & cōfort me with apples, for I am ſick of loue. You ſee how effectuall, how precious & admirable is the banner of Chriſt that as ſoone as euer the ſpouſe ſawe it, her heart was inflamed within her, & ſhe cōſtrained to breake forth into theſe words, ſaying, for I am ſicke of loue. And why ſhouldſt thou be ſick, ô thou welbeloued ſpouſe? Is it for the want of the glorious preſence of thy husbād that thou doeſt ſo torment and vexe thy ſelf? why doeſt thou crie out vnto the yong maidens,

that is to ſay, vnto the faithfull, what wouldeſt thou haue them to do for thee? why calleſt thou vnto them, & biddeſt them ſtay thee vp with flagons, and comfort thee with apples? Surely by the flagōs of wine we muſt vnderſtand the faithful, and by the apples the holy Ghoſt, or the wordes and operations of Chriſt. And it commeth all to one paſſe as if ſhe ſhould haue ſayd, I am growne ſo impatient in ſtriuing to ſhew forth my exceeding great loue vnto my beſt beloued Chriſt, that I had need to be ſtayed vp and ſtrengthened with the ſweet ſmelles & wine, that is to ſay, with the comfortable words of the faithfull, and with the holie ſpirit of the Bridegrome, abounding in them vnto all maner of perfection & increaſe of faith, & therfore I do long to be cōforted with the delicate apples of the ſpirituall pleaſures & delights of his heauenly promiſes. His left hand is vnder mine head, & his right hand doth imbrace me: that is to ſay, my requeſt is vnto my husbād, that he wold comfort me in this preſent world with the word of God, leaſt happily I may take occaſion through the conſideration & conſcience of my ſins to fall into deſperation: & I deſire to haue him imbrace me with the clear ſight and fruition of his bounty, & that he would preſerue and deliuer me being now in this vale of miſeries, from all maner of ſinne and

daunger of diſpaire or diffidencie at all, and that it may pleaſe my husband to beſtow vpon me the graces and gifts of the mind, or otherwiſe confirme them in me with his glory & perpetuall loue. By the right hand of God, is ſignified proſperitie, & by the left aduerſitie: and theſe are called the two hands of the Bridegrome, becauſe he worketh & effecteth al things by thē. The ſpouſe hath the left hād of Chriſt but vnder her head: that is to ſay, vnder Chriſt by whoſe will and commādement they moſt willingly ſuffer & endure all maner of croſſes, troubles or perſecutions whatſoeuer. For ſhe knoweth this moſt certainlie, that not an haire of her head ſhall fall to the ground, or that ſhe ſhall ſuffer any bitterne
                        •
                      of griefe in the world, vnleſſe the Bridegrom
                        •
                      will. And furthermore, that this left hand cannot alwaies be vnder her head, although the fruites and effects thereof, to wit, true riches, and godly glorie ſhall endure and continue for euer. Beſides all this, ſhe is moſt certainly perſwaded that her happy daies, which God holdeth in his right hand, ſhall neue
                        •
                      ceaſe:Pſal. 16.11 for as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, In thy preſence is the fulnes of ioy, & at thy right han
                        •
                      are pleaſures for euermore. And truly if i
                        •
                      were ſo that Gold ſhould holde his left han
                        •
                      only vnder our heads, as we haue ſhewed yo
                        •
                      before, we ſhold ſoon be brought to nough
                        •
                     
                     
and neuer be able to come vnto the euerlaſting pleaſures in his right hand. Gods left hand is ſaid to be vnder their heades, what is meant by that? but that when the iuſt man f
                        •
                     lleth, he ſhould not be broken in peeces: wherfore the ſpouſe feeling his left hand vnder her head, reioyceth notwithſtanding, becauſe of the louing imbracings which ſhe is ſure to enjoy by the benefit of his right hand.
               
               
                  The words of the Bride vnto the yong maydens.
                  There be foure things which cauſe me exceedingly to reioice: firſt, becauſe of the flow
                     
                        •
                     rs, that is to ſay, for the faithful, becauſe there 
                        •
                     re enough of thē: ſecondarily, for the apples of the moſt fruitfull tree Chriſt: thirdly, becauſe he hath his left hand vnder his head, 
                        •
                     hat is to ſay, vnder the ſpouſes head, for hee 
                        •
                     s the head of the ſpouſe: laſt of all, becauſe of the certaine hope and aſſurance which 
                        •
                      haue, that hee will imbrace me with his right hand, that is to ſay, with the pleaſures and ioyes of euerlaſting glorie. And thus whiles the Church▪ the ſpouſe of Chriſt 
                        •
                     oth take her quiet reſt & ſleepe▪ the word of God commandeth her not to be troubled or diſquieted any thing at all: & it is as if Chriſt ſs;hould ſpeak vnto the ſoules of the faithfull 
                        •
                     fter this manner, I charge you, ô ye faithfull

ſoules, and which is more, I coniure you by that which is moſt deare and pleaſant vnto you, that you ſtir not the loue of your huſband in the elect, by iudging & condemning them, by the wrath and fauour of God ſhewed more or leſſe towards them. I ſay, find not you fault with God for being ſometimes diſpleaſed with the elect, and ſhewing forth his anger towards thē, accuſe not his diuine prouidence, or the maner of his proceedings, eyther in iuſtice or mercy, becauſe he doth moſt certainly guide and direct all things vnto th
                        •
                      good of his elect: but ſubmit your willes Alwayes vnto the good will and pleaſure of almighty God, praying continually, that hi
                        •
                      will may be done, & his name hallowed. And we are to vnderſtād by the roes and hinds o
                        •
                      the fields, by the which he chargeth the ſoule
                        •
                      of the faithfull, the Apoſtles and preacher of Gods word which wander vp and dow
                        •
                      in the worlde, preach
                        ••
                     g the Goſpell euery where, wherſoeuer they come, fearing the policies & ſleights of their aduerſary the diuell▪
                  
               
               
                  The ſpouſe vnto the yong maides.
                  
                     It is the voice of my welbeloued, behold, 
                           ••
                         commeth leaping by the mountaines, and skipping by the hilles. This is a notable place to pro
                        ••
                      that all thoſe that are of Chriſts Church 
                        〈◊〉
                      know their husband Chriſts voice, that is t
                        •
                     
                     
ſay, his words, and can iudge thereby Gods words from mens. Becauſe ſhee ſaith flatlie vnto the virgins, that the words that ſhe doth heare are vndoubtedly the words of her louing husband Chriſt: for ſhe ſaith, ſhe knoweth them well enough; and indeed to ſay the truth, who ſhould better knowe the thinges which concerne the Bridegrome, then the Bride her ſelfe? Nowe I am the Bride, which haue eſpouſed the onely begotten ſonne of God: wherefore me thinks I ſhould knowe his voyce better then anie other. So then firſt of all there is ſhewed vnto vs the Church, by the voyce of the bridegrome which ſhe knoweth moſt readily: afterwards there is declared vnto vs the fruit that ariſeth & redoundeth vnto her by the knowledge of his voice, that is to ſay, the knowledge of perfect charity. And Chriſt the husband of the faithful is likened vnto him which is moſt faire in the faireſt thinges, moſt excellent in the excellents that that can be gotten, exceeding beyond the degree of admiration, and abounding beyond meaſure in all maner of thinges that may be deſired, coueted, or obtained. Finally, the ende and terme of Gods promiſes contayned within the compaſſe of the ſcriptures, and written of, either in the Law or in the Prophets. This Chriſt the ſumme of all happines and felicity, came vnto his own

vnder the forme of mortality, hauing a wall ſet betweene him and the wicked, becauſe he would not be ſeene of the vnworthy, vngodly, or vnelected ones: and yet he ſtood in the middeſt of them, and ſpake the words of life, partlie vnto them which did ſee him, & partlie vnto thoſe which deſpiſed him & voluntarilie ſuffered themſelues to be ſeduced or deceiued: & ſo as he looked forth of the windowes, and ſhewed himſelfe through the grates he might be ſeen and heard after ſome ſort of the wicked, but onely the godly and elect of God vnto ſaluation, may fully ſee & behold, & laſtly receiue him into their hearts by faith. And the words of Salomō
                      in the next verſe before, how hee came leaping by the mountains, & skipping by the hilles, ſignifieth nothing els but this, how his ſpirit leaped vpon the Patriarkes and Prophets, and skipped in the Apoſtles & preachers of the Goſpell, who being more eminent and excellent thē the reſt, did teach men the ſimplicity and plainneſſe of their liues & doctrines, and the ſimilitude of a roe or a hart which followeth in the next verſe, is all one in effect with the former, becauſe it is only proper vnto goates to leap & skip about, although they may bee likened vnto thē for another reaſon, becauſe of their ſharpe ſight: for vnleſſe their ſight were as good as their running, they ſhold not

be able to diſcerne their way▪ & know either how to leape or skip. By the ſwiftnes of their leaping & skipping vp and downe, we may note the earneſtneſſe of a willing and charitable minde: by the quickneſſe of ſight, the ſharpeneſſe of iudgement, & ſo in both theſe thinges we may obſerue both iudgemēt and mercy crying out with Dauid in the Pſalmes, Mercie and iudgement will I ſing vnto thee 
                        •
                      Lord.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           10 My welbeloued ſpake and ſaid vnto me, ariſe my loue, my faire one, and come thy way.
                        
                           11 For behold, winter is paſt, the raine is changed, and is gone away.
                        
                           12 The flowers appeare in the earth: the time of the ſinging of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.
                        
                           13 The figtree hath brought forth her yong figs, and the vines with their ſmall grapes haue cast a ſauour: ariſe my loue, my faire one, and come away.
                        
                           14 My doue that art in the holes of the rock, in the ſecret places of the ſtaires shew me thy ſight. Let me heare thy voice▪ for thy voice is ſweet, & thy ſight comely.
                     
                  
                  
                     The voyce of the Spouſe vnto the virgins.
                  
                     My welbeloued ſpake & ſaid vnto me, &c. The ſpouſe being once awaked out of her ſleep, tels her maydens what her ſweet-heart ſaid vnto her, Ariſe my loue & faire one, and come thy way, to wit, ariſe frō reſt to labour, frō ioy & peace to ſorrow & griefe, and riſe thou thy ſelfe, let no other riſe for thee, becauſe I wil haue thee & no other to gather my flowers & fruits, that is to ſay, vnto the miniſtery of my word, by the which the flowers (to wit, the ſoules of the faithfull) are gathered together into the Church. And come thy way, that is, follow me, & continue to beleeue in me by faith, becauſe he may be truly ſayd to followe after Chriſt, which beleeueth in him: & then the ſpirit of Chriſt the bridegrome of the faithful ſpeaketh after this maner vnto the elect diſperſed throughout the face of the whole earth: Riſe vp my faithfull ſpouſe by a liuely faith in Gods wordes, and put all thy truſt and confidence in him that calleth thee vnto him; & he ſheweth that there is a conueniēt time for all things to be done in, by reaſon of the viciſſitude and change of thinges: for wheras her welbeloued had but earſt before viſited her in her greene bed, now he wils her to dreſſe the vineyard, and driue

away the wilde beaſts out from it, that is to ſay, to build vp his Church, and weede out all manner of heretickes out of it, and it is as if Chriſt ſhould haue ſaid vnto her, Riſe vp out of thy bed of contemplation and reſt, wherein thou now ſlumbereſt & yet thinke not that I will vtterly forſake thee, becauſe thou art my loue, but go & gather the faithfull together in the ſpirit of gentleneſſe and lenitie, becauſe thou art my doue: come thy way and ſuppreſſe thy aduerſaries, becauſe thou art faire and adorned or beautified with all manner of vertues, for behold the winter is paſt, the raine is changed and is gone away. That is to ſay, the old and ancient errors are vaniſhed away at the comming of the glorious Sonne of God Chriſt Ieſus, and the tedious darke, and dyrtie time of winter is paſt and gone, when all things were wrapt and infolded in ignorance and blindneſſe, in neglect and contempt of Gods good will and benefits: but loe now the ioyfull and hopefull time of Spring is come, when the pleaſant and wholſome blaſt of Gods fauor ſhall blow vpon all the hearts and mindes of the faithfull, filling and inſpiring them with the word of God ſent downe from heauen for the behoofe and benefit of vs mortall men: and now is the time or neuer to repent and amend our liues, by awaking out of ſinne,

and preparing our minds & conſciences vnto the ſtudy or godlineſſe & meekeneſſe, and to do the true works of piety, to roote vp the concupiſcences of carnall ſenſes, and follow the old and ancient diſcipline of the Church. The voyce of the Turtle doue hath beene already heard vppon the earth, which is a ſigne of a moſt happie yeare, or ſpirituall aboundance and plentie of all manner of goodneſſe and gladneſſe in the hearts and conſciences of the faithfull, and the pleaſantneſſe of the Goſpell is comming vpon you with all maner of comfort and conſolation: and now the time approcheth, whē you ſhall reape the fruit, and receiue the benefit of your godlineſſe: the figge tree bringeth foorth her young figges, and the vines begin to bud foorth, ſo that we haue all the ſignes of a rich and plentifull yeare, which is likely to abound in all manner of loue and true holineſſe, perfect ioy and euerlaſting comfort: and we haue certain infallible & true tokens of the Churches perfection, which conſiſteth in the true vnitie therof, and knowledge of Gods loue, & in the multitude of the Gentiles and faithfull ſoules which are called. Moreouer we may, if we will, allegorically interpret the hardneſſe of the winter, to be the hardneſſe and rigor of the law, which is alreadie vaniſhed away, becauſe of the comming

of the Goſpell of glad tydings, and therefore we ſee the promiſes of the Prophts to flouriſh, and the gracious proceedings therof, which we may call the floures, which appearing in the ſpring time, do ſhew forth a fruitfull and happie yeare: and the time of pruning or dreſſing, is, when laying aſide all manner of lying and deceit, euerie man ſhall ſpeake the truth vnto his neighbour. And by the voyce of the Turtle, is ſignified the voice of the Preachers of Gods word, which beginneth to be heard abroad in the world. And the figge tree doth bring forth her young figges, that is to ſay, the Apoſtles are alreadie come into the world, which bring forth the moſt delectaable and pleaſant food of the Goſpell, and miniſter it vnto the faithfull, according to their neceſſities.
               
               
                  The Bridegrome ſpeaketh vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     My doue that art in the holes of the rocke, in the ſecret places of the ſtayres ſhew me thy ſight, let me heare thy voice, for thy voice is ſweet & thy ſight comely. By the doue is ſignified the holy Ghoſt (as it is euident out of the third of Matthew, the firſt of Marke, the third of Luke, and 1. of Iohn. Wherefore the Church which is inſpired and filled with the

holy Ghoſt, made altogether ſpirituall, may well be called here in this place a doue, and whereas he replyeth and calleth her his loue, we are to note, that all her loue commeth frō him which is the fountaine of loue, and that it is from him, and for him, that ſhe is called beautifull and faire, or a doue: that is to ſay ſpirituall, and ſhe is prouoked and ſtirred vp afreſh by the Bridegroome to come. but in the holes of the rockes, and ſecret places of the ſtayres. This rocke is Chriſt. 1. Cor. 10 v. 2. We did all drinke of the ſpirituall rocke that followed them, & the rocke was Chriſt, and by the ſecret places of the ſtayres, is meant the inward aſcention and lifting vp of the heart, which euery faithfull man muſt needs haue. And it followeth, ſhew me thy ſight, becauſe the bridegrome was deſirous to ſee the face of the Church, as I ſhewed you before in the holes of the rockes, and in the ſecrete places of the ſtayres, and to heare her voyce, or rather his, becauſe otherwiſe the wordes of God cannot be acceptable vnto her, neither is it poſſible for her to find her husband by any other meanes, for thy voice is ſweete, and thy ſight comely, & here we ſee the goodneſſe of her louing ſpouſe towards her. For without all queſtion, it is indeede his voice and his words which the Church ſpeaketh, and to conclude, all that the Church hath, is

his: but why then calleth he it her voice? thy voice is ſweete: becauſe we ſhould know that his voyce is common betweene him and the ſpouſe, for Chriſts voice is nothing elſe but the miniſterie of Gods word in the Church: ſo that alwayes Chriſts words do concerne and regard the Church, and the good of the people. It followeth, and thy ſight comely. We are to obſerue in theſe wordes, that whereas euery one is knowne by his face, that the Church here in this place is ſaid to be known by her ſight, face, or countenace. Now the face of the ſpouſe, is the righteouſneſſe of the iuſt, I meane the beleeuing iuſt, of the light of whoſe countenāce it is written, to the end that they may turne the hearts of fathers vnto their ſonnes, and the vnbeleeuers vnto the wiſedome of the iuſt. And whoſoeuer hath this wiſedome, walketh not after the will of man, but after the will of God the holy Ghoſt, that is to ſay, when his mind and vnderſtanding is ruled and gouerned by the holy Ghoſt, which commeth then to paſſe, when he iudgeth all things rightly according to the word of God. And likewiſe ſhe may be then ſaid to haue Chriſts face, when in the middeſt of proſperitie ſhee doth nothing by chance, or otherwiſe then as a true Chriſtian woman ſhould do, but in effect & deed, and maketh it manifeſt vnto the whole

world, that ſhe hath rightly put on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and his face is ſeene in her aduerſities and troubles, if ſhe willingly beare the croſſe, and crucifie the old man by ſuffering patienly all manner of aduerſities.
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        
                           15 Take vs the Foxes, the litle Foxes, which destroy the vines: for our vines haue ſmall grapes.
                        
                           16 My welbeloued is mine and I am his: he feedeth among the lillies.
                        
                           17 Vntill the day breake, and the shadowes flee away: returne my welbeloued, & be like a Roe, or a young Hart vpon the mountaines of Bether.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The Foxe is one of the craftieſt beaſts in the world, and hereby are ſignified & painted out vnto vs, the falſe beleeuers and enemies to the truth, and this text may be fitly applyed againſt falſe teachers & diſſembling Prophets, which deſtroy the litle vines, that is to ſay, corrupt thoſe which in the particular Churches of the world, doe beginne to beleeue: and he repeateth the word Foxes, by

ſaying litle Foxes, the better to make known vnto vs their weakeneſſe & infirmity, which is ſuch, that they cannot be able to bring any thing to paſſe againſt the Church of God, vnleſſe they firſt receiue power from the darkeneſſe of God: and this he forewarneth the friendes of the bridegrome, to wit, the miniſters of the word, to the end that they ſhould girde vp themſelues to take them, by the mutuall helpe of the bridegrome, and of the bride, as often as they would, like fiſhes faſt caught in the nets of Gods word: now hee is ſaide properly to be taken or caught, which is cōuinced by the truth. And in that he ſayth, Take vs the Foxes, we muſt note this, how the preachers of the Goſpell, which are commaunded to do this, do take and keepe them for Chriſt and the Church, labouring to pleaſe and obey them both, becauſe they are miniſters both of Chriſt, and alſo of the Church. The vines are the particular Churches, which the heretikes and falſe hypocriticall Doctors and teachers doe corrupt and peruert, becauſe they pare away the greenneſſe & beautie of the Church, that is to ſay, ſucke out the principles of good fruit, which they haue gathered out of the worde of God, and alleage them vnder a ſhew and pretence of godlineſſe vnto a moſt wicked end. Wherefore all ſuch

muſt be driuen away which goe about to depraue the word of God with their hereſies and inuentions.
               
               
                  The Spouſe ſpeaketh.
                  
                     My welbeloued is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lillies. As who would ſay, I do moſt conſtantly and inuiolably hold the friendſhip of my welbeloued, for becauſe I know his loue is moſt conſtant towards me, which I perceiue by his great familiaritie, in that he feedeth among the lillies. By the lillies are to be vnderſtood, the ſoules of the faithfull, which do alwaies yeeld foorth a pleaſant ſent of good workes among their neighbours: ſo that the ſpouſe being inuited to them by the word of God, and now ioyned with her husband Chriſt, is imbraced of him, and deſireth to dwell with him for euer: and that ſhe may in the deuotion of her mind, as it were among the lillies and roſes, continually enioy the comforts of the Saints and holy ones, vntill the cleare day-ſtarre, and meridian brightneſſe of Gods good will and pleaſure, do ſhine foorth: whereby all manner of clouds and ſhadowes may be compelled to flee away, to the end that all manner of men from the higheſt to the loweſt may know God, without feare of ſinne, or danger of hereſie. It is certainely a great ſute which

the Church hath vnto Chriſt here in this place, and although ſhe be moſt fully perſwaded that it ſhall be moſt fully graunted vnto her: yet neuertheleſſe, ſhee interpoſeth and offereth vp her prayers vnto God, becauſe ſhe would not be depriued of this happineſſe in any ſort, ſaying: Returne my welbeloued. Returne (I ſay) my welbeloued, and be to me both in word and deede, a moſt ioyfull goat, to ſpie out our wantes and defects with ſharpe and quicke eyes, and to looke downe vpon our miſeries with the eye of pitie and compaſſion, as a moſt louing young Hart: take the old ſerpent away from among vs, which lyeth in wait to do vs harme, and kill him with the breath of thy mouth: ouercome all our enemies, ô, thou which art ſo louing ouer all mankind and faithfull ſoules: graunt this (O Lord) if it be but for the promiſes which thou madeſt vnto our forefathers, whom verily thou diddeſt chooſe out amongſt the Gentiles, & commandedſt them to looke for their ſauing healthes and ſaluation, and the ſaluation of all others at the hands of Chriſt Ieſus their Sauiour, which was promiſed vnto them from the beginning of the world.
               
            
            
               
               The third Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 In my bed by night I ſought him that my ſoule loued, I ſought him, but I found him not.
                        
                           2 I will riſe therefore now, and go about in the citie by the ſtreetes, and by the open places, and will ſeeke him that my ſoule loueth: I ſought him, but I found him not.
                        
                           3 The watchmen that went about the citie found me: to whom I ſaid, haue you ſeene him whom my ſoule loueth?
                        
                           4 VVhen I had paſt a litle from them, then I found him whom my ſoule loued: I tooke hold on him, and left him not, till I had brought him vnto my mothers houſe, into the chamber of her that conceiue
                              •
                            me.
                        
                           5 I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, by the Roes and by the Hindes of the field, that ye ſtirre not vp, nor wake
                              •
                            my loue vntill she pleaſe.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  THe ſoules of the righteous are ſaide t
                        •
                      make them beds, when flying the care
                        •
                     
                     
and troubles of the world, they take a courſe how to liue quietly & peaceably. And to ſeek the bridegrome in the night time, or in the dark, is as much as to ſeeke him in their own works, or in the traditions and conſtitutions of men, where it is not poſſible to find him, becauſe they are full of darkneſſe and obſcuritie. So then the ſpouſe the Church ſpeaketh theſe words, or the like in effect; Being pricked with the guiltineſſe of mine own ſinfull conſcience, and labouring in my chamber & bed, that is to ſay, truſting in mine own merits or worthineſſe, I ſought the fauour and loue of my husbād, becauſe indeed I thought to haue obtained & purchaſed eternall bliſſe and happineſſe by the workes of the law, and thus hauing a long time ſought it here, I could not find it: becauſe his loue commeth not from our merits and worthineſſe, but of his meere good will & fauour. I will riſe therefore now, that is to ſay, whiles that I doe goe about to ſeeke him out of me, and go about in the citie by the ſtreetes, and by the open places to ſeeke my Sauiour and husbande, the foundation of my happineſſe, and that in the religion of the Gentiles, and doctrine of the Philoſophers, I found him not likewiſe. And to ſeeke Chriſt is to bee willing to truſt in him, and ſincerely to beleeue all his ſayings, and be directed and gouerned

by them: and laſtly, to hope moſt conſtantly for their ſaluations by the merits of Chriſts workes, wherefore the ſpouſe here in this place ſheweth, that ſhe was not a litle deceiued, when ſhe ſought him diligently, but with humaine diligence and induſtrie, and vpon the full confidence of her owne workes. Go to then, riſe vp, and goe about the citie, that is to ſay, all humaine counſels, becauſe they which ſeeke Chriſt without the word and ſpirit of God, doe as i
                        •
                      were fetch a compaſſe, and goe the fartheſ
                        •
                      way about. Now the wicked do trace vp and downe in this way in vaine, becauſe tha
                        •
                      wheras no care & induſtry of man is auaileable vnto the finding of him, they can neuer finde him out this way. The watchmen that went about the citie found mee, to whom I ſayd, haue you ſeene him whom my ſoule loueth? The watchmen, &c. that is to ſay, thoſe which follow the conſtitutions of auncient fathers, reuelations and ſtudies of men, which ſeeme to ward and keepe the Church, I asked them alſo whether they could certainely tell mee of any place where to find out my louing and gracious ſpouſe, whe
                        •
                      I might ſecurely embrace him, and ſecretly comfort my ſelfe. To conclude, I asked them whether they could bring me any certaine tydings of my ſaluation: but hauing

paſt a litle from their humaine ſtudies and ſpeeches, to ſee whether I could find anie more certaine ſteppes and footings, as it were of my ſaluation and peace of conſcience, which I had ſought a long time, but neuer as yet found, at the length, leauing all humaine helpes and Doctors, I buſied my ſelfe to make inquirie after him in the bookes of the holy ſcripture, being written by the inſtinct of the holy Ghoſt, whom I doe loue moſt entirely, as being the ſenſe of pietie and ſolide truth: for it is onely Gods ſpirit, which ſatisfieth and filleth the mind of man, deſirous of knowledge, and leadeth his diſciples into all manner of truth, by teaching them the wordes of God. And here I finde, that not onely my vnderſtanding is informed, but alſo that my affections are inflamed within me, and that I am preſently able to diſcerne errors and falſehood from the veritie of true doctrine, and to receiue and intertaine in my heart the true peace of conſcience, quieting and contenting my ſelfe in my husband, and all this happeneth for no other cauſe, but becauſe I haue found out Chriſt my Sauiour and redeemer, that is to ſay, him who hath obtained the ſpirit of grace, which is neuer ſeparated and abſtracted from the truth, that

which is his is mine, for otherwiſe I knowe that I ſhould ſuddenly periſh and come to nought, and forthwith Chriſt doth ſeeke the ſaluation of thoſe which liue in wickedneſſe and error. Wherfore the Church being once conuerted from the wicked, promiſeth to bring in Chriſt, whom ſhee findeth in the houſe of his mother, that is to ſay, in the Synagogues and congregations of the wicked, from whence he came: and verily the true beleeuers do ſtudy and endeuour by praiers, by the miniſterie of the word, and by all maner of meanes poſſible, to reduce the poore wandring ſoules of the Church, to the truth of Gods word, that they may receiue Chriſt into their houſes, and into the ſecret chambers of their hearts, becauſe it is not enough for the ſeruants of God to ſeeke their owne ſaluations, vnleſſe they may compaſſe it for others alſo, and direct them as well as they may, vnto the like ſpeeches of God, which they ought to ſeeke ſo carefully and diligently, that they ſhould not leaue off ſeeking of it, vntill they know that they haue receuied mercie as well as they, which is declared vnto vs in the next words following: I left him not till I had brought him into my mothers houſe, into the chamber of her that conceiued me. That is, I left him not till euen the wicked, ſuch a one as I my ſelfe had heretofore

for a certaine ſpace beene, being turned and conuerted vnto him, receiued him.
               
               
                  The wordes of the Bridegrome vnto the Virgins.
                  
                     I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of the field, that ye ſtirre not vp nor waken my loue vntill ſhee pleaſe. I charge you. The faithfull ſpouſe of Chriſt doth moſt willingly obey his will and commaundement, by ſeeking the ſaluation of her mother which conceiued and bare her, which yet wandreth vp and downe in darkeneſſe, and in the daunger of death, ſo that the word of truth doth not a litle thing profite by her, by making her fit to receiue him that was comming, Chriſt Ieſus, and to change her by the power of his ſpirit, to the end, that they that were wiſe ſhould become fooles, and they that were fooles, ſhould become wiſe. Hence is it that ſhe is become one of the Churches daughters, or rather to ſpeake more properly, a true member of the Church and ſpouſe of Chriſt: afterwardes the Bridegroome diſpatcheth vnto her heart, the pleaſures of his ſpirite, and peace of God, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding. Therefore both the mother and the daughter

being both of them together, made a faithfull ſpouſe of the Lords, do reioyce and are merrie, whereupon ſhe ſleepeth and taketh her quiet reſt in the holy Ghoſt, whom the holy Ghoſt doth ſo preſerue and keepe from feare of any danger, that the quiet reſt and peace of their minds and conſciences cannot be diſturbed or hindered at all. He ſaith vnto the yong virgins, * I charge you, which words were expounded before. He chargeth them not to ſtirre or waken his loue, vntill ſhee pleaſe, but then he would haue the young maydes to waken her, when they are moued thereunto by the word of God: and this verſe is repeated in the Canticles, to ſhew that God hath no leſſe care ouer the Church which is made of the Gentiles and wicked, being once conuerted, then hee hath of the Iewes and others, which in the beginning were made righteous by him, but that hee hath an equall care and loue of them both, being made one in him and thorough him.
               
               
                  The friends of the Bridegrome vnto the young maydes.
                  
                     
                        
                           6 VVho is she that commeth vp out of the wilderneſſe like pillars of ſmoke, perfumed with myrrhe and incenſe, and with all the ſpices of the merchant?
                        
                           
                           7 Behold his bed, which is Salomons: threeſcore ſtrong men are round about it, of the valiant men of Iſraell.
                        
                           8 They all handle the ſword, & are expert in warre, euery one hath his ſword vpon his thigh for the feare by night.
                        
                           9 King Salomon made himſelfe a pallace of trees of Libanon.
                        
                           10 He made the pillars thereof of ſiluer, and the pauement thereof of gold, the hangings thereof of purple, whoſe middeſt was paued with the loue of the daughters of Ieruſalem.
                        
                           11 Come forth ye daughters of Sion, & behold the king Salomon, with the crowne: wherewith his mother crowned him the day of his mariage, and in the day of the gladneſſe of his heart.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The bleſſed ſpouſe reſting her ſelfe vnder the protection of Chriſt, doth dayly more & more profit in the knowledge of Chriſt: and this is done euen in the wilderneſſe of this world, and in the middeſt of the wicke, dall maner of aduerſities & troubles whatſoeuer,

to the words which come after, like pillers of ſmoke perfumed with myrrhe and incenſe, teach vs, that as ſweet ſwelles and perfumes being layd vpon the fire, do yeeld a greater and better ſmell, euen ſo the elect out of the verie, fire of their tēptations, by the works of Chriſtian iuſtice, do ſ
                        •
                     nd forth the ſweete ſmell of mirrhe and incenſe, which the friendes of the Bridegrome perceiuing, crie out with great admiration and wondring, ſaying, Who is ſhe that commeth vp, &c. ſo that theſe wordes and the reſt that follow vnto the end of this chapter, do in my opinion, properly belong & appertaine vnto the friends of the Bridegrome, and miniſters of the word, and therefore they containe matters of doctrine, which concern the Church and glory of God. Firſt of all therfore, as if they were aſtoniſhed and ſurpriſed with admiratiō, they tel vs what wonderfull things God hath wrought & brought to paſſe in his Church, that is to ſay, how by the vertue of the ſpitit at one & the ſelf ſame time ſhe doth both reſt and moue, or aſcend like a pillar of ſmoke, perfumed with mirrhe and incenſe. A verie ſtrange thing and worthie to bee noted: and in the fire of tribulation at the ſame time ſhee hath peace, at what time ſhe goeth and groweth from vertue to vertue by the ſpirit, and her faith increaſeth dayly more and more, which

is effectuall and powerfull in her by meanes of loue, & peace. And this is the peace which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, becauſe the fleſh cannot conceiue how this ſhould be, that ſhe ſhould at the ſelfe ſame time bee vexed and troubled, and yet haue ſuch peace and reſt thereby, that ſhee ſhould become more righteous, godly and pure then ſhee was before. And looke as the ſmoke mounteth vpward, ſo long, that at the length it cannot be ſeene any longer, ſo as it is partly ſeene, and partly not ſeene: ſo the Church conſiſteth of her members, the number whereof is dayly renued, and which are partly knowne, partly vncertaine and vnknowne. And as the ſmoke which is engendred of the fire, mounting vp on high, doth by litle and litle vaniſh away out of a mans ſight, euen ſo the church which kindleth the loue of God in our harts by the fire of the holy Ghoſt, leaues not to aſcend and mount vp higher and higher vntill ſhee bee cleane lifted vp aboue the ſight of all earthly thinges, and tranſported vnto the conſideration of the inuiſible thinges which are in heauen aboue. Beholde his bed, which is Salomons, threeſcore ſtrong men are round about it, of the valiant men of Iſraell. Behold. Finally, they ſhewe what and how greate the ſecuritie is of the flouriſhing greene bed, that is to ſay, of

the power and wiſedome of Chriſt, and what vehement and wonderfull great loue he beareth towardes the ſpouſe and her maydens: and all this is done vnder the figure of Salomon. Furthermore, they lay before our eyes certain tokens of his loue, as namely theſe, in that he keepeth, preſerueth & defendeth his Church from the tyranny or treacherie of ſuch as lie in waite to deſtroy it, and likewiſe in ſending of his Prophets at their appointed time, to forewarne them of the euils to come, and fore-arme them with all ſortes of armour neceſſarie for them againſt their enemies the fleſh and the diuell: for the Prophetes muſt by their offices ſtill watch and ward for the profite and commoditie of the Church. And the number of ten being multiplied by ſixe, maketh vp iuſt 60. Where the number of ten is taken for the Law or decalogue, and the number of ſixe for all that ſpace and time wherin God made all things. Wherefore by the threeſcore ſtrong men wee are to vnderſtand all the perfect and righteous men of the Church, who whileſt they fulfil the ten commandements in ſixe daies, they may be rightly ſaid to bee ſet round about Chriſts bed, becauſe they doe confirme and ſtrengthen the godlie minds of the weaker ſort of their brethren, both with good words & good examples, & ſo by this means

they do driue away all their enemies from them. They hold the ſwordes in their handes whē they obey & fulfill Gods words, and are expert in warre, whiles they teach & inſtruct others, which by their godly meanes are preſerued: and the ſword, to wit, the word of God, teacheth vs that no malice of man is able to ouercome the wiſedome of God, and the hands wherein they holde his ſword, are nothing els but good deedes & good works: and the elect which are already come vnto perfection, haue this ſword vpon their thighes, that is to ſay, are able to endure and beare the rigour of their conuerſation, by the which they learne to beate downe the vnruly appetites of the fleſh, and deſpiſe the force and ſtrength thereof, by putting all their hopes and confidences in God, to the end that their enemie the diuell may not cauſe them to fall into the ſnares of his nettes, by the intiſing baites of the fleſh in the night time and ignorance of the world. King Salomō made himſelfe a pallace of the trees of Libanon. King Salomon: theſe words may be well vnderſtood either of the ark of the Lord, which our Lord Chriſt the husband of the Church cauſed to bee made of ſundrie kindes of pretious woods, or elſe of the Temple which king Salomon built: but chieflie and principally they are to be vnderſtood of the whole Church &

congregation of the faithfull, which is ſo precious & coſtlie in the ſight of God, that it is to be preferred before the moſt precious & deareſt matter of all the moſt ſtatelieſt buildings which are▪ be they neuer ſo curiouſlie framed & built: becauſe it is builded of ſtatelie high trees of Libanus, that is to ſay, of notable good teachers and preachers of the Church, which are eminent aboue the reſt, and famous, as well for the pure ſiluer of their doctrine, as for the gliſtering golde of zeale & charitie crowned and adorned with the beautie of many vertues in ſuch ſort, that the mindes of other faithfull men are conſtrayned as it were to beholde and admire them, as alſo for to glorifie God in his Saintes.
               
               
                  The words of the Bridegromes friends vnto the yong virgins.
                  
                     Come ſorth ye daughters of Zion, and behold the king Salomon, with the crowne wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his mariage, and in the day of the gladneſſe of his heart. Come forth ye daughters of Zion, that is to ſay, ye daughters of Zion, as many among all the nations of the world as haue receiued the words of life through Chriſt, and the handes of the Apoſtles to beleeue, come forth out of your errors and vanities, being before inſtructed

by the holie ſcripture, behold the peaceable king Salomon, which made of two churches one, by taking away the hinderance and let, as well of God towardes man, as of the Iewes towards the Gentils, by his death and paſſion on the croſſe: come ſee and behold the humanitie of Chriſt crowned with a crowne of the deitie O good God, how great was the loue of God towardes man, that hee gaue his onlie begotten ſonne in the fleſh, to the end that euerie one that beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh, but haue eternall life, either that they ſhall receiue it in that day when he ſhall come to iudge both the quick and the dead, or that they haue receiued it already, in that day, when his humanitie was glorified the third day after his reſurrection and triumph ouer the diuell the great enemie of all the faithfull people of God.
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 Behold thou art faire my loue: behold thou art faire, thine eyes are like the doues: among thy lockes thine haire is like the flocke of goates, which look downe from the mountaine of Gilead.
                        
                           2 Thy teeth are like a flocke of sheepe in good order, which go vp frō the washing:

which every one bring out twinnes, and none is barren among them.
                        
                           3 Thy lippes are like a threde of skarlet, and thy talke is comely: thy temples are within thy lockes as a peece of a pomegranate.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Bride
                  THe Church of God is commended for diuerſe things in the Canticles. Firſt, for her doues eyes, that is to ſay, her ſimplicitie and ſynceritie of minde and iudgement which is giuen her by the holy Ghoſt, which is ſignified by the ſimilitude and ſhape of a doue: ſecondly, for her ornaments and iewels which do not a litle beautifie and adorn the face, becauſe they are the ornamentes of the head, and the head is Chriſt, whoſe face ſhineth moſt gloriouſlie, and in whoſe countenance is all the glorie of all the faithfull whereſoeuer. Thirdlie, ſhe is prayſed for her haire for as the haires do grow on the head, ſo the truth which we haue and receiue from our head Chriſt, doth take faſt root, and increaſeth in vs: nowe it groweth and increaſeth in vs by reaſon of the preachers of the Goſpell, which are as it were the haires of

this head, which depēdeth on Chriſt the true head of the church. And the hairs of this head of the ſpouſe are very properly & fitly compared vnto Goats haires, becauſe whiles they attend wholly vnto the precepts of the Law, and meditate vpō nothing but vpon heauē
                     ly things, they are clean creatures, which feed in high ſteep places. And by Gilead, which is as much to ſay by interpretatiō, as an heap of teſtimonies, is meant the multitudes of martyrs, which cōfirme Chriſts doctrine by their deaths and paſſions. Thy teeth are like a flock
                           •
                         of ſheep in good order, which go vp from the waſhings, which euery one bring out twins, and none is barren among them. Thy teeth. The teeth are the power of the holy Ghoſt, by the which the true Biſhops do ouercome the wicked, and cruſh them in peeces by the preaching of the word and Chriſtian conuerſation, and either conuert and turne them to the truth, or elſe confirme and eſtabliſh them in the truth by the power of the aforeſaid word. Againe, the Biſhops are teeth, becauſe they reprehend and reproue the wicked by the word of truth, and make them members of Gods holy Church. Moreouer, they are teeth to break & bruiſe the bread of doctrine, ſo that it may be food for the weak. And the teeth of the Church are deſcribed to be like vnto ſheep after they are waſhed and ſhorne, becauſe the

ſpirit of truth doth make the true profeſſors of the Goſpell, and generally all the faithfull to become pure, innocent, & ſimple or harmleſſe as ſheepe: neither are they barren or fruitleſſe, becauſe as the ſheepe they bring forth twinnes, & alwayes abound in all maner of good workes. Thy lips are like a thred
                           •
                         of skarlet, and thy talke is comelie: thy temples are within thy lo
                           •
                        kes as a peece of a pomegranat. Againe, the Church is commended for her lips: that is to ſay, for her words. And her lips are ſaid to bee red, becauſe all her ſpeeches tend onely to this end & purpoſe, to ſet forth the death of Chriſt our Sauiour: red with bloud for the ſaluation of the elect. And her words are fyery hot with zeale and faith▪ not knowing howe to l
                        •
                     e, but able to ouercome the falſe and lying brethrē. And by her cheekes, is ſignified modeſtie and ſhamefaſtneſſe, becauſe when a man is aſhamed he bluſheth, or his cheekes do looke red: and becauſe the pomegranat is red in hewe, therfore it may be moſt fitly applied vnto the paſſio
                        •
                      of Chriſt. Now, becauſe the Church is not aſhamed of Chriſts croſſe, but reioyceth rathe
                        •
                      in her paſſions and perſecutions, which ſh
                        •
                      is to ſuffer for his ſake, and is wont to bear
                        •
                      the ſigne of the croſſe verie patiently: therefore it was well ſaid, that her cheekes wer
                        •
                      like a pomegranate, & eſpeciallie like a peece

of pomegranat, becauſe the redder part of it was hid, and the white only was ſeen. And as the number of graines which are in a pomgranat cannot be ſeene, vnleſſe the pomegranat be broken or bruiſed in peeces: ſo likewiſe the vertue and power of the Church is not ſeene but in tribulations and troubles.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           4 Thy necke is as the tower of Dauid, built for defence, a thouſand shieldes hang therein, and all the targets of the ſtrong men.
                        
                           5 Thy two breasts are as two yong roes that are twins feeding among the lillies.
                        
                           6 Vntill the day break, & the shadows flie away, I will go into the mountaine of mirrhe, and to the mountaine of incenſe.
                        
                           7 Thou art all faire my loue, & there is no ſpot in thee.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  In this place he cōmēdeth the ſpouſes neck as a tower built vp of a reaſonable height, hā
                     ged round about with ſtrong ſhields: & what thing elſe is this in the ſpouſe but the ſweete

agreement of holie maners, or true ſtrength & fortitude againſt all aduerſities that ſhall happen, being alwayes adorned and decked with ſtrong champions and Chriſtian warriours, which they keeping and preſeruing, do not only praiſe them, but alſo in the power and vertue of him that is able to ſtrengthen their weake ſoules endure and ſuffer all maner of aduerſities. The great Cannon which defendeth this Church, is nothing els but the liuely words of the holy ſcripture which do pearce euen to the ſoule: and the thouſand bucklers or targets, are the hoped for helpes and ſuccours of Gods diuine prouidence, by the which he doth ſo much ſuſtaine and releeue his ſeruants, that it is not poſſible that they ſhould bee ouercome or ouerthrowne. Thy two breaſts. Finally, becauſe hee meaneth not to proceed ſo far in this place, as to ſpeak of her girdle, after he had ſpoken of her head and neck, he addreſſeth himſelfe to ſay ſomwhat in commendations of her two breaſtes: wherby is meant the doctrine of both the old and new teſtament, then the which there can bee nothing imagined more pleaſant more amiable, or more profitable: and he likeneth them to two young roes, becauſe as they do lightly leape and skip vp and downe, ſo the doctrine of both the old and newe teſtament is ſpread abroad throughout the face of the

whole world, & their feeding, is ſaid to be among the lillies: wherby are ſignified the faithfull, amongſt whom there is alwaies abiding the loue & charity of the Church, which feedeth, that is to ſay, recreateth her: & this loue doth remaine for euer in her full ſtate & perfection among the faithfull. But what is the food wherewith ſhe feedeth thē? It is the food of the ſpirit and word of God: for becauſe the Church doth alwaies feed on that food which ſhall make her ſtrong to perſeuer and continue out vnto the end. Moreouer, the faithfull people of God are fed and nouriſhed with faith and loue of the Church: but howe long are they fed after this ſort? vntill the day breake, that is to ſay, to the end of the world, and that the ſhadowes of errors, mens inuentions, and all the workes of darkneſſe do flie away. And Chriſt may rightly then bee ſayd to come vnto vs, when he helps vs, and to go away from vs, when he takes all hope of help and ſuccour from vs. Now the ſpouſe as long as ſhe is in this world, is not without tribulations and croſſes, and doubtleſſe ſhe would ſoone periſh and come to nought, if Chriſt ſhold not come to her to comfort & ſtrengthen her with the power of his ſpirit, and therfore the Bridegrome ſpeaketh vnto the Church, as if he did ſpeake vnto a third perſon, ſaying, I will go into the mountaine, that is

to ſay, I will indeed helpe thee, which arta mountain of mirrhe, & a hill of incenſe, that is to ſay▪ ſo full of my ſweete ointments, as a mountaine of incenſe and mirrhe. Thou art all faire my loue, & there is no ſpot in thee. Thou art, &c. He commeth then, and ſlacketh not to come vnto his welbeloued ſpouſe: for he is no lyer, to ſay that he will come, and not to come: & he ſaith, thou art all faire, & there is no ſpot in thee. How faire? how without ſpot, or blemiſh? by the bountifull and beautiful preſence of the immaculate ſon of God, and for the ſweet ſmell of his ointmēt wherwith he hath perfumed vs: and hence it is, that the Church is called a mountaine of mirrhe, & a mountain of incenſe becauſe that ſhe albeit in her ſelf, and of her ſelfe ſhe is moſt miſerably foule, & black as any blackamore can be: yet notwithſtanding in her bridegrome Chriſt moſt amiable, admirable & faire, pure without ſpot in Chriſt, becauſe he wipes away all her ſpots, & blots by forgiuing her her ſins, and imputing them no longer vnto her.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           8 Come with me frō Lebanon my ſpouſe, euen with me from Lebanon, and looke from the top of Amanak, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the dennes of the Lyons,

and from the mountaines of the Leopardes.
                        
                           9 My ſiſter, my ſpouſe, thou haſt wounded mine heart, thou haſt wounded mine heart with one of thine eyes, and with a chaine of thy necke.
                        
                           10 My ſiſter, my ſpouſe, how faire is thy loue? how much better is thy loue then wine, and the ſauour of thine ointments then all ſpices?
                        
                           11 Thy lippes, my ſpouſe, drop as honeycombes: honey and milke are vnder thy tongue, and the ſauor of thy garmentes is as the ſavour of Lebanon.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  Here in this place we are to conſider thus much: that by the foure hilles of Iſraell is to be vnderſtood the vocation of the Church of the Gentils vnto Chriſt her husbād, which is called, that ſhe may not dwel any longer with Lyons & Leopards, but may be freed frō the power of thē, that is to ſay, that her body may not bee torne in peeces with the cruelty of bloudy tyrants, or diſtracted by the diuerſity & variety of wicked ſects: but that ſhe being reduced, & brought from hereſie & errour to

the true vnderſtāding of the faith, may make one true Catholike Church of all the elect, which are gathered & aſſembled together of all nations, tongues, and kingdomes of the earth, as who would ſay: This my beautifull ſpouſe flyeth vnto me for refuge, not only from Libanus, but from all the corners and quarters of the earth, eſchuing the ſubtilties of Sathan, and treacheries of falſe teachers and heretikes, ſuch as they haue meditated and thought vpon lying on their beds, to deſtroy and annoy the Church. And in that he ſaith, that his heart was wounded, wee are to note the greatneſſe of his loue which he beareth towards the Church, which he for good cauſe calleth his ſiſter and ſpouſe: firſt, becauſe ſhee is become his heauenly bedfellow, & partaker of the benefit of his celeſtial bed: and ſecondly, becauſe hee vouchſafed to take fleſh, and put on mans nature vpō him, that he might be our naturall brother. The eyes of the Spouſe are the iudgements & proceedings of the holy Ghoſt: the necke is faith, and the chaines about the necke, the workes that are done in faith. Againe, the ſpouſe hath two eies whileſt ſhe liueth in the fleſh, to wit, the iudgemēt of the ſpirit, & the iudgmēt of the fleſh: the firſt pleaſeth Chriſt greatlie, the ſecōd diſpleaſeth him as much as the former pleaſeth him, becauſe it is cōtrary to the former,

which the church ſhal be quite & cleane freed frō, when mortifying the old man, ſhe runneth vnto the tabernacle of the bodie by death. Furthermore ſhe is ſaid to haue two chains about her neck, the one a chain of hypocriſie, that is to ſay, of ſeming good works that iſſue forth frō faith, one of theſe chaines the bridegrome loueth, and the other he hateth to the death, becauſe it is a ſinfull chain, wherefore he ſaith, thou haſt wounded mine heart with one of thine eyes, that is to ſay, with the iudgemēt and vnderſtanding of the holy Ghoſt, and with one of thy chaynes, that is to ſay, with the workes which come from faith, haſt thou wounded mine heart, that is to ſay, thou haſt done things very gratefull and acceptable vnto me, and hee repeateth theſe words, of wounding of his heart twiſe, to make knowne and declare the ſingular great loue which Chriſt beareth towardes his Church. And theſe loues are better then wine, becauſe neither wine nor any other outward thing, can be more pleaſant or acceptable, thē the workes of Chriſtian charitie. And finally the ſauour of thine oyntments is better then all ſpices, becauſe the Church is made partaker of Chriſts ointments, which yeeld foorth a farre more precious, gracious, and louing ſmel, then the ſmell of any outward vnguent or any thing elſe whatſoeuer. Thy lippes my

ſpouſe droppe honycombes: hony and milke are vnder thy tongue, and the ſauour of thy garmēts is as the ſauour of Lebanon. Thy lips. The lips of the church are euer like honycombs dropping: but what do they drop or diſtill? milke and hony which is vnder their tongues. By which words we are to note the hony ſweet, and milke white, vnſpotted words of God. Theſe words may be ſaid to drop from the mouth of the chaſt ſpouſe, whiles ſhe deliuereth them vnto her neighbours, & they flow from her moſt eaſily and fluently, which is ſignified by theſe words in that they are ſaid to be vnder her tonge. Indeed ſhe is indewed with her husband Chriſts ſpirit, by meanes whereof ſhe both perfectly knoweth, and eaſily pronounceth all things, becauſe it is a generall rule, the more perfectly we know a thing, the more ready ſhall we be able to vtter and pronounce the ſame. And it followeth in the text, and the ſavour of thy garments is as the ſauour of Lebanon. What garments are theſe which the Church weareth, vnleſſe it be theſe, wherewith ſhee which is Chriſts moſt ſacred body is couered and apparelled withall? and theſe are the garments indeede wherwith the grace of Chriſt, his iuſtice ſpirit, truth peace, and all thoſe good gifts and graces which do accompany them, are greatly glorified. The ſent & ſmell of theſe things

is wonderfull ſtrong and ſtrange: for it is as the ſauour of the hill of Lebanon, or of many odoriferous trees, and yet neuertheleſſe the garmēts of the ſpouſe are more odoriferous and well ſmelling, then all theſe things. But it is God alone, and his Chriſt, the Angels and elect which do ſmell the odor thereof, & are delighted therwith; becauſe it is not poſſible at all for them to pleaſe either God or man, which haue not receiued of the fulneſſe of Chriſts ſpirit.
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        
                           12 My ſiſter my ſpouſe is as a garden incloſed, as a ſpring shut vp, and a fountaine ſealed vp.
                        
                           13 Thy plants are as an orchard of pomegranates with ſweete fruits, as camphire, ſpikenard.
                        
                           14 Euen ſpikenard, and ſaffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all the trees of incenſe, myrrhe and aloes, with all the chiefe ſpices.
                        
                           15 O fountaine of the gardens, ô well of liuing waters, and the ſprings of Lebanon.
                        
                           16 Ariſe, ô North, and come ô South,

and blow on my gardē, that the ſpices therof may flow out: let my wel beloued come to his garden, and eat his pleaſant fruit.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The Bridegrome in this firſt verſe commendeth the ſpouſe for abounding in all manner of fruit of good workes, and he vſeth the ſimilitude very fitly of a garden, which becauſe it may the better bring forth herbes, trees, ſpices, and all ſorts of fruits, men do vſe to ſet a hedge round about it, to keepe out cattle from hurting of it, and laſt of all, it is watered with wholeſome, ſound, and vnpoyſoned waters: and euen ſo for all the world is it with the Church. What booteth it then, for the Church to be neuer ſo fertile and fruitfull in good workes, vnleſſe God preſerue and keepe it with a fatherly prouidence and care, ſetting (as it were) a hedge round about it, vnleſſe he water it with the water of life, and ſhadow or refreſh it with the comfortable gifts and graces of the holy Ghoſt: and therefore it is ſaid, as a ſpring ſhut vp, and a fountaine ſealed vp, becauſe it is confirmed and ſtrengthened with the protection of the Almightie, as alſo for an other reaſon, becauſe it is not lawfull for vs

either to adde or diminiſh any thing from the fountaine of the Goſpell, becauſe it muſt not be infected with the puddle of mens filthy doctrines or wicked conſtitutions. Thy plantes are as an orchard of pomegranates, with ſweet fruits, as camphire, ſpikenard. Thy plants. That is to ſay, the fruits of good workes which follow the planting of faith, are as deare vnto me as a garden, and as pleaſant vnto me as any orchard can be in the world: and thus by the varietie of coſtly ſpices, and odoriferous trees of a paradiſe, that is to ſay, of a wide orchard or delectable garden, wee are to learne, that the elect although diſtinguiſhed by degrees and perſons, yet are they notwithſtanding all of them within one paradiſe, that is to ſay, within the odoriferous and pleaſant trees of the Church, which abound in moſt precious and ſweet plants of the elect and faithfull ones, and euery tree, that is to ſay, euery one which is not planted in this pleaſant Eden or garden, bringeth forth poyſoned and corrupted fruit. And to conclude, there is no good herbe or fruit growing in the world out of this garden: and contrariwiſe, all that groweth here is wholeſome, pleaſant and a fruit to be deſired.
               
               
                  The words of the Bride vnto the Bridegrome.
                  
                     O fountaine of the gardens, ô well of lyuing

waters, and the ſprings of Lebanon. O fountains. This ſentence appeareth to be an exclamatorie ſentence of the ſpouſe, breaking foorth into the prayſe of her husband, for all the good things which ſhe hath receiued of him, as if ſhee ſhould haue ſaid in other wordes, Thou, ô my gracious and louing ſpouſe, art the cauſe of all my good, the fountaine of eternall life: all our gardens had neede to be watered with this liuely water: thou art the well-ſpring of all heauenly graces, from whō all good things are powred downe vppon vs in moſt plentifull ſort: thou art the conduit which conuayeſt theſe wholeſome waters vnto thy Church, which is Lebanon. For as Lebanon is full of odoriferous plantings of the faithfull: ſo the particular Churches may be called ſmall orchards, and pettie-gardens of the great paradiſe of the Church: and there is but one fountaine of liuely water which runneth thorough out all the gardens of Lebanon, that is to ſay, there is but one fountaine of grace and truth, namely the holy Ghoſt, wherewithall the ſeuerall congregations of the faithfull muſt be watered and refreſhed. So then the fountaine of the gardens, that is to ſay, of the particular Churches and congregations is nothing elſe but the fountaine of the Catholike and Vniuerſall Church, becauſe it

is in her firſt, and from thence deriued vnto all the reſt. Ariſe, ô North, and come ô South, and blow on my garden, that the ſpices thereof may flow out: let my welbeloued come to his garden, and eate his pleaſant fruit, Ariſe, ô North. The ſpouſe inuocateth the ſuccour & helpe of the holy Ghoſt, by whoſe inſpiration her young and tender plants may as well in aduerſitie as in proſperitie, flouriſh, increaſe, and bring foorth fruit worthy of the bridegrome, to recreate, delight, and content him, which is a moſt carefull and diligent huſbandman ouer the flocke that is committed vnto him: ſo that the breath of his mouth may cauſe the ſweete ſpices to fall off from the trees, and to ripen the daintie fruits vpon the trees, to the end, that he that is the true husband of the Church may eate and be delighted with the fruit thereof. In fine, her heartie deſire and affection is, that ſhee may be commended of the Bridegrome for her fruits of faith, which ſhe can not bring forth without his ſpeciall aſſiſtance, helpe, and fauour.
               
            
            
               The fift Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 I am come into my garden, my ſiſter, my ſpouſe: I gathered my myrrhe

with my ſpice: I eate mine hony combe with mine hony, I dranke my wine with my milke: eate ô friends, drinke and make you merrie ô welbeloued.
                        
                           2 I ſleepe, but mine heart waketh, it is the voice of my welbeloued that knocketh, ſaying, open vnto me my ſiſter, my loue, my doue, my vndefiled: for mine head is full of dew, and my lockes with the droppes of the night.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the Bridegrome.
                  THe Church calleth her husband Chriſt her welbeloued in her garden, that is to ſay, ſhe aſcribeth all glorie vnto him, for making her ſo faire a garden, and cauſing her to bring foorth ſuch trees and wonderfull ſtrange and odoriferous fruit: whereby ſhee confeſſe, ththat both her ſelfe and her fruit do come from Chriſt, to the end that hee may be alwayes ready to helpe her, and that he may be glorified in all, of whom all things are, and haue their being: therfore ſhe ſpeaketh theſe words, my welbeloued Chriſt came into his garden, that is to ſay, vnto me which

am his, and in whom, if there be any good or pleaſant thing, it muſt be acknowledged to proceede & come from his bountifull goodneſſe, and he eate his 
                     It, the fruit fo his pleaſant apples. 
                     pleaſant fruit, ſo that theſe are the words of the ſpouſe, promiſing her ſeruice & deuotion vnto the Bridegrome. Furthermore her garden and all her delights, (as it hath bene before ſhewed you) muſt be watered by Chriſt with his heauenly water.
               
               
                  The Bridegrome ſpeaketh vnto the Bride theſe words.
                  
                     I am come into my garden, &c. The Bridegrome heareth the prayers of the Church, and accordingly addreſſeth himſelfe vnto her, and he commeth to helpe her, he gathered myrrhe and ſpice, that is to ſay, the good workes of the Church, which are done in faith, doe fully pleaſe, and are right acceptable vnto him: afterwards then he calleth her to come into his garden, into what garden I pray you? vnto her ſelfe, for ſhe is Chriſts pleaſant garden, ſhe is his paradiſe: for it is Chriſts deſire and will, that ſhe ſhould retire backe againe vnto her ſelfe, and returne vnto her heart, and he calleth her, becauſe no man can truly returne vnto his heart, vnleſſe it pleaſe him to call, and inſtruct him with his holy Spirit: and the reaſon thereof may be this, becauſe there is no man ſo righteous

or godly which ſinneth not at one time or other, as long as he liueth in the fleſh, and therefore he hath great need to returne vnto himſelfe, and be renewed and repayred in Chriſt, becauſe in deed no man can be truely ſaid to returne, but hee that crucifieth the fleſh, and is reformed and informed afreſh againe by the holy Ghoſt. It followeth, and eate his pleaſant fruit. Before we heard that Gods wordes were taken for hony, milke, and wine: for hony becauſe of the ſweetneſſe thereof, for milke, for the meeteneſſe and conuenientneſſe thereof for young children, laſtly for wine, becauſe it filleth our hearts with true ioy and gladneſſe, all theſe the bridegrome may be ſaid to eate and drinke▪ when he delighteth in them, eate, ô friends drinke and make you merrie, ô welbeloued. Among the number of thoſe which are of th
                        •
                      Church of God, there are called vnto th
                        •
                      aforeſaid banquet of hony, milke, and wine that is to ſay, vnto the taſting of Gods wor
                        •
                      firſt of all, all Biſhops and true profeſſors o
                        •
                      the Goſpell: hee willeth them to eate an
                        •
                      drinke, and be drunken alſo, becauſe h
                        •
                      would haue them to take enough of God words, that is to ſay, to giue themſelues whol
                        •
                     ly vnto the meditation of them vntill th
                        •
                      be dronken therewithall. O happie drunkenneſſe, which commeth not of the fr
                        •
                     
                     
of the vine, but of the ſweet liquor of Gods words, which maketh vs forget all temporall affaires, in ſuch ſort, that men beeing once inflamed with the loue of heauenly things, neuer feele any temporall paine or griefe, as a drunken man in his drunkennes forgetteth all his buſineſſe.
               
               
                  The words of the Spouſe.
                  
                     I ſleepe, but mine heart waketh, it is the voice of my welbeloued that knocketh ſaying: open vnto me my ſiſter, my loue, my doue, my vndefiled, for mine head is full of dew, and my lockes with the droppes of the night. I ſleepe. There be ſome, in whom the deſires and affections of the fleſh are yet to be ſeene, as in the be
                     
                        •
                     eeuers which haue not yet altogether crucified and mortified the ſame, becauſe whiles 
                        •
                     hey liue in this worlde, the fleſh pre
                     
                        •
                     ayleth and worketh ſomething in them: 
                        •
                     nd therefore the Spouſe ſayth, I ſleepe, but 
                           ••
                        ne heart waketh. She ſleepeth whiles that he is ſomewhat kept backe by the weake 
                        •
                     eſh, that ſhe cannot follow Chriſt ſo per
                     
                        •
                     ectly as ſhe would: for ſhee would not 
                        ••
                     ne nor offend any more by her good will, yet neuertheleſſe ſhe doth ſinne and 
                        •
                     ffende many times whether ſhee will or 
                        •
                     o, becauſe oftentimes it ſo happeneth,

that ſhe doth thoſe things which ſhe ſhould not, and would not doe, and thoſe things which ſhe would do, doth ſhe not: and yet for all this, her heart waketh, by the grace and fauour of the bridegrome: whence it commeth to paſſe, that according to the inward man, ſhe reioyceth in the law of the Lord, and delighteth in it, ſaying, the voyce of my welbeloued, as if ſhe ſhold haue ſaid, although I ſleepe in the fleſh, yet my heart is ſtill waking, I heare and knowe the voyce of my welbeloued Chriſt, calling me into his garden, that is to ſay, willing mee to returne vnto my ſelfe, open vnto me my ſiſter. He ſaith not ſiſter, but my ſiſter, this word my, and yo
                        •
                      marke it, is alwaies added to the former. No
                        •
                      he calleth her ſiſter, becauſe of the bond o
                        •
                      charitie, a friend for her faith, a doue for hauing the ſpirit of God vndefiled, becauſe o
                        •
                      the righteouſneſſe of her husband, his, becauſe all theſe thinges, being put together, or euery one by themſelues in particular: do flow from Chriſt. So then the Bridegrom knocketh ſaying, open vnto me, this is great and waightie commaundement, an
                        •
                      there cannot be a more neceſſarie precep
                        •
                      the bridegrome would haue euery one t
                        •
                      open vnto him, and why ſo? for becauſe 
                        •
                      he ſaith himſelfe, mine head is full of dew, 
                           〈◊〉
                         my lockes with the droppes of the night. Go
                        •
                     
                     
the father is Chriſts head, as it is in the firſt Epiſtle of S. Paul to the Corinthiās, chap. 3. verſ. 11. and Iſaiah ſaith, thy dew is the dew of light, that is to ſay, his truth and his iuſtice: againe Chriſt is the head of the ſpouſe, and the lockes of his head are thoſe things which ſhe obtaineth thorough his meanes at the handes of God, as grace and remiſſion of ſinnes, the peace of mind, helpe and ſuccour in time of trouble and neceſſitie, and a hundred ſuch like things, the night, or darkeneſſe, are the wicked, the droppes of the 
                           ••
                        ght, are thoſe things which are deriued from them, as poyſoned doctrine and wicked workes. Wherefore to conclude this point, all wicked men, and all the power of darkeneſſe which Chriſt ſuſtayneth, or reſtrayneth rather from doing of any euill, both to himſelfe, and his ſeruants, they are the droppes of the night, becauſe they are the workes of darkeneſſe.
               
               
                  The Text. The wordes of the ſpouſe vnto her ſelfe.
                  
                     
                        
                           3 I haue put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I haue washed my feete how 
                              •
                           hall I defile them?
                        
                           
                           4 My welbeloued put in his hand by the hole of the doore, and mine heart was affectioned towards him.
                        
                           5 I roſe vp to open to my welbeloued, and mine hands aid droppe downe myrrhe, and my fingers pure myrrhe vpon the handles of the barre.
                        
                           6 I opened to my welbeloued: but my welbeloued was gone and paſt: mine hea
                              ••
                            was gone when he did ſpeake: I ſought him but I could not find him: I called him, b
                              •
                            he anſwered me not.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  Our old Adam, being not yet altogether mortified in the Church, is ſomewhat ſlu
                        •
                     
                     giſh & ſleepie, and oppoſeth himſelf again the wakefull and vigilant ſpirit, making the anſwere vnto the Bridegroome, when h
                        •
                      commaunded him to open vnto him, and 
                        •
                     ceiue him for his eternall ſaluation. I have p
                           •
                         off my coat, as if he ſhould haue ſaid, I ref
                        •
                      not to opē vnto thee, but the fleſh doth ſon what trouble and moleſt me, and thorou
                        •
                      thy fauour and grace I haue put off the c
                        •
                      of the old man, that is to ſay, all manners truſt and confidence in my owne workes haue waſhed and cleanſed my feet from a

manner of affections, and haue alreadie couched my ſelfe in the moſt ioyfull bed of thy peace, and now if I ſhould riſe vp out of my bed to open the dore for to let thee in, I ſhold all to befoule my feet, and diſquiet my ſelfe, graunt this, that I ſhould go to bed againe, and enioy my happy reſt with thee. I am wel pleaſed with the amiable dewe of thy head, that is to ſay, of thy eternall and heauenly father, but the drops of the night which 
                        •
                     ang in the locks of thy head, do amaze & terrifie me, & who knoweth whether it ſhall ſo happen, that when I ſhall ſuffer and endure the ſharpneſſe of theſe drops, that is to ſay, of the croſſe I ſhall offend thee, and defile my ſelfe, and ſo conſequently, exclude my ſelfe from all manner of partaking of the dew of Gods fauours, and looſe the quiet reſt and peace, which by thy gracious meane I haue obtained & purchaſed vnto my ſelfe: thus being plunged in extremities, and doubs, I can not ſee any manner of meanes how I ſhould riſe and open vnto thee.
               
               
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the virgins.
                  
                     My welbeloued put in his hand by the hole of the dore, and mine heart was affectioned towards him. My welbeloued. Chriſts hand doth betoken his mightie operation

power and helpe, the doore of the ſpouſe, the workes and iudgemēts of the fleſh, and this doore is faſt ſhut or locked, that is to ſay, the impediments & hinderances of the fleſh are not as yet taken away, which, as long as they remaine it is vnpoſſible for the ſpouſe to entertaine or receiue Chriſt, or to ſet all her affection vpon him: but he perceiuing this our naturall dulneſſe or frowardnes rather, putteth his hand, that is to ſay, his mercie, and bringeth ſuccour thorought the hole of the doore, that is to ſay, of the fleſh which is weake, and full of holes and infirmities: and he may be truly ſaid to put his hand into the Church by the hole of the doore, when he lightneth her with the light of his grace, inflameth her with a true & ardēt heat, draweth her after him, and finally confirmeth and eſtabliſheth her with other gifts of the holy Ghoſt: wherefore as ſoone as euer ſhe perceiueth Chriſts neceſſary and helping hand, ſhe ſhaketh off al kind of drowſineſſe and ſlothfull ſluggiſhneſſe; and her bowels are mooued towards him, that is to ſay, all her inward partes are mooued within her, together by the motion of the holy Ghoſt, to the end, that ſhe may be able to do all that which her welbeloued willeth & cōmandeth her to do, and now ſhe maketh as much haſt as may be to riſe vp, which before could not find in

her heart ſo much as to riſe & opē to her welbeloued when hee knocked. And here wee may note the wonderfull force and efficacie of the bridegroms hand: for ſhe did not only riſe vp when ſhe opened to her welbeloued, but furthermore, her hands did drop down mirrhe. Now the hands of the ſpouſe are her workes, which do not alwaies drop downe mirrhe, but then only when ſhe openeth vnto her husband, and obeyeth his commandements: and looke whatſoeuer ſhe doth in the faith and confidence of the bridegrome, is but as it were hands dropping down mirrhe through her fingers: becauſe the good deedes of the Church, be they done neuer ſo ſecretly, yet neuertheleſſe they do yeeld foorth a moſt ſweet ſmell, and incorruptible ſauour, moſt acceptable vnto God, in whoſe preſence they are done, and accepted of him.
               
               
                  The ſpouſe ſpeaketh.
                  
                     I opened to my welbeloued: but my welbeloued was gone and paſt: mine heart was gone when he did ſpeak: I ſought him, but I could not find him: I called him, but he anſwered me not.
                  
                  
                     I opened, &c. After that Chriſt had comforted the Church with his hand, and ſuccoured it with his helpe, and comfort, ſhe opened: by which word we are to note al that which doth any way fauour the wicked deſires

of the fleſh, that is to ſay, all inuentions of men whatſoeuer, which we muſt open, that is, take out of the way, otherwiſe we ſhal not be able to open the wicked dore of the fleſh, that is to ſay, to mortifie and crucifie it with the wicked luſts & affections thereof, which commeth to paſſe as often as he enableth her to ſubdue and crucifie the wicked fleſh, and taketh away from her matter & food of impietie, planting in her a deſire and longing after heauēly things, ſo that ſhe is forthwith filled with Chriſts ſpirit, and verily ſhee aſketh many things at his hands, becauſe ſhe is all in all in the glorie of his name, but he paſſeth and goeth away along by her, that is to ſay, he doth not graunt her all the deſires & petitions of her heart: but how then doth the chaſt ſpouſe behaue her ſelfe after Chriſt is departed and gone away from her, that is, when he doth not fulfill all her deſires, & do all that ſhe would haue him for to do? ſhe rehearſeth the wonderfull workes of God, and laudeth the great power & force of his word, ſaying, my ſoule ſhall go forth when he ſpeaketh. The ſpeech of the Bridegrome is his worde, which ſpeaketh moſt abſolutely in the hearts of the faithfull by the operation and working of the holy Ghoſt, and as ſoone as the faithfull mā heareth the ſoūd of theſe words, he beleeueth and truſteth in them, and his

heart or ſoule goeth foorth, becauſe hee renounceth and denyeth himſelfe, and all that liueth or is within him, for Chriſts ſake: and the ſoule may be truely ſayd to go forth at the voyce of the bridegrome, which leeſeth her voyce and life, and all that euer ſhe hath for him, but whoſoeuer doth ſo, ſhall be ſure to keepe them vnto eternall life. So then, it is all one in effect, as if the ſpouſe ſhould ſpeake after this ſort, ſo amiable and effectuall is the voice of my welbeloued husband, that I am wholly bent and intent vpon him, ſtill looking and following after him. It followeth, I ſought him, but I could not find him. What ſhould the ſpouſe of Chriſt be by the delights and ioyes of Chriſt, but readie to ſeeke him and runne after him, and this with as much haſt and diligence as may be. Thus then ſhe maketh diligent ſearch and inquiry for her husband, & continueth ſtill ſeeking of him▪ but he withdrew himſelfe from her, & would not ſuffer her to find him out, although ſhe deſired it ſo as nothing more, for albeit ſhe puffed & blowed, & labored till ſhe ſwet againe, to find him out, yet ſhe could not find him, till he manifeſted himſelf vnto her, which may be foūd at any time, ſo that a mā haue faith which faith cōmeth frō God the giuer of al good things. Neuertheleſſe it pleaſeth him for a while to withdraw

himſelfe from the fleſh, to the end that it may be more holy, and more ſanctified. Againe, the ſpouſe addeth theſe wordes, I called him, but he anſwered me not. She calleth the Bridegrome, becauſe ſhe hath neede of his fauour and help, and deſireth it moſt earneſtly, & he anſwereth her, when he granteth her the deſires and petitions of her heart: but ſhe ſaith, that her welbeloued anſwered her not when ſhee called him. Becauſe he did not preſently yeeld vnto her requeſt, by giuing that which ſhee asked: for oftentimes it ſo commeth to paſſe, that God doth not preſently beſtow that on vs, which we deſire at his hande, becauſe indeed by withholding and withdrawing theſe things from vs for a certain time, he maketh vs to bee more earneſt and willing to ſeeke thoſe thinges, according to the inſtitution & preſcript of his word.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           7 The watchmen that went about the citie found me: they ſmote me and wounded me: the watchmen of the walles took away my vaile from me.
                        
                           8 I charge ye, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, if you find my welbeloued, that you tell him that I am ſicke of loue.
                        
                           
                           9 O the faireſt amōg women, what is thy welbeloued more then other welbeloued? what is thy welbeloued more then another louer, that thou doeſt ſo charge vs?
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  Whiles the Church was thus earneſt in the purſuit of her welbeloued, the watchmen, and thoſe that went round about the citie found her thus perplexed: and by them we are to vnderſtand thoſe which are Biſhops and chiefeprieſts in name and word only, being indeed ſo far frō ſhewing where Chriſt is, and comforting the weake conſciences of the ignorāt people with the words of life: that they do rather beat the ſpouſe, and vexe the Church, as the euill ſeruants in the Goſpel, did afflict and beat the reſt of their maiſters family, and fellowſeruants, whiles their maiſter was abroad in a forraine countrie. Theſe be the men that lade men with an infinit number of humane precepts and commandements, & theſe falſe teachers tooke away her vaile from her. When vnder the pretence and pretext of true religion, they became deſtroyers or corrupters of the word of God, by taking it away out of the Church, to the end that their owne doctrines might take place.
               
               
                  
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the virgins.
                  
                     I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, if you find my welbeloued, that you tell him that I am ſicke of him. I charge you. The faithfull ſpouſe of Chriſt, being wounded, beaten, ſpoyled and depriued of her owne garments, and being now altogether out of hope as a man would ſay, to find him in the doctrines of men, yet neuertheleſſe for all this, ſhe ceaſeth not to call vpon him, and ſeeke after him: neither wanteth ſhe any deſire or godly affection to ſtirre her vp vnto the earneſt and vehement purſute therof: for it is moſt certaine that the elect of God, are ſo inwardly prouoked and ſtirred vp vnto thoſe things by the meere inſtinct of the holy Ghoſt, that they would rather chuſe to die a hundred times, then once to leaue off from doing thoſe things. Wherefore as the ſpouſe could learne nothing of the falſe teachers and enemies of godlineſſe, which carried a great ſhew of pietie & learning, ſhe turneth her ſelfe vnto thoſe which of her knowledge made no great ſhew of knowledge and learning, to wit, vnto the young maydes and daughters of Ieruſalem, ſignifying the faithfull and godly ſort, liuing here in this world which are accounted fooles, and deuoyde of

iudgement of the world. And it is moſt euident that hereby they are meant, becauſe the daughters of Ieruſalem are alwayes taken for the faithfull whom the Church chargeth, that if they find Chriſt, they would be a meanes vnto him for her to obtaine his loue by telling him that ſhe was ſicke of loue, and languiſhed for the deſire of him, which is the greateſt deſire the elect can haue, becauſe they do both ſeeke to find out Chriſt together with the ſpouſe, and alſo deſire him to help and ſuccour them at all times & houres.
               
               
                  The virgins words vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     O the faireſt among women, what is thy welbeloued more then other welbeloued? what is thy welbeloued more then an other louer, that thou doeſt ſo charge vs? It is not poſſible for the young virgins the Churches beſt beloued, vnleſſe they firſt heare, to vnderſtand what his ſtate and condition is, wherefore here in this place they do aske after his condition and qualities demaunding what he is. Wherefore the faithfull people of God doe earneſtly deſire to receiue inſtructions of the Church, and bee informed of her what is her welbeloued (for it appertayneth onely to the Church to define of theſe things) prouided alwaies that ſhe doe it by the tenour and preſcript of Gods

word, which is her onlie life and rod of direction: how he was begotten of the father before all ages: and how in the fulneſſe of time, he came into the world, to take the Church to be his ſpouſe, ſauing and redeeming her from all her ſinnes.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           10 My welbeloued is white and ruddie, the chiefeſt of ten thouſands.
                        
                           11 His head is as fine golde, his lockes curled, and blacke as a rauen.
                        
                           12 His eyes are like doues vpon the rivers of waters, vvhich are vvasht with milke, and remaine by the full veſſels.
                        
                           13 His cheeks are as a bed of ſpices, & as ſweet flowers: and his lippes like lillies dropping downe pure mirrhe.
                        
                           14 His hands as rings of gold, ſet with the Chryſolite: his bellie like vvhite iuorie couered vvith ſaphirs.
                        
                           15 His legges are as pillars of marble ſet vpon ſockets of fine gold: his countenāce as Lebanon, excellent as the Ceders.
                        
                           16 His mouth is as ſvveet things, and he is vvholly delectable: this is my vvelbeloued,

and this is my louer, ô daughters of Ieruſalem.
                        
                           17 O the faireſt among women, whither is thy welbeloued gone? whither is thy welbeloued turned aſide, that vve may ſeek him with thee?
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  In theſe verſes the Spouſe deſcribeth vnto vs the beauty of her immaculate ſpouſe. And firſt, in generall tearmes, ſpeaking of his whole perſon: then in particular, by entreating of each part and mēber of him. She ſaith then, that he is white and ruddy, the chiefeſt among thouſands. By his whiteneſſe, we are to vnderſtand his diuinitie, according to that of S. Iohn, God is the true light, and there is no darkeneſſe in him. His redneſſe or ruddineſſe is a token or ſigne of his humanity, becauſe of the bloud which he ſhed, & rebukes which he ſuffered, and bitterneſſe of torment which he endured: and laſtly, becauſe his bloud doth waſh vs cleane from all our iniquities.
                  It followeth in the wordes of the Spouſe, that her welbeloued was the chiefest of thouſandes, that is to ſay, among all the multitudes of men, becauſe a thouſand in this place is taken for all men, there being one onely

Mediator left betweene God and man, Ieſus Chriſt. But why is he the chiefeſt and principall aboue all other? Becauſe he ſhould be a fit Sauiour and redeemer of the Church: for whereas we are all the ſort of vs wicked, reprobate and ſinfull men, he is therefore principally good, and the choſen and chiefeſt among all others, to the end that we that are by nature wicked, ſhould by his grace become good, and of a vile and cruell nation, an elect and choſen people vnto him, being by faith made fully partakers of his goodnes & graces, and whom it hath pleaſed God the Father, for his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus ſake, to elect, predeſtinate and preordaine vnto ſaluation from the beginning, becauſe no man can be choſen or become good, vnleſſe it bee by Chriſt, and a true & liuely faith in his death. His head is as fine golde, his lockes curled, and blacke as a rauē. His head, &c. Now the ſpouſe goeth about to deſcribe all the particular 
                        •
                      ſeuerall parts of the bridegrome: and firſt ſhe beginneth with his head, affirming it to 
                        
                           •
                         like the fineſt gold. Whereby is ſignified the moſt precious nature of God, which is called Chriſtes head, as S. Paule ſayth: the head of Chriſt is God. Secondly ſhe praiſeth him fo
                        •
                      his lockes, becauſe, as the haire doth great
                        ••
                      grace the head, if it bee finely curled, and ſomewhat blacke withall: euen ſo the lock
                        •
                     
                     
of Chriſtes head are moſt decent and faire, that is to ſay, the doctrine and workes done in faith, preached by the Apoſtles, and Doctors of the Church, which hang round about this head like ſo many curled lockes. For albeit the wicked, as much as in them lyeth, do daily reſiſt and ſtriue againſt them, yet they haue a moſt notable victorie ouer them, and are more and more enlarged, though peraduenture the wicked may thinke them to bee blacke, becauſe they cannot pleaſe them; for they do alwayes labour as much as they may, to impugne them, & obſcure their doctrines with lies & inuentions. His eyes are like doues vpon the riuers of waters, which are waſht with milke, and remaine by the full veſſels. His eyes, &c. Here ſhe praiſeth him for his eyes, by the doues, vpon the riuers of waters, which are waſht in milke or ſpices, we are to conſider the exceeding great knowledge, & fulnes of the holy Ghoſt which was ſo plentifully abounding in our Lord & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, as in no creature elſe. Wherfore S. Iohn faith, that he was full of grace and truth: and ſhortly after it followeth, & of the fulneſſe of his grace we all receaue: and truly ſuch are the eyes, that is to ſay, all the iudgements and proceedings of Chriſt, to wit, moſt ſincere & pure, and proceeding from the fulneſſe of the holy Ghoſt: his cheekes are as a bed of ſpices and

as ſweet flowers, and his lips like lillies dropping downe pure mirrhe. His cheeks, &c. Here is the perfect deſcription of his cheekes, which are in the face, and wherby euery man is known: and therefore wee may verie well take theſe cheeks for the cōmandements and writings of God, becauſe they do rightly teach and inſtruct vs how to know Chriſt: and therefore it was wel ſaid of Iohn, Attend diligently vnto the writings of the ſcriptures, becauſe you may haue eternall life by them, and they are they which teſtifie of me. So then it appeareth moſt plainely, that the ſcriptures and word of God are the face and cheekes of Chriſt: which doe giue vs moſt euident tokens of him: & they are as it were beds of ſpices, becauſe their ſpeeches are diſtinguiſhed and deuided into diuerſe books, which ſmell moſt ſweete vnto the godly mindes and this ſweete ſmell is cauſed by the operation of the holy Ghoſt, which happeneth ſo often as the ſtately ſence thereof is vnfolded and expreſſed: and the ſent thereof is increaſed not a litle, when thoſe thinge
                        •
                      which may ſeeme to bee litle of themſelues are for a certainty known to be moſt diuine celeſtiall and heauenly thinges. But wh
                        ••
                      do theſe ſweete ſpices growe? In the heart of the faithfull, which onely do eſteeme and make account of them. And hee ſaith, tha
                        •
                     
                     
                     the ſmell of them is increaſed by reaſon of them which fell ſweete ſpices and drugs which are the true Biſhops and miniſters of the word:Thus it is in Italian. who whiles they by the ſpeciall direction and inſpiration of the word pronounce and miniſter it vnto the people, as a moſt ſoueraigne ointment, to recreate and heale their wounded ſoules. Afterwards ſhe commeth to deſcribe the Bridegromes lippes. Nowe the lips of the Bridegrome Chriſt, are his doctrine, which is publiſhed abroad by his Apoſtles and Saints, which like vnto certaine odoriferous lillies, do render foorth a moſt gratious ſmell of righteouſneſſe and truth. His handes as rings of gold ſet with the Chryſolite: his belly like white iuorie couered with Saphirs.
                  
                  
                     His hands, &c. The hand of Chriſt is the power of Chriſt, wherwith both in himſelfe and in others hee bringeth to paſſe ſtrange things, and he declareth the exceeding great value, & ineſtimable goodnes of theſe hands, in that he likeneth them to rings of gold, ſet with Chryſolits and pretious ſtones: becauſe that it is not poſſible for any mortall man to cōprehend the height & depth of Gods omnipotent power. Furthermore, ſhee praiſeth him for his belly: vnderſtanding by his belly, his affections & cogitations: & ſhe ſaith, that his belly is like white iuory couered with ſaphirs. Becauſe all the cogitations, affections, and

purpoſes of Chriſt, and the faithfull are and appeare in the preſence of God, moſt white, moſt precious, and moſt acceptable. Iuorie is made of an Eliphants tooth, very hard, & very durable, or incorruptible, and the Saphire is a kinde of pretious ſtone, which ſhineth moſt brightly: and euen ſo the iudgements of Chriſt and his elect are moſt ſincere, firme, and incorruptible: and furthermore they are bright and Orient Saphirs, lightning the whole body of the Church with their good workes: ſo thē men ſeeing them, may glorifie God, which is in heauen. His legges are as pillars of marble: ſet vpon ſockets of fine gold: his countenance as Lebanon, excellēt as the Cedars. His legges. Here in this place the ſpouſe goeth about to commend Chriſtes legges. Now all the ſtrength and nimbleneſſe of a man is in his legges: wherefore by the legges, wee may note the inuincible ſtrength and fortitude of Chriſt, which is able both to breake all his enemies in peeces, and preſerue his ſeruants from all manner of euill: and therefore they may be well likened vnto pillars of marble, ſet vpon ſockets of fine gold, becauſe they are inuincible, and the ſtrength of them can not bee ouercome: for he came into the fleſh, and ouercame ſinne, death and hell it ſelfe; becauſe hee might ſubdue them vnto the faithfull, and ſtrengthen their fearefull

hearts. And hence it is, that you may read in the holie Scripture, that hee is called a rocke, becauſe of his exceeding great force and ſtrength, againſt the which nothing ſhalbe able to preuaile. Thus then the force of Chriſt conſiſteth in this, that he is a pillar of marble, which hath none like vnto him, or to be compared with him: and as many as beleeue in him, may truly bee ſayd to bee pillars alſo. So that as many as are ſtrengthened and confirmed by him, may bee ſayd to be pillars of the Church. And now after all this, ſhee ſetteth foorth his beautie at large, which onely the beleeuers ſee, and are delighted with the beautie thereof: and yet they ſee no more then it pleaſeth him to reucale vnto them. And his countenance is likened vnto Lebanon, which is a moſt ſtately and pleaſant place, becauſe indeed all the beauty, and ſweete ſmell of Lebanon, that is to ſay, of the Church, which is myſtically to bee vnderſtood by Lebanon, is hid in Chriſt, and among all the trees of Lebanon, he is compared vnto the high, incorruptible, and odoriferous Cedar: for looke howe much the Cedar doth paſſe all other trees in height, euē ſo much and more doth he exceed and ſurpaſſe all others in the Church; becauſe hee is more high, more precious, and more odoriferous then any other, yea there is no good ſmell,

no pretious & good thing whatſoeuer, which is not deriued frō him as frō the fountain of all good. His mouth is as ſweet things, and he is wholly delectable: this is my welbeloued, & this is my louer, ô daughters of Ieruſalem.
                  
                  
                     His mouth, &c. Laſt of all, ſhe deſcribeth the bridegromes mouth, taking it for all his inward ſweetneſſe, that is to ſay, for that ineſtimable great loue which he bare vnto mā
                     kind, in ſeeking their ſaluations, his peace which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, the righteouſnes of Gods eternall truth, & in a word, his ineffable & ineſtimable ſpirit. Finally the ſpouſe wondering at the altitude of Chriſts glory: and ſeeing that all the praiſes that ſhee could heap and accumulate vpon him were many degrees inferiour vnto his deſerts, concluding much matter in few tearms ſhe ſaith, that he is wholly delectable, & indeed this is her principall intent & purpoſe euery where in the Canticles, to proue Chriſt to be moſt earneſtly deſired and ſought after, that ſhe might inflame and kindle the loue of all men towardes him. And it followeth in the text: and this is my louer, to ſhew howe greatly ſhe did glorie in him.
               
               
                  The vvordes of the young virgins vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     O the faireſt among women, whither is thy

welbeloued gone? whither is thy welbeloued turned aſide, that we may ſeeke him with thee? Whither, &c. Conſider that which went before, how the elect not as yet wholly & fully perfect, but tainted with ſome ſmall errors and faults, haue a kind of forme of godlines, and ſome certaine knowledge of God, which they deſire might bee increaſed euerie day more and more, and they are willing to bee better informed, & taught better things. The young virgins, that is to ſay, the faithfull ſeruants of the immaculate ſpouſe, had learned and heard before what Chriſt was: now they deſired to know where his abiding is, whither he is gone, and where they ſhould finde him, and they promiſe to ſeeke him with her: and they may well ſay with her, for no man can find Chriſt, without he haue that which ſhal bring him vnto the knowledge of chriſt, or confirme and ſtrengthen him in it. Nowe we know, that a true faith is a true companion of the faithful Church & ſpouſe of Chriſt, which he himſelfe nameth, the faireſt among all women, that is to ſay, among all congregations and nations, becauſe ſhe is moſt wonderfully perfect and excellent, by reaſon of that vnſpeakeable beautie, which ſhe receiueth from her heauenly husband and celeſtiall bridegrome Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
               The ſixt Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 My welbeloued is gone downe into his garden, to the beds of ſpices, to feede in the gardens, and to gather lillies.
                        
                           2 I am my welbeloueds, and my welbeloued is mine, who feedeth amōg the lillies.
                        
                           3 Thou art beautifull (my loue) as Tirzah, comely as Ieruſalem, terrible as an armie with banners.
                        
                           4 Turne away thine eyes from me: for they ouercome me: thine haire is like a flock of goates, which looke downe from Gilead.
                        
                           5 Thy teeth are like a flocke of sheepe, which go vp from the washing which every one bring out twinnes, and none is barren among them.
                        
                           6 Thy temples are within thy lockes, as a peece of a pomegranate.
                        
                           7 There are 60. Queenes and 80. concubines, and of the damſels without nūber.
                        
                           8 But my doue is alone, and my vndefiled, she is the only daughter of her mother, and she is deare to her that bare her, the daughters haue ſeene her, and counted her bleſſed: euen the Queenes and the concubines, and they haue praiſed her.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the young damſels.
                  IT is a ſtrange thing to ſee how the Church which but a litle ſince ſought after her welbeloued, whom ſhe could not find, charged the young damſels, that is to ſay, the faithfull, that if they did find him, they ſhould bring her tidings of him, becauſe ſhe was ſick for the loue of him, & yet the Church knew full well, that the young virgins could neuer find out Chriſt, vnleſſe they were firſt ioined with him in perfect charitie, and therefore ſhe teacheth and inſtructeth them, how they ſhould ſeeke Chriſt, if they meant to find: & it is as much as if ſhe ſhold haue ſaid in other words, my louing ſpouſe, the only begotten ſonne of God, came downe from heauen out of the boſome of his father, into his garden here in this world, which he created for the elects ſake, adorned & beautified it, commending it to them as a paradiſe of delight, for to dreſſe and keepe it, to the end, that they hauing once rooted out the thorns of errors and impieties, might make deepe furrows in it, with the plough of Gods word, wherein might be ſowen ſpices and ſweet odors, which afterwards taking deepe roote might growe vppe, that is to ſaye, the

elect and faithfull ſoules might receiue profit thereby, and in proceſſe of time gather roſes, that is to ſay, the ſonnes of God diuided in the world, but vnited in faith and charity: and afterwards tranſlate or lay them in the barne or heauen of all happineſſe. And there ſhe ſaith, I will embrace and loue my welbeloued, and my welbeloued ſhall embrace and loue me, in ſuch ſort, that I cannot hope for greater happineſſe and ioy, to bring me vnto the top of felicitie: becauſe this is the cauſe why the bridegrome came into the world, to draw all things vnto him, to the end, that amongſt the elect and regenerate, the fulneſſe of ioy of the Bridegrome might bee fulfilled in the Spouſe, as it were among thoſe that feede among roſes and lillies. And the ſecond verſe is an exaggeration, ſhewing that her minde was pricked with wonderfull great zeale of charitie, becauſe it was inflamed and burned within her: as if ſhe ſhould haue ſaid, He deſcended and came down into me, and therefore if you will finde him, you muſt ſeeke him in me.
               
               
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Bride.
                  Thou art beautifull my loue, as Tirzah, comely as Ieruſalem, terrible as an armie with banners. Thou art beautifull, &c. Whence is it

that the chaſt ſpouſe of Chriſt is ſo courteous and charitable? vnles it be of Chriſtes ſpirit, in whom ſhe beleeueth: and therefore he doth well to call her beautifull and comely. And he calleth her his loue or friend by grace, becauſe by nature ſhe merited not this loue of the Bridegrome. But therefore was ſhee comely and faire, becauſe he elected & choſe, decked and trimmed her, and ſo loued her, that he prouided all things neceſſarie for her ſaluation in moſt plentifull and aboundant ſort. And becauſe Ieruſalem in the time of king Salomon was richer then any other city, in golde, ſiluer, ſtrong men, peace, ioy, and aboundance of all corporall and temporall goods: therefore was there no better way to ſet foorth the beauty of the Church, but by cōparing it vnto Ieruſalem, the citie of God: eſpecially whereas the Church is a certaine pleaſant city of God, abounding in all maner of ſpirituall goods. Neither is the Church only beautified, and adorned with all maner of graces and vertues, which ſhine in her: but ſhe is terrible alſo, or rather maieſtical & portly, made inuincible by the power of the Bridegrome: and alwayes triumphing ouer all the world, and wicked worldlings therin contained. Turne away thine eyes from me, for they ouercome me: thine haire is like a flock of goats, which look downe from Gilead.
                  
                  
                     
                     Turne away, &c. The Bridegrome falleth afreſh in commēding & praiſing of the bride, vſing the very ſame wordes which ſhee vſed before in the 4. chap. wherefore whereas the ſpouſe is ſo glorious and great, by meanes of the bridegrome, he deſireth no further thing at her hands, but that ſhe would withall maner of confidence & truſt, behold & looke vpon him, nothing diſtruſting his loue or kindneſſe towards her, aſſuring her ſelf, that it could not but be right pleaſant in his eies, which is the husband of the Church, that his goodnes & louing kindneſſe ſhold be beleeued, & embraced of the faithful: and he goeth forward in cōmending the ſpouſe for manie good parts which were in her, becauſe he him ſelfe is the head of the Church, & therfore he ſhold not ſeeme ſo much to cōmend himſelf, as his ſpouſe: but he cōmendeth the haires of her head, which may bee taken here in this place for the chiefe of the Church, as Apoſtles, teachers, and expounders of the word: hanging downe his head, that is, depending vpō the ſpirituall influences of his graces for the better ornament of the bridegrome with mutuall loue and concord. And theſe haires are likened vnto a faire flocke of goates which come from the pleaſant paſtures of mount Gilead, the ſpouſes eyes, as it hath beene aboue declared in the fourth cha. ſignifie the iudgement

of the holy Ghoſt, and whereas it is ſaid, that the Spouſe was ouercome, 
                     Thus it is in Italian. 
                     waxed proud, or tooke great glorie in them, and all this after a good and godly ſort, therefore the bridegrome willeth them to turne them away from him, not but that he was greatly pleaſed with them, for ſo wee muſt alwayes vnderſtand him, leaſt we miſtake him, and be deceiued our ſelues: for the meaning of the words is this, I am already delighted & pleaſed with thy eyes, that is to ſay, with the knowledge of the godly & righteous iudgemēts of the ſpirit of God which fully reſteth in them, in ſo much that they do is it were kindle my loue towards thee, inflaming my zeale, & increaſing the ioy which I conceiue by thee, ſo that I can hardly endure the vehemēcy of my loue, it ſo burneth within me. The other words which folow are expoūded in the aforenamed place and chapter. There are 60. Queenes and 80. concubines, and of the damſels without number. The Church of God is one Church in the true vnitie of the ſpirit, this Church hath two mothers, one a fleſhly mother, and the other a ſpirituall mother, of the firſt wee haue intreated alreadie in the third chap. of the ſecond, that is to ſay, of the ſpirituall mother, are theſe wordes ſpoken here in this verſe: for out of doubt theſe words are not intended of

the carnall Church, and therefore they muſt needs be meant of that Church which conſiſteth in the ſpirit. The Bridegrome calleth this Church a doue, that is to ſay, ſpirituall: and hee addeth moreouer, his doue, becauſe it is by means of his ſpirit, that ſhe is ſpirituall: for without it ſhe could not bee accounted a doue. Furthermore, we may, for ought that I know, take this mother for the regenerating grace of God, which electeth the ſimple, and ſuſtaineth and vpholdeth the elect: & this is commended of the Queens, concubines, and yong damſels: by whom we are to vnderſtand the faithfull, becauſe they are made of a wicked and incredulous generation, a Church and congregation of the elect, which is continually reuiled, blaſphemed, & contradicted Furthermore, theſe concubines and Queenes are the kings wiues, becauſe it is no ſtrange phraſe in the ſcripture, to call the concubines by the name of wiues: although it be euident out of the olde teſtamēt, that the chiefe of them were called wiues, and the reſt concubines: as it is manifeſt by Abrahams wiues. Thus thē the whole Church being conſidered together, is one perfect ſpouſe of Chriſt, called a doue, becauſe of the gifts of the holie Ghoſt, which are contained in her: and the more ſpeciall, particular, and greater Churches are called Queenes, the leſſer concubines,

becauſe although they be threeſcore in number, that is enough, yet theſe are fourſcore, that is more, for indeed the leſſer Churches are more in number then the greater, the young damſels are the faithfull ſoules without number, becauſe there are many which are vnknowne to vs.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           9 VVho is she that looketh forth as the morning, faire as the moone, pure as the ſunne, terrible as an armie with banners.
                        
                           10 I went downe to the garden of nuts, to ſee the fruits of the valley, to ſee if the vine budded, and if the pomegranates flourished.
                        
                           11 I knew nothing, my ſoule ſet me as the chariots of my noble people.
                        
                           12 Returne, returne ô Shulamite returne: returne that we may behold thee, what shalt thou ſee in the Shulamite, but as the companie of an armie?
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  THe Church is the morning, which hath not yet receiued the fulnes of her light,

which ſhe ſhall receiue in glorie: the M
                        •••
                     e is the truth of Chriſts doctrine▪ which ſhineth in the darkneſſe, but the darknes comprehē
                     ded it not, Ioh. 1. The Sun as Chriſt Ieſus. Eſa. 60. verſ. 20. Thou ſhalt haue no more Sunne to ſhine by day, neither ſhall the brightneſſe of the moone ſhine vnto thee, for the Lord ſhall be thine euerlaſting light, and thy God, thy glory. Thy 
                        •
                     un ſhal neuer go down, neither ſhall the moone be hid: for the Lord ſhal be thine euerlaſting light. Thus then the Church is faire, but faire as the moone, that is faire as the truth, becauſe all her beauty and faireneſſe commeth from thence: for ſo grea
                        •
                      is her beauty and comelineſſe, as her faith is great in Gods word, if her life be anſwerable therunto: afterwards ſhee is elected as the ſu
                        •
                      Chriſt, who in all the elect is ſayd to be th
                        •
                      firſt borne, becauſe others are elected and predeſtinated vnto ſaluation frō the beginning for his ſake: that ſhe is terrible as an army wit
                           •
                         banners. It hath bene already ſhewed yo
                        •
                      in the beginning of this chap: where you may read the very ſame words. And this interrogatiue kinde of ſpeech, Who is ſhe? are th
                        •
                      words of Chriſt ſpoken by the way of admiration, to make the glorie of the Churc
                        •
                      more known vnto al the world. I went dow
                           •
                         to the garden of nuttes, to ſee the fruites of th
                           •
                         valley, to ſee if the vine budded, and if th
                           •
                        
                        
pomegranates flouriſhed. I went downe &c. He calleth the Church a garden of nuts, becauſe the kernell and ſweetneſſe thereof is contained vnder an hard ſhell of aduerſitie. Chriſt came downe into this garden, to preſerue the fruits of the waters or torrents,Thus it is in Italian. that is to ſay, of the elect, which are as trees planted by the riuers of waters, as it is in the firſt Pſalme. To ſee whether the vine budded, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      to ſay, the faith of thoſe elect, of the elect which cōtinually haue their faiths accōpani
                     
                        •
                     d & followed with good works: & we may, obſerue this in theſe wordes of Chriſt vnto the Church, I went downe, that there is nothing which may any way belong or appertaine vnto the good of the Church, but he reuealeth and maketh it knowen vnto her.
               
               
                  The Spouſe ſpeaketh vnto the Bridegroome.
                  
                     I knew nothing, my ſoule ſet me as the chariots of my noble people▪ I knew nothing, &c. Chriſt deliuered vnto the ſpouſe the manner of his comming downe vnto her, and that in the verſe immediatly going before, to whom ſhe replyeth after this manner, I knew not, that is to ſay, I marked not that you were ſo neare me, till you bewrayed your ſelfe vnto me by your ſweete and pleaſant wordes,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
likewiſe I knew not when thou departed
                        •
                      from me, vnleſſe it pleaſed thee to reueale the ſame vnto me, and the reaſon is, becauſe no man knoweth the hidden ſecrets and myſteries of God, vnleſſe it be God and him▪ vnto whom God reuealeth them: and it followeth, my ſoule. The ſoule of the Church is Chriſt, & it is a very vſuall and ſignificatiue kind of ſpeech to expreſſe a mans loue, becauſe he that loueth a thing earneſtly and vehemently, calleth that which he loueth, his ſoule: ſo that the righteous mā which loueth Chriſt, ſaith, that Chriſt is his ſoule, he ſet me as the chariots of my people
                     ▪ which runne willingly in the courſe of Gods words, but although they be willing in ſpirit, and readie in mind, yet they draw after them heauie & weake chariots or burdens, and therefore I will goe draw thoſe chariots, I will enter into them, and confirme the weake and frayle ones, with the doctrine of pietie, comfort thoſe that are comfortleſſe, and as much as I can frame my ſelfe wholly vnto their ſeruice, caring not what ſhall happen vnto me, ſo that I may winne ſome vnto the Goſpell. And hence it was that S. Paul boaſted of his infirmities and labours which hee ſuffered, and endured for Gods people.
               
               
                  
                  The words of the young damſels vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     Returne, returne, ô Shulamite returne: returne, that we may behold thee, what ſhall you ſee in the Shulamite, but as the companions of any armie? Returne &c. It hath beene oftentimes declared vnto you before, that by the name of damſels, or young virgins, are ſignified the faithfull people of God, which are all renewed in Chriſt, and euery one of them hath a youngneſſe or youth of mind: theſe viewing and beholding the great care, and diuerſe troubles of the Church, which ſhe ſuffereth and endureth for their ſakes, are conſtrained to reioyce in the true charitie thereof, becauſe it is proper vnto the faithfull alone, to reioyce & be glad in the Lord, whē they ſee the loue of others towards thē, which they deſire and ſtudie (as much as in them lieth) to immitate and expreſſe. Therfore theſe are the words of the faithfull vnto the Church of God, which is ſo carefull and penſiue for their good. Returne ô Shulamite, that is to ſay, O thou peaceable and quiet ſpouſe of Chriſt, becauſe that ſhe ought to be a peaceable ſpouſe of her peaceable huſband Chriſt, to the end that her nature may be anſwerable vnto her name, and the thing concord and concurre with the words. The

doubling and repetitiō of the word returne, diſcouereth the greatnes of their affections, & whence ſhould ſhe returne? whence ſhold ſhe come? from labours and griefe, from ſorrow and trouble
                        •
                      for verily we can not but ſee how the Church is vexed and tormented, watcheth and faſteth, laboureth & ſweateth, and all this ſhee is content to receiue at the hands of the wicked, for the behoofe & good of the godly, and therfore no maruell if they haue compaſſion on her, and call vnto her, not to diſeaſe or diſquiet her ſelfe, by putting her ſelfe to much trouble and ſorrow, but that ſhe would reſt a while from her labors, and returne vnto the comfortable places of the holy ſcriptures, to the end, that out of the ſcripture they may learne & ſee what things are to be done with eaſe and quietneſſe, and what with care and trouble. And briefely, this is that which the young virgines deſire and couet for to know, what the Church of God is, and where it is in time of proſperitie and aduerſitie: and this is a thing moſt ſtudiouſly to be obſerued and noted, that without the knowledge of the Church, we cannot well attaine vnto the knowledge of Chriſt, and they are ſo faſt linked & bound together, that if you know one, you may eaſily know to other.
               
            
            
               
               The ſeuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 How beautifull are thy goings with shoes, ô Princes daughter: the ioyntes of thy thighes are like iewels: the worke of the hand of a cunning workeman.
                        
                           2 Thy nauell is as a round cup that wanteth not licour: thy belly is as an heape of wheat compaſſed about with lillies.
                        
                           3 Thy two breaſts are as tvvo young Roes that are tvvins▪
                        
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Bride.
                  HE beginneth here in this place, as it is manifeſt by the ſequell therof to praiſe and command the Church whom he cannot chuſe but loue, as being his only deare ſpouſe: and his meaning and purpoſe is to ſay, and ſhew no more then Iſaiah ſaith in his 52. cha. Nahum. 1. and Rom. 10. How beautifull are the feet of thē that declare & publiſh peace, that bring good tydings & publiſh ſaluatiō,

And the Church of God, the true ſpouſe of God is ſhe which doth truely preach theſe good tydings, becauſe ſhe alone declareth vnto vs the worde of God, whereunto we muſt leane, and theſe goings are ſaid to be beautifull with ſhoes, which words are ſpoken by way of ſimilitude, to ſhew & inſtruct vs, that as thoſe which will go any farre iorney muſt be well ſhod: ſo the profeſſors and miniſters of the Goſpell, which are to go a farre iorney to preach the Goſpell throughout the whole world, muſt be moſt readie to declare the truth vnto all men; and verily they may be then ſaid to be readie, and neuer before, when they do teach his word faithfully and ſincerely. So then beautifull are the goings of the. Church with ſhoes, becauſe when ſhe is ſent of God, ſhe is moſt willing and ready to declare vnto all men the words of ſaluation, and thus you may ſee, how Chriſt commendeth his owne good gifts in the Church, and that before the young virgins, to wit, the ſoules of the faithfull, becauſe he would haue vs all to knowe, what manner of thing the Church is, and I doubt not, but that it ſo commeth to paſſe by the ſingular prouidence and wiſedome of God▪ that there are ſo many places in this book of the Canticles, where the Church commendeth Chriſt, and is againe commended of

him, becauſe we ſhould know what a neceſſarie point of doctrine this is to be repeated, and ingeminated in the eares of the faithfull, ſeeing that the ignorance and want thereof, hath almoſt ſeduced and beguiled the whole world. In the ſecond place he prayſeth the Church for her vnſpotted fruitfulneſſe, becauſe her thighes ſignifie the power and vertue of bringing foorth others by the word, being like vnto precious iewels, and hereby is meant the diuine gifts of the holy Ghoſt, which do adorne, beautifie, and make fertile the ſoules of the faithfull. And be ſaith, that they are the worke of a cunning workman, becauſe they are, the workes of almightie God, the moſt ingenious and cunning workemaiſter that euer was, who hath all power and vertue to doe whatſoeuer him liſteth, who powreth his graces downe vppon vs, which make vs to bee farre more excellent and pure then wee were before, and without whoſe helpe we cannot doe any thing at all, thy nauell is as a round cup that wanteth not licour, thy bellie is as an heape of wheat compaſſed about with lillies. Thy nauell, what is this round baſon or cup, but the doctrine of the Goſpell, which neuer wanteth the licour of Gods ſpirit, which is ſtill put into it? And here by the way we are to conſider of how litle

eſtimation the faithfull are at the firſt time when they are borne, vnleſſe they be recreated and refreſhed with the liuely licour of Gods worde, which when they haue once taſted, they ſhall neuer need any more moyſture, hauing the continuall dew of Gods ſpirit, whereby they are enabled and made powerfull to multiply and beget other ſonnes vnto their husbande, and the ſeede whereby they do conceiue and bring forth, is the worde of God, and then this is the expoſition of theſe words; To the end that thou ſholdeſt beget children vnto me▪ there needeth no carnall imbracings or copulation, as in the generation of mens bodies, becauſe that when thou wert firſt affianced and betrothed vnto me by faith, thou diddeſt receiue the ſpirit and giftes of the holy Ghoſt, whereby thou mayeſt be able to conceaue, and bring foorth children vnto God. Faith and vnfained charitie is the copulation which is requiſite in the procreation of theſe ſpirituall children, and therefore there needeth no outward ſeede of the fleſh, becauſe wee haue the ſeede of Gods word, which is moſt effectuall to the conceiuing and bringing foorth of the fruites of good workes, and this wonderfull, ſtrāge and pure kind of fertilitie, is yet made more plaine by theſe words following, thy bellie

is as an heape of wheat, compaſſed about with lillies. Thy belly. As if he ſhould haue ſaide, euen as in a heape of wheat there are many graines of corne, ſo within thy fertile wombe, there are contayned many multitudes of thoſe which thou haſt conceiued for mee, and becauſe thou art full or heauenly bleſſings, no doubt of it, but thou wilt bring them foorth in their due time and ſeaſon, and ſhe conceaueth theſe bleſſings when ſhe beleeueth, but bringeth them foorth when they are done in faith, and this belly is compaſſed about with lillies, by the lillies we may vnderſtand the faithfull, becauſe the wombe of the Church is wholly compaſſed about with the lillie-white innocencie of the faithfull, thy two breaſts are as two young▪ Roes that are twins, thy two, the two breaſts in this place, ſignifie the old Teſtament and the New, the doctrine of the Prophets, and the doctrine of the Apoſtles which may bee very well compared vnto young Roes, either for their puritie and whiteneſſe, or elſe, becauſe they do runne about the whole world, as the young Goates doe leape and skippe about the hilles, and for the farther expoſition of this place, wee muſt entreate the gentle Reader to returne backe againe vnto the fourth Chapter, where he

ſhall finde this verſe wholly interpreted: only we will note this by the way, that he calleth them twinnes, becauſe it is the ſelfe ſame God and father, which is the author and father of both Teſtaments.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           4 Thy neeke is like a towre of iuorie: thine eyes are like the fish pooles in Heshbon, by the gate of Beth-rabbim: thy noſe is as the towre of Lebanon, that looketh toward Damaſcus.
                        
                           5 Thine head vpon thee is as a skarlet, and the bu
                              •
                           ke of thine head like purple: the king is tyed in the rafters.
                        
                           6 How faire art thou, and how pleaſant art thou, ô my pleaſure?
                        
                           7 This thy ſtature is like a palme tr
                              •
                           e, and thy breaſts like cluſters.
                        
                           8 I ſaid, I will go 
                              •
                           p into the palme tree, I will take hold of her boughes: thy breaſts shall now be like the cluſters of the vine: and the ſauour of thy noſe like apples.
                        
                           9 And the roofe of thy mouth like good wine, which goeth ſtraight to my welbeloued, and cauſeth the lips of the ancient to ſpeake.
                     
                  
                  
                     
The Commentarie.
                  The necke is faith, as it is euident out of the firſt and fourth Chapters, and this place may be thus expounded, as if a man had a towre of iuorie, doubtleſſe it would be a very precious and ſtrong place: ſo in like maner, if a man haue faith, hee hath a moſt firme, ſtrong and precious towre and rocke of defence, againſt which the gates of hell ſhal neuer be able to preuaile: but of this there hath bene ſufficiently ſpoken in the places aboue mentioned. Moreouer, he commendeth her for her fine eyes, which ſignifie nothing elſe but the iudgementes of the Church, which are as cleare, bright, and pure, as the moſt 
                        ••
                     eare waters in the fiſh-pooles of Heſebon, which are the liuely fountaines of truth, and pure waters of Gods word, which the bridegroome hath in great abundance, and of the aboundance of his goodneſſe wee all receiue that belong vnto the faithfull churches. And theſe fiſh-pooles are neare vnto the gate of Beth-rabbim, that is, if a man interpret it, the gate of the daughter of a multitude, that is, wherein manie are contained, or to whom manie belong, according to the phraſe and manner of ſpeaking of the Hebrewes, is the Church, which may bee verie fitly called, a

daughter of multitudes begotten by the word of God, whoſe gate is Chriſt. In this gate is their great aboundance and plentie of fountaines & fiſhpooles of liuing water, that is to ſay, of truth, grace, and Gods diuine iuſtice. Furthermore, he goeth onward in praiſing her for her noſe, which is a ſignification of vertue; for thereby do we ſmell the ſweete ſauours of our Lord and ſauior Ieſus Chriſt: wherefore, as they which are ſituated vpon the top of a towre on the pleaſant hill of Lebanon, do partake the ſweet ſent of the ſpices which growe thereon; ſo hee that ſtandeth vpon the ſtrong tower of the Church, and hath ſure footing on this rocke, to wit, of faith, which is noted by the ſimilitude of a rock or towre muſt needs be perfumed with the ſweete ſmell of Chriſtes ointments: for becauſe he is in the Church, and the reſt not ſo for the ſame reaſon: and he ſaith, that this tower of faith looketh toward Damaſcus. Where he taketh Damaſcus for all the carnall minded men, which are indeed nothing elſe but a ſacke of bloud: becauſe this is the right ſignification of the word in the originall. Againſt theſe doth the ſtrong tower, that is to ſay, the faith of the Church, looke moſt oppoſitely and directly, becauſe the iudgementes and affections of the Church are cleane contrarie vnto them: and the heade

of the Church, as wee haue before prooued vnto you, is the Bridegrome Chriſt: a pleaſant and worthy Bridegrome, high as mount Carmel, and fruitfull as mount Carmel: for all theſe thinges haue bene truly ſpoken, and may bee very well verified of Chriſt, the head of the Church, for hee is moſt high and ſtatelie, fruitfull, and abounding in the corne of trueth, or rather all manner of fruites ſpring from him, and without him it is not poſſible for anie man to budde, or bring foorth either fruite or leaues. Finallie, wee are ſed with his corne, that is to ſay, with his Spirit and truth, as often as we beleeue in him, as it is in the ſixt chapter of Iohn and 32. verſe, where hee commaunded the Iewes to eate and drinke him by faith. And Chriſt here, as in manie other places of the Canticles, commendeth himſelfe in the Church, and the Church in him: for when hee praiſeth the head of the Spouſe, what doth hee elſe but commend himſelfe? by and by afterwardes he commendeth the Spouſe in commending himſelfe: for otherwiſe the Spouſe deſerueth no commendarious, vnleſſe it be for his ſake. He proceedeth further yet to magnifie and extoll her haire: now the haire is nothing els but the doctrine and deedes of Chriſt, and the king which he talketh of is God, the purple the holie

Ghoſt, and perfect charitie, the watering places, the writings of God & the Prophets, where all the flockes of the Chriſtians are to be watered. And the haire of Chriſt is compared and likened vnto the purple of ſome mightie Prince, becauſe all that which hee either did or taught, was deriued from the ſource of the holy Ghoſt, and fountaine of true charitie, and the king is tyed to the watering places, becauſe Gods holy ſpirit is inſerted and ingrafted within the writings of the holy ſcripture, and bookes of the Prophets, where he is alwayes preſent, and by them he maketh knowne the loue of God vnto the godly mindes: moreouer he continueth to prayſe the Church, by rehearſing the generall commendations thereof, and confounding or huddeling the prayſes therof, together into one ſhort ſentence, ſaying, ô faire art thou. O thou Church and congregation of the faithfull, which art moſt louing and pleaſurable vnto thy ſpouſe, and that in the pleaſures of thy Chriſt, whileſt thou reioyceſt in him alone, and none but him, for otherwiſe thou ſholdeſt be the moſt miſerable & diſtreſſed wretch in the world, receiuing no helpe and ſuccour from him, for no man that walketh in ſtrange pleaſures from Chriſt, can haue any comelineſſe or beauty before the Lord. Again ſhe is commended

for her husband, and for her ſtature, in theſe words: This thy ſtature is like a palmetree, and thy breasts like cluſters. The palmetree is a tree that hath a ſound trunke, high and ſtraight; but the barke or rinde thereof is rugged, hard, and deformed, being broad and equallie big at top, bowing her head euerie way downward, which yeeldeth plentie of a kind of ſweet fruite called dates, which growe ſo plentifully vpon this tree, that they be like vnto the cluſters of vines: and this is the ſtature of Chriſtes ſpouſe: for ſhee is ſound becauſe of the roote and ſtrength of faith: ſomewhat high and tall, which is ſo ſtreight in the toppe with faith, and the conſideration of heauenlie thinges: that ſhe boweth or ſwaggereth not at all, neither to the right hande, nor to the left from the word of God: ſhee hath a hard, rough, and filthie barke, becauſe ſhee is yet a ſinner, hauing not crucified the olde man, but being alwayes ſubiect vnto aduerſities, ſtormes and troubles: aboue on the toppe of the tree, that is to ſay, in Chriſt the head of the Church there bee manie fine heights and breadthes, and workes of charitie ſtooping euerie way vnto the neceſſities & infirmities of her neighbours and brethren: here are to be gathered moſt ſweet and pleaſant fruits,

becauſe there is nothing more pleaſant and ſweete then the loue of the Church, and as it is ſaid, the Church is the palmetree, which our ſauiour Chriſt went vp into, when hee powred downe his heauenly graces from heauen. Againe, hee went vp this palmetree, when more particularlie hee reuealed vnto his faithfull the knowledge of his maieſtie. And hee tooke hold of the boughs therof, that by touching of him, he might giue them ſome influence, and cauſe them more and more for to proſper and encreaſe. The breaſts of the Church are compared & likened vnto the cluſters of the vine: becauſe as there are many ſtones in a cluſter of grapes, ſo true and perfect charitie is not idle, but bringeth foorth many godly workes. The laſt commmendation which hee giueth of the ſpouſe, is of the roofe of her mouth, which is the taſte and feeling of Gods ſpirite, which is like the beſt wine, becauſe it is moſt pleaſant in taſte, comfortable to the mind, and without any mixtion or infuſion of anie ſtrange liquor, maketh a man drunken after a moſt profitable and wholeſome kinde of ſort.
               
               
                  
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           10 I am my welbeloueds, and his deſire is towards me.
                        
                           11 Come my welbeloued, let vs goe foorth into the field: let vs remaine in the villages.
                        
                           12 Let vs get vp early to the vines, let vs ſee if the vine flourish, whether it hath budded the ſmall grape, or whether the pomegranates flourish: there will I giue thee my loue.
                        
                           13 The mandrakes haue giuen a ſmell, and in our gates are all ſweet things, new and old: my vvelbeloued, I haue kept them for thee.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The wordes of the Spouſe vnto the Bridegroome.
                  Theſe are the wordes of the ſpouſe directed vnto the Bridegroome, containing thus much in effect. As long as I endeuour & ſtudie to pleaſe thee, ſo long I may perſwade my ſelfe moſt aſſuredlie that I ſhall want

nothing. And furthermore, that hee will loue & embrace me as his moſt deare ſpouſe and louing married wife, according vnto the holy and godly lawes of matrimonie, becauſe my deſire ſhall bee towardes him. Come my welbeloued, let vs go foorth into the field, let vs remaine in the villages. Fieldes, vines, and villages are out of the towne, within the towne hurres, ſturres & tumults: abroad a man may finde reſt and quietneſſe, but at home, that is, within Gods Citie, to wit, the Church, we are to looke for nothing but ſtirres and tumultes, either whiles ſhe is toſſed vp and downe, and vexed with the care of prouiding thinges neceſſarie for the welfare of the Church, or in making continuall warre and fight with olde Adam and the wicked: and ſhee is ſaide to goe foorth, when ſhee is deliuered and freed out of the handes of them, or when ſhe can be moſt willing and content to ſuffer and endure all manner of rebukes for the teſtimonie of a good conſcience, or for Chriſts ſake: repoſing all her truſt and confidence in God, and vtterly diſtruſting her owne workes or merits. Afterwards ſhe may bee trulie ſayd to remaine in the villages, when ſhe hath the benefite of Chriſts peace. Earlie in the morning, that is to ſay, when ſhe is illuminated and lightened thereunto by

Chriſt, becauſe all thinges muſt be done in his name, and in his name we are to ſeeke for the flower of true faith. And the grapes which are not yet fully ripe, are the works and deeds of faith, which are ſaide to be greene, vnripe, or ſomewhat ſower, becauſe as long as wee liue here in this wicked world, and carrie about vs this frayle and brittle fleſh, there remayneth ſome dregges of imperfection in vs. And furthermore, it is ſayd that they went to ſee whether the Pomegranates did flouriſh: that is to ſay, they did ſeeke and inquire after many good workes, done in good and orderly ſort: likewiſe we may vnderſtand hereby the well ordered and gouerned congregations of the faithfull which are red with charitie: and this is the onely order and method to be obſerued of vs in gouerning and guiding the works of the Church, that all thinges be done and ordered according vnto the preſcribed rule and Canon of Gods word: for otherwiſe howe can they be ſaid to be ordered at all? The violets haue giuen a ſmell, and in our gates are all ſweete thinges, new and olde: my welbeloued, I haue kept them for thee. So then the Spouſe goeth vnto the villages with Chriſt, that is to ſay, by his meanes ſhee commeth vnto the full fruition of true reſt and tranquilitie, becauſe the violets, which do moſt commonly

growe abroad in the fieldes, are taken for the faithful, whoſe place and habitation is in the fields, that is to ſay, in peace: becauſe as they are ſometimes oppreſſed with the tumultes of the Citie, that is to ſay, aſſaulted with diuerſe and grieuous temptations: ſo at another time they enioy ſuch reſt of minde, and peace of conſcience, that they ſeeme to haue arriued at the hauen of all happineſſe, and to be ſafely brought vnto the pleaſures and delights of the countrie. It followeth, And in our gates are all ſweet thinges, to wit, in the gates of our villages, which are theſe, iuſtice, righteouſneſſe, hope, the grace of God, wiſedome, a cleane heart, and a pure vnderſtāding: becauſe the faithful do remaine and dwell in theſe villages moſt peaceably and ſecurely: and the gates of theſe villages or towres are theſe, faith and trueth, together with the feare of God, which is the beginning of wiſedome: and theſe are for the moſt part common with Chriſt and the ſpouſe, and therfore he calleth them our gates. Round about theſe gates and villages there is great plentie of good workes growing, which are to bee reaped, when the harueſt and ſeaſonable time of charitie commeth.
               
            
            
               
               The eight Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1 O that thou vvereſt as my brother that ſucked the breast of my mother: I vvould finde thee vvithout, I vvoulde kiſſe thee, then they should not deſpiſe thee.
                        
                           2 I vvill leade thee and bring thee into my mothers houſe: there thou shalt teach me: and I vvill cauſe thee to drinke ſpiced vvine, and new vvine of the pomegranate.
                        
                           3 His left hand shall bee vnder mine head, and his right shall embrace me.
                        
                           4 I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, that ye ſtirre not vp nor vvaken my loue vntill she pleaſe.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The wordes of the Spouſe vnto the Bridegroome.
                  
                     OH that thou wereſt as my brother, &c. Chriſt is as it were a brother vnto thoſe that are of the congregation of the faithful

as hee ſaith in the third chap, of Mark. verſ. 35. Whoſoeuer doth the will of God, hee is my brother, and my ſiſter, and mother, and Saint Paule in the 8. chapt. to the Romanes, calleth him the firſt borne among many brethren. And hee was made, as it were a brother, when hee tooke fleſh, and was in outward ſhewe like vnto vs men. Now as euery brother, that is to ſay, euerie faithfull man ſucketh the breaſtes of his mother the Church which begate him by the word of God, that is to ſay, receiueth ayde and comfort of her charitie and loue: ſo in like maner Chriſt, although indeede hee receiued not any comfort from her breaſtes, yet neuertheleſſe wee may truly ſay, that hee did ſucke her breaſtes, becauſe he tooke delight and comfort in them. For the two breaſtes ſignifie loue and charitie, as it hath bene before ſhewed you. And this husband Chriſt is hee whome the Church deſireth to finde in the ſtreetes of the Citie, that is to ſay, in the multitudes of peoples, becauſe it is her heartie deſire and wiſh, that if it bee poſſible ſhee may bee ſeene and knowne of all by faith, and finallie to the honour and glorie of God, and example of others: ſhee deſireth to kiſſe him, that is, humblie to requeſt Gods fauour and grace through Chriſt, wherefore the Spouſe here in this

place ſeemeth to bee willing before men to confeſſe her ſelfe to bee a moſt wretched, vile, and miſerable ſinner, making dayly interceſſions and prayers vnto God through Chriſt for his mercifull fauour, and therefore ſhe deſireth that ſhe may haue leaue to kiſſe him publikely in the ſtreetes▪ and what is meant hereby? it appeareth by the words following, then they ſhould not deſp
                           •
                        ſe me. As who would ſay, I know that thou doeſt moſt louingly embrace and kiſſe me in ſecret, but I beſeech thee, ô my gentle and moſt louing Sauiour, to kiſſe me openly, and in the preſence of whole multitudes, to the end that all men may know and learne by my example, to confeſſe themſelues to be miſerable ſinners, wretched perſons, and in the ſtate of damnation, and ſo conſequently ſue for Gods fauour and remiſſion of ſinnes, thorough thee their Sauiour and Redeemer, againe thy deſire and prayer is, that thy moſt glorious and holy name, may be ſanctified among all men, and that no man would deſpiſe thee, but contrariwiſe, euery one would magnifie & extoll thee with all their hearts. I will lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers houſe: there thou ſhalt teach me: and I will cauſe thee to drinke ſpiced wine, and new wine of the pomegranate. I will leade thee, &c. Finally he ſheweth the duetie of the ſpouſe, ſhe

ſaith, I will leade thee. Chriſt is led of them that pray vnto him by faith, whither they will, becauſe he heareth them, and graunteth their requeſts. Thus the Church bringeth him into the houſe of her carnall mother of whom wee haue ſpoken ſufficiently alreadie. It followeth, there thou ſhalt teach me. She which was but lately informed and taught by Chriſtes ſpirite, waxeth now more earneſt and zealous to be taught and inſtructed in higher points of doctrine, and ſhee will haue none to teach her but Chriſt, to whom ſhe ſpeaketh with great boldneſſe and confidencie, ſaying, thou ſhalt teach mee, and no other but thee: for there is nothing which the Church doth ſo much deſire, as to be taught of her husband & bridegrome Chriſt, and to heare his voice, that is to ſay, his wordes and no mans elſe, and after that ſhe hath bene taught of the bridegrome, what remaineth then for her to do? then ſhe muſt cauſe him to drinke of the beſt wine, or ſpiced wine. Now this new wine of the pomegranates, is the knowledge of the truth, and veritie of the ſcriptures, which is ſeaſoned with the taſte of the holy Ghoſt: and the pomegranates are the congregations of the faithfull, being red with the holy Ghoſt, and directed or gouerned by charitie, that is to ſay, liuing

altogether by the rule and canon of Gods holy word, which is moſt pure and vndefiled, which order muſt neceſſarily be kept of all thoſe which meane to attaine vnto ſaluation. Their new wine, is the delectation and ſweetneſſe of Gods ſpirit, whereby they liue and walke, and haue their being, and the bridegrome may be very well ſaid to drinke of this wine, becauſe he is greatly delighted therewithall, for he may be ſaid in ſome ſort to drinke which findeth a thing which pleaſeth him greatly. Laſt of all, ſhe thirſteth to drinke of this new wine, that is to ſay, after the workes of faith, which Chriſt may bee very well ſaid to drinke, whiles he ſeeth theſe things in the faithfull, and is well pleaſed with them. His left hand ſhall be vnder mine head, and his right hand ſhall embrace me. The carefull and louing ſpouſe entreth into the houſe of her carnall mother, and bringeth Chriſt along with her, ſhe bringeth him thither by ſincere prayers, and preaching of the Goſpell, and ſhe followeth the matter ſo earneſtly & faithfully withall, that ſhe receiueth the truth of her mother, and ſo embraceth it. For hauing once receiued the truth of her mother, that is to ſay, of carnall men, from whom the Church iſſued and came, ſhe becommeth both the mother and the daughter, that is to ſay, the

Church and ſpouſe of Chriſt, and laſt of all▪ being conuerted vnto the truth, ſhe beginneth to make experience and triall of the croſſe, together with her daughter, becauſe it is vnpoſſible indeede that the croſſe ſhold not be a companion to the loue of the truth▪ Furthermore, ſhe ſendeth Chriſt vnto he
                        •
                      which is her true ſpouſe by faith, I meane his peace: and among all the croſſes, perils by ſword, rebukes, tribulations, and all maner of aduerſities he ſendeth vs by meanes of his peace, the comfortable ioyes of his holy ſpirit, whereby his left hand is comforted of the right, vnto a certaine hope of ſaluation▪ as theſe words are expounded aboue in the ſecond Chapter, where the very ſame words are to be read.
               
               
                  The words of the Spouſe vnto the young damſels.
                  
                     I charge you, ô daughters of Ieruſalem, that you ſtirre not vp, nor waken my loue vntill ſhe pleaſe. I charge you. After that the ſpouſe the Church, had made ſufficient triall of the ſharpneſſe of Gods left hand, that is to ſay, had ſuffered croſſes and tribulations enough, ſhe was ſuſtayned and vpholden by Chriſts right hand, wherewith he did moſt louingly embrace her in her greateſt temptations, ſitting euen in the ſhadow of death, and cauſed

her to reſt moſt quietly with the holy Ghoſt, and enioy that peace which paſſed all vnderſtanding: reſting thus ſecurely on her bed of reſt, the bridegrome (becauſe hee would haue no body to trouble her) ſpreads the couerlet ouer her, and ſaith theſe wordes vnto the young virgins, I charge you ſtirre not vp, nor waken my loue
                     ▪ and why then do you raiſe her vp & waken her, by ſending her abroad amidſt the troubles and turmoyles of the world, which are alwayes oppoſed againſt her, nay rather let her alone for a while, trouble her not, ſuffer her to repoſe and reſt her ſelfe a while in the beds of the holy ſcripture, and let my holy ſpirit abide and dwell in her.
               
               
                  The Text. The ſpeech of the young virgins.
                  
                     
                        
                           5 VVho is this that commeth vp out of the wilderneſſe leaning vpon her welbeloued, I rayſed thee vp vnder an apple tree, there thy mother conceiued thee.
                        
                           6 Set me as a ſeale on thy heart, and as a ſignet vpon thine arme: for loue is ſtrong as death: iealouſie is cruell as the graue: the coales thereof are fierie coales,

and a vehement flame.
                        
                           7 Much water can not quench loue, neither can the flouds drowne it: if a man should giue all the ſubſtance of his houſe for loue, they would greatly contemne it.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  Wee ſee here, that the Church doth turne her carnall mother, and ſhe being conuerted or turned, is made one and the very ſelfe ſame with the Church, and together with her, cleaueth and inclineth vnto Gods word, notwithſtanding any croſſe or aduerſitie whatſoeuer. And ſhe that was before conuerted by her daughter, doth now ſeeke to procure the ſaluation of her mother, that is to ſay, of thoſe from whom ſhe came, for this is alwayes a generall note, that the Church of God doth ſeeke the ſaluation of the wicked, and their vngodly congregations, from whence ſhe came, and was deriued, becauſe we were all of vs once ſinners and offenders, and ſprong vp out of the Church of the wicked. I ſay of the wicked, and not of the reprobate, becauſe euery reprobate is a wicked perſon, but it followeth not, that euery wicked perſon is a reprobate: and albeit the elect were ſaid to be of Sathans

Church before they did beleeue and embrace Chriſt in their hearts, by a liuely faith: yet neuertheleſſe in the eternal decree of almightie God, they were alwayes reckoned to be of his Church. But the young virgins looke vpon the ſpouſe, and ſee how quietly ſhee ſleepeth amongſt the dayly troubles of the Goſpell, profiting daily more and more in the knowledge of the Goſpell, and therefore breaking foorth into a kind of admiration, they aske who is this? as if they ſhould haue ſaid, it is a very ſtrange thing, beyond all ſenſe and reaſon, that ſhe ſhould perſeuere among ſo many euils as do aſſault her. And they ſay, that ſhe came vp out of the wilderneſſe, becauſe they ſprong out of the drie and dead ſtocke of that abominable ſect of the vnbeleeuers, as it were out of a plaine deſert, whither went ſhee, whither did ſhe aſcend or go? verily ſhe mounted from terreſtriall, carnall, and momentarie things, ſhe went vp vnto the glorious hill of Chriſt, the true Sion.
               
               
                  The words of the Bridegrome vnto the Church after her conuerſion.
                  
                     Vnder an appletree, &c. The preaching of any man whatſoeuer, be his gifts of vtterance & perſwaſion, neuer ſo good, profiteth vs nothing, vnleſſe Chriſt preach and teach

vs inwardly by mouing of our harts to heare the word, and afterwards by confirming & ſtrengthening the ſame in our minds, when we haue heard it. The Church (as we declared vnto you before) brought Chriſt vnto her mother, and he conuerted her becauſe Chriſt can not be truely and properly ſaide to be brought to a place, vnleſſe he be entertained and lodged there. So then he being once in friendly ſort receiued and entertayned, vouchſafeth to teach and informe her himſelf, deliuering her the whole ſumme of the doctrine of the Goſpell in few words, for he ſaith no more vnto her but this, vnder an apple tree, as if he ſhould haue ſaid, thou waſt before in a miſerable caſe, dead in ſinne, but I haue raiſed thee vp, and that vnder an appletree: that is to ſay, vnder mee, for hee ſpeaketh of himſelfe, as if he meant a third perſon. We are then raiſed vp vnder Chriſt, the true appletree of life, if we do but beleeue in him by faith, and wholly depend vpon him: who are there, that is to ſay, vnder the appletree, borne by the Church, the mother of the faithfull, as vnder that other tree of delight in paradiſe, our grandmother Eue conceaued and brought vs foorth the ſonnes of wickedneſſe and corruption. Set me as a ſeale on thine heart, and as a ſignet vpon thine arme: for loue is as ſtrōg as death: iealouſie

is cruell as the graue: the coales thereof are firie coales, and a vehement flame. Set me, &c. He may be rightly ſaid to haue ſet Chriſt as a ſeale on his heart, and as a ſignet on his arme, which can ſubdue & keepe vnder the wicked affectiōs of the fleſh, together with the works thereof: ſo that he frame him ſelfe wholy vnto Gods glorie. For what thing elſe is the heart, but the affections of the heart? & what is meant by the arme, but the ſtrength and force thereof, with all the works of our hands? And ſhe yeeldeth a reaſon thereof, becauſe as ſhe ſaith, Loue is ſtrong at death, to wit, the loue of Chriſt, becauſe hee loued vnto the death, and this ielouſie is cruell as the 
                     It. Hell. 
                     graue, that is moſt dreadfull and horrible towardes hypocrites. And the meaning of all theſe words is this: drawe neare vnto me with all thy heart, with all thy mind, and with all thy ſtrength, and do all things in my name, becauſe ſuch is the loue wherewith I loue thee, that I was content to die for thee. And as for thoſe which ſay they are of me, that is, of my Church, and yet haue not any ſeale, that is to ſay, faith, but the lying ſignes of the fleſh and the world, my iealouſie & indignation ſhalbe kindled againſt them as hote as hel fire. And in that it is ſayd, The coales thereof are fierie coales, and a vehement flame, we are to note the vehemencie and heate both of Chriſtes loue,

and alſo of his iealouſie, becauſe they cauſe ſuch a fire as is the fire of Gods ſpirit, that is to ſay, a moſt liuely and mightie fire, becauſe the fire of loue, that is to ſay, the holy Ghoſt maketh vs to be inflamed with a profitable and wholeſome kinde of heate. And the iealouſie of this fire, that is to ſay, ſharpe reuēge and indignation conſumeth all the wicked & vngodly men of the earth. Much water can not quench loue, neither can the flouds drowne it: if a man ſhould giue all the ſubſtaunce of his houſe for loue, they would greatly contemne it. Much water, &c. Here in this place the conſtancie and ſtabilitie of the aforenamed Loue is deſcribed and deciphered vnto vs: & this is that loue wherwith Chriſt loued his Church. And verily ſuch was the heate of this loue, that many violent ſtreames of inconueniences, troubles, reproches, tribulations, and all ſorts of euils that could be deuiſed, could not quench it: for by the parable of a houſe built vppon a ſure rocke, mentioned in the ſixt Chapter of Saint Lukes Goſpell, it is euident that flouds do ſometimes ſignifie aduerſitie. Now the loue which by the vertue of the ſame ſpirit abideth in the elect, is firme and ſtrong vnto them, in as much as they are built vpon the moſt ſure and ſtrong rocke Chriſt. That which followeth afterwards, If a man ſhould giue all, &c. doth declare to vs the exceeding

great efficacy of this moſt ſacred & holy loue in all thoſe which are truely poſſeſſed therewith: for it is the nature of true and perfect loue which commeth from the holy Ghoſt, to cauſe a man to renounce all that euer hee hath, and to order him ſelfe wholly after Gods will and commaundement. When riches are offered them, they regard or eſteeme them not: for wee ſee by daily experience, that they are ready and willing to forſake all that euer they haue if occaſion ſerue, & time ſo require, rather then they will ſeeme to denie the truth. And truly it is no great maruell neither: for where the loue of heauenly thinges is once accounted and eſteemed of, there the poſſeſſion and fruition of all earthly and tranſitorie things is vilified, neglected, and diſeſteemed.
               
               
                  The Text. The wordes of the Spouſe vnto the young maides.
                  
                     
                        
                           8 VVe haue a litle ſiſter, and she hath no breaſts: vvhat shall vvee do for our ſiſter, vvhen she shalbe ſpoken for?
                        
                           9 If she be a vvall, vve vvill build vpon her a ſiluer pallace, and if she be a

doore, vve vvill keepe her in vvith boords of Cedar.
                        
                           10 I am a vvall, and my breasts are as towers: then vvas I in his eyes as one that findeth peace.
                        
                           11 Salomon had a vine in Baal-hamon: he gaue the vineyard vnto keepers: euery one bringeth forth the frute thereof, a thouſand peeces of ſiluer.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  This is the voice of the Primitiue and Apoſtolike Church, which grew out of the Synagogue and people of the Iewes, reioycing for the grace of God which was ſpred abrode throughout all nations: and it is very fitly ſpoken of Salomon, to call the Church of the Gentiles ſiſter vnto the ſynagogue of the Iewes, becauſe God is father to them both, & Abraham alſo, by whoſe faith the Gentiles are proued to be lawfull ſonnes. This is that yong Church, which muſt be choſen from among the Gentiles, which is called little or ſmall, becauſe it had but ſmall beginnings at the firſt, till afterwardes in proceſſe of time, by litle and litle it grew vp in ſpirit & truth, She hath no breaſtes: becauſe the doctrine of the Lawe and of the Prophets belonged not

vnto the Gentiles, neither receiued ſhe anie inſtruction of faith in God, and charitie towardes her neighbour of her ſelfe: for ſo ſhe was not able to miniſter vnto her yong ones the ſpirituall foode of both the Teſtaments. What then ſhall we do vnto our ſiſter? Aske the Patriarkes and Prophets, aske of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and they wil ſhew you how the churches were to be taught, how they ſhould be vnited & knit together of the Gentils, how they ſhould grow vp, how they ſhould bee nouriſhed and fed, how they ſhould be ioyned in mariage with ſo noble a bridegroome as the Church, how partakers of Gods fauor through Chriſt, how they ſhould adorne and beautifie the ſpouſe at ſuch a day of ſolemnitie, what they ſhould do at that time, louing thoſe things which they ought to loue, and which they knew to be loued of the bridegroome, how and in what termes they are to commend themſelues vnto the bridegroome when they are brought vnto him. If ſhe be a wall, we wil build vpon her a ſiluer pallace: and if ſhe be a dore, we wil keepe her in with boordes of Cedar, which is thus expounded. If ſhe be a wall: that is, if the Church of the faithful be as ſtrong in faith as a wall, ſo that ſhe cannot bee eaſily ouerthrowne, doubtleſſe ſhee will ſtand faſt vnto the authoritie of the Scriptures, and bee a ſpouſe worthie of the holy

Ghoſt, and of her husband Chriſt: but without faith it is not poſſible for her to pleaſe him, or to profite in any kind of exerciſe or ſtudie whatſoeuer. Wherefore if ſhe be faithful, we wil build vpon her a pallace of ſiluer, that is to ſay, the bright ſhining, precious, and eternall truth, by which we may be able without all other helpes, to ouerthrow and fiuſtrate the wicked attempts of our enemies. Afterwards they deuiſe and cōmune among them ſelues how to ſhut the doore which is Chriſt, with boords of Cedar: hereby endeuoring as much as in them lieth, to make the workes of the Church continually from time to time more perfect and ſincere: for this is meant onely by the going in and going out of the doore.
               
               
                  The Church of the conuerts vnto the Spouſe.
                  
                     I am a wall, and my breaſts are as towers, then was I in his eyes as one that findeth peace. Shee replieth vnto them and faith, that ſhe is a wall, that is to ſay, founded and grounded in the faith of Chriſt: for it is verie neceſſarie for euery Chriſtian man or woman, to yeeld a reaſon of his faith to euery one that ſhall demaund or aske it of him. Likewiſe ſhe ſaith, My breaſts are as towers, that is to ſay, charitie and loue in entertaining and receiuing

others. And this is meant hereby, being directed and guided by my welbeloued husband Chriſt Ieſus, I ſhall be able to teach others & ſtrengthen them which are borne ſonnes vnto God by the Goſpell: and ſince that time I haue receiued ſuch fauour and kindneſſe at my husband Chriſtes hands, that I am in his eyes as one that findeth peace. And in theſe words ſhe ſeemeth to aſcribe all the glory vnto God, for comforting and ſtrengthening her, and giuing her ſuch ſtrong breaſts.
               
               
                  The Church of the Conuerts.
                  
                     Salomon had a vine in Baal-hamon: he gaue the vineyard vnto keepers: euery one bringeth forth the frute thereof, a thouſand peeces of ſiluer. Here ſhe yeldeth yet a more ample teſtimonie of her faith, ſaying, in that, that is to ſay, the Catholike Church, which containeth ſo many nations. Salomō, that is to ſay, Chriſt our true Salomon and peaceable king, had a vine in the beginning, to wit, his vniuerſall Church, for that is his vine, And he gaue the vineyard vnto keepers: as who would ſay, I know that it is needfull and requiſite, that euery one to whom the charge and miniſtery of the word is committed, ſhould be thriſecarefull to keepe, and not to waſt and ſpoile: te defend, and not to deſtroy my vineyard.

Euery particular man of the elect may be ſaid to bring forth the frute thereof, a thouſand peeces of ſiluer, that is, all that he hath, and himſelfe alſo. And the frutes of this vineyard are theſe, the grace of God, peace, righteouſneſſe, iuſtice, truth, & other particular ſignes of the holy Ghoſt and life euerlaſting: So that this is the ſumme of a Chriſtian mans confeſſion, to confeſſe Chriſt to bee head of the vine, that is to ſay, of the Church of the conuerts.
               
               
                  The Text.
                  
                     
                        
                           12 But my vineyard which is mine, is before me: to thee ô Salomon, appertaineth a thouſand peeces of ſiluer, & two hundred to them that keepe the frute thereof.
                        
                           13 O thou that dwelleſt in the gardens, the companions hearken vnto thy voyce: cauſe me to heare it.
                        
                           14 O my welbeloued flie avvay, and be like vnto the Roe, or to the young Hart vpon the mountaines of ſpices.
                     
                  
                  The Commentarie.
                  The wordes of the Bridegrome vnto the Church of the Conuerts.
                  The bridegroome confirmeth her ſayings

to be true, affirming the Church to be before the Lord, becauſe he is alwayes moſt readie to ſuccour and helpe her in all her neceſſities. Wherefore he ſendeth not wolues, but faithful miniſters and Apoſtles to be her keepers, in ſuch ſort, that it is not poſſible that any one of them ſhould periſh.
               
               
                  The church of the conuerts vnto the Bridegrome.
                  
                     To thee appertaineth a thouſand peeces of ſiluer. Becauſe the number of a thouſand is the terme and bound of all other numbers, therefore it is taken for all numbers, and then the words go thus, O Salomon; O my peaceable and louing Chriſt, to thee appertaineth a thouſand, that is, the greateſt and farthermoſt number: And two hundred to them that keepe the frute thereof, that is, not ſo much a
                        •
                      appertaineth vnto thee.
               
               
                  The wordes of the Bridegrome vnto the Bride.
                  
                     O thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken vnto thy voyce: cauſe mee to beare it. Here Chriſt ſpeaketh vnto all the Church in generall, ſhewing how acceptable and pleaſant her voyce is to him which ſhe ſo greatly longeth for to heare, becauſe her voice

is Gods word: therfore he ſpeaketh after this maner vnto the ſpouſe, O my louing ſpouſe thou that dwellest in the gardens, that is to ſay, in the particular Churches, which are taken for gardens. Thy companions or friends; namely thoſe which preach and teach the Goſpell: Hearken vnto thy voyce; that is, are obedient vnto thee, becauſe thou alone art able to teach them my words. Cauſe me to heare thy voyce: which is nothing diuerſe (I am ſure) from my words, or contrarie to the ſcripture: & therfore moſt acceptable and pleaſant vnto me, becauſe all other words which proceede and come from the fleſh, they are not my words, they are adulterous and falſe words, and therfore moſt abhominable in mine eares.
               
               
                  The wordes of the Spouſe vnto the Bridegroome.
                  
                     O my welbeloued flie away, and be like vnto the Roe, or to the young Hart vpon the mountaines of ſpices. This mountaine of ſpices is the Church, and therfore the leſſer and particular Churches are called mountaines of ſpices. Chriſt deſired to heare the Spouſe ſpeake: the Spouſe anſwereth him by vttering the words of perfect charitie: by which words it appeareth how zealous ſhe is of Chriſtes glorie, and the knowledge of his truth. And furthermore

the great deſire wherewith ſhe is inflamed towardes the ſaluation of all men. And this is briefly the ſence and meaning of theſe wordes, O my welbeloued flie away: as a man when he flieth away in great haſt; or as the Roes or young Harts doe skirre it along moſt nimbly vpon the tops of the hils: ſo do thou make haſt, and tarrie not to come vnto the mountaines of ſpices, that is to ſay, to come both vnto the Church vniuerſall, and alſo to be preſent & ayding vnto all the particular Churches, leaſt happily they may be conſtrained to receiue any other beſides thee, and ſo by eſtraunging themſelues from thee, periſh eternally. Therfore gentle Chriſt come quickly, to helpe and ſuccour, to direct and guide vs vnto the right way, which leadeth vs vnto life euerlaſting.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Faults eſcaped.
            In the Preface, for the title or inſcription of the Song of ſongs, reade the title or inſcription is the Song of ſongs.
            Page 8. line 12. for man, reade men. p. 14. l. 6. for ſunnie, reade ſinne. p. 21. l. 23. for particularly, reade patiently, p. 23. l. 10. for houſes reade horſes. p. 39. l. 13. for vvith the ſvveete, reade vvith ſvveete. p. 40. l. 28. for gold, reade God, p. 51. l. 7. for the people, reade his people. p. 51. l. 30. for and maketh it, reade maketh it. p. 64.1. for to, reade and p. 79. l. 7. for of ſeeming workes that iſſue foorth from faith, reade of ſeeming good vvorks but not proceeding frō faith: the other, a chaine of good vvorkes indeed, that is to ſay, of vvorkes that iſſue foorth from faith. p. 108. l. 12. for then, reade that. p. 121. l. 11. for thoſe elect vvhich is a companion, &c. reade of the elect vvhich continually haue their faiths accompanied and follovved vvith good vvorkes.
            
         
      
   