
      
         
            
            
            A treatiſe of
MELCHISEDEK,
prouing him to
be SEM,
The father of all the ſonnes of
Heber, the fyrſt king, and all
kinges glory: by the generall
conſent of his owne ſonnes, by
the continuall iudgement of
ages, and by plentifull argumentes
of ſcripture.
            
               Heb. 7. 4.
Now conſider how great HE is.
            Imprinted at London for
Gabriel Simſon and
William White.
1591.
            
               OMNE BONŪ SVPERNAE
            
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable Syr
WILLIAM CECILL, of the
honorable order of the Garter
Knight, Lord Burghley, Lord Treaſurer
of Englande: grace and
peace from the iuſt king
of peace.
            
               THe heauenly ſayinges
of Moſes (Right Honorable)
concerning Melchiſedek Gen. 14
and the commaundement of
conſideryng howe great the
party is. Heb. 7. can not well
take place in our hartes, vnleſſe
the perſon be knowen: that
all ſpoken of hym may be taken
in due ſenſe. For eyther we ſhall clymbe three
ſteppes too hygh with Melchiſedekians, Hierax, or yet
Origen, who make hym more then a mortall wight: or
we ſhall fall too low, with the common Greekes, who
make hym eyther a Chanaanite, or leaue hym to be an
obſcure man. But when we find out certaynely who the
perſon is, then we may ſafely examine all that is ſpoken
of hym. And in my opinion, that which is written of
hym, reacheth ſo farre both to the firſt Adam one way,
and to the ſeconde Adam an other way, ſtyll ouerſhynyng
Aarons ceremonies: that an errour in this matter
wyll no leſſe frette the webbe of holy Story, then the
worke of a VVeauer is hurt, when many thriddes in

one place are pulde away, which reached through the
whole peece. In a matter of this weight, I iudged my
labours ſhoulde be well ſpent, that I myght both ſhake
off quite, from all myndes which vſe my paynes, that
which is to be reiected: and helpe to ſettle better the
ancient trueth. To that ende I handle the chiefe diuerſitie
that haue been touching Melchiſedek: and ſpeake
for one opinion more at large: which Hebrewes alwayes
helde, and Latines moſt commonly: that Sem the father
of all the ſonnes of Heber, muſt needes be the man.
Whereas many and great men thought otheryſe: but
neyther the moſt ancient, nor the moſt part, nor onely
of the beſt: I leaue all to the Reader to iudge: who, yf
he be of Learnyng wyll eyther (as I truſt) folow the oldeſt
opinion continued ſtyll, or without blame geue
others leaue to folow it. In choſing a particuler Iudge,
I finde your Lordſhyp, meete to geue a right cenſure in
difficulties: and I ſuppoſe you wyll delyght to heare
what antiquity ſpeaketh, and the matter it ſelfe in this
cauſe. You ſhall finde this matter muche lyke that,
wherein once your L. beſtowed long tyme in ſpeach
with me: and many of the very ſame poyntes (though
to an other concluſion) wyll here offer them ſelues.
As the other, in my mynde, were of profite to be knowen:
ſo by theſe I truſt, the ſtudent in Diuinitie wyll
thinke hym ſelfe ſomewhat holpen. And that both may
come togeather, yf it be not a trouble to your leaſure to
remember, it wylbe a benefite to Scholers for to marke
how ſome Counſellers looke into theyr ſtudies, and
teach by ſodayne demaundes what poyntes experience
of whole kingdomes require to be playnely taught in
the worlde: which the common ſort lytle thynke of:
and for want of indgement raſhly diſpiſe. Fiue yeeres
ago your L. requeſted me to repayre to the Court, concernyng
the Greeke tranſlation of the Hebrew Prophetes

preſented to you, and concernyng peruſing of the Englyſh:
to haue more integrity and playnneſſe accordyng
to the Hebrew and the Apoſtles Greeke. Then you afforded
moſt wyllingly three houres ſpech for matters
of chiefe and generall vſe, and of great hardneſſe: in ſuch
ſort that I was amazed how you ſhoulde haue eyther
ſuch leyſure, to be ready in them, from your politicall
affayres and ſtudies, or ſo right and profounde a iudgement
for the bones in the body of Scripture, as Diuines
ſkant thinke of, tyll great errours driue them to conſider.
Beginnyng from the Greeke, you demaunded why
the 70. ſhould not be more accompted then the Hebrew,
ſeeing the Apoſtles folow it: Reaſon beyng rendred,
that they were to folow it, becauſe Heathen commonly
knew no other Bible. You further examined how farre
they folowed, and in eache kinde tryed out the matter.
Their ſtrangeneſſe of imitation was, in that they refuſed
not bare faultes of Grammer, as often appeareth: to
teach vs not to fight for wordes: Secondly, they folowed
the 70. where they hid their mynde, as in Kenan,
Gen. 11. and Luk. 3. and in Seuentie and fiue ſoules, for Seuentie▪
               Gen 46. Acte. 7. or deale as Paraphraſtes or abridgers:
which often they do. Thirdly, in ſome rare vſe of
a worde. One example of that offered it ſelfe. Heb. 10.
which myſtaken by Tranſlaters, putteth all men to a
plundge. For it is ſayd: No further offeryng remayneth
for ſinne, yf we after knowledge of the trueth ſinne

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                whiche ought not there to be tranſlated willingly:
rather of pretended malice, from Exo, 21. 13. where

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is in Hebrew Zadah, inſidiatus, lying in wayte,
or iazid. 14 wylfull, or malicious ſpitefull. And ſo the
diſputation was playne agaynſt the Iewes, wylfully
faythles: and no further griefe to diſtreſſe the conſcience
of any. This was examined as a thyrd kinde of the
70. folowed. You examined likewiſe, turning to your

Bible the 70. Tranſlations refuſed: when a chiefe matter
was weakened by the 70. therefore Paule ſayde, for
this cauſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I rayſed vp, not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Thou haſt been
ſuffered aliue:
               Rom. 9. 17. becauſe he woulde expreſſe the Hebrewe
more playnely.Exod. 9. 16. Moreouer for heauenly eloquence, how
the Apoſtles departed from the Tranſlation: namely
Heb. 1. 3. that your L. diligently tryed by Eſay. 4. and
other places. Neither was the Hebrew left vntryed with
the 70. for a rare text: or in ſome vſe an onely: VVhy
we ſay Pſalm. 2. Kiſſe the Sonne: where the Latin hath
after the Greeke, Amplectimini eruditionem. The openyng
of that drewe more matter. I anſwered, that by both
Tranſlations it myght appeare, that the Hebrew worde
was Bar. Now the Hebrew worde Barar (To teach)
might by proportion of language haue Bar for doctrine:
though ſo in vſe any where it commeth not: but for a
ſonne, it doth in the Prouerbes. 31. 2. Bar, and Dan. 3. Bar:
and in the new Teſtament Actes. 4. Bar-nabas was expounded,
Sonne of conſolation. This text litigious,
for the wryting amongſt the Romiſtes, for the meanyng
with Iewes folowyng the 70. your L. mooued to be
expounded. For the Tranſlaters I geſſed, that eyther
they feared to tranſlate for Heathen, vngrounded vpon
the Trinitie a diſtinct ſaying of one perſon, The Sonne,
leaſt Heathen ſhoulde turne it to a wrong meanyng:
or they marked it not. As in Daniel they knew not how
to tranſlate Iccaret
                     •
                  
                Mesſiah: Mesſiah ſhalbe killed:
becauſe they vnderſtoode not the matter: or they feared
to publyſhe it in a playne phraſe, and in Greeke.
Vpon mention of Daniel, your L. requeſted an opening
of the whole Booke, and examined the particulers:
what tymes or yeeres it conteyned, what Empires: and
how the Image legges, which were to be made duſt,
before the Stone was made a Mountayne, myght not be
taken for the Romans. For ſo we ſhoulde conclude with

               Iewes, that Chriſt is not yet come: as alſo by the fourth
Beaſt: yf we made it the Romanes. And for the golden
text of Daniels Seauens, your L. had read ſome that I
then had not, of great accompt. It woulde be too long
to runne now through all. I coulde not faſter runne
then through any part of myne owne ſtudies, then you
purſued in demaundes for the chiefe matter. Your
ſhortneſſe in propounding queſtions, readineſſe in
conceyuing a full anſwere, diligence in trying Scriptures,
dexteritie in replying vpon colour of doubt,
quickneſſe in trying what confidence I had in myne
aſſertions: and laſtly, ſinguler gentlenes of encouraging
my ſtudies, with entreatie to repaire often to you: theſe
partes do aſſure me of a Iudge fitte for wyll and ſkyll.
VVherefore I willingly reuiue the memory of your
Lordſhyps ſpech: to liue through all memory: and to
ende as I began: to your Lordſhyppes protection I
commit this Treatiſe, to finde intertaynement: but ſo
farre as trueth ſhall be ſeene to require.
            
               
                  Your Lordſhyps
to commaunde:
HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
         
         
            
            Scapes in printing▪ at which if the Reader
ſtagger, let him reade thus.
            ſickerly for ſickerles, A ii. line 33. Sixtus for Pius
at A 4. line 12. for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for from from
Vr from Vr. blunter beaſtes read breſtes. For
moueth vs to fayth, meeteth vs by fayth. F. b. i.
the fourth ſide, line 13. for Ramban read Rambam
H i. b. in the margent. reade Pſal. 48. for 180.
D ii. a. line 14. F iii. b. reade that in a Politicall.
Gen. 11. not. 12. F. iii. the thirde page, lyne. 33.
         
      
      
         
            
            A treatiſe touching the ſundry opinions
concerning Melchiſedek,
who he ſhoulde be: wherein is enterlaced
a diſcourſe of the olde Greke tranſlatours,
hiding their mynde for
Gen. 5. and 11.
            
               SVndry opinions hath Epiphanius of
Melchiſedek,
               Epiphanius, book 2. her. 55 what, or who that perſon
ſhoulde be. But time hath vanquiſhed
part of them, frō defence of ye learned
by writing, though in phantaſies of
men they be quicke. Part, haue yet
their defenders of ſundry ſortes vntyll
this day. Of ſuche as are vanquiſhed, a ſhort ſpeeche may
ſuffiſe: of the others, more ſhalbe ſpoken: to ſettle one, true.
            1 The Melchiſedekians framing a deadly hereſie, as Epiphanius
doth recorde,The firſt Opinion▪
                helde Melchiſedek to be a certaine
wight dwelling in ſome place, which none can tell of, being
a wight greater then CHRIST. Forſooth they woulde
ſtabliſhe that opinion from (Pſal. 110. 4.) Thou art a Sacrificer
for euer, after the order of Melchiſedek: as though
Chriſte muſt therefore be inferiour, and needing the order
of the other. And of Melciſedek they holde it to be properly
ſpoken, that he is without father, without mother,
without kinred: going about to proue that, from the Epiſtle
to the Hebrewes. Now from the ſame wordes they may
be confuted. As Dauid prophecying of the LORD, ſayd,
that he ſhoulde be a Sacrifi
                     •
                  er after the order of M
                        •
                     lchiſedek:
               
by the very ſame Scripture ſheweth the Apoſtle,

               That euen Chriſt ſhould be that Sacrificer, who is Lord in
Dauid. Pſal 110. and aboue all to be prayſed for euer. Rom.
                9.
Of Melchiſedek ſpeaketh the Apoſtle in the ſame place,
that he likened to the Sonne of God, continueth a Sacrificer
for euer. Now if he be but likened to the ſonne of God,
he is not equall to the ſonne of God: For how can the ſeruant
be equal to ye maiſter? Now Melchiſedek was a man.
That Epiphanius proueth afterwardes. And that, VVithout
father, without mother: is not ſayd, as though he had
not father and mother: but becauſe they are not in moſt
manifeſt ſort (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .) named in the Scripture.
How many others haue not their kinred in ye moſt manifeſt
ſort, as Daniel, Sidrac, Miſac, and Elias?
            
            This much for the Melcheſedekians, out of the Greeke
Father Epiphanius: wherein I coulde wyſhe ſome to marke
how grauely and truely, the learned father expoundeth the
wordes. without father, without mother. For whereas he
In ſaying 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  ▪ that is: in the moſt manifeſt ſort. maketh the relation to be only to Gen. 14. they do not wel
that ſtretch it further: as though the holy Ghoſt had ſayde,
in all the Scripture, a father or mother for him can not be
founde. So they might as wel ſay, that by al the Scripture
it coulde not be proued, that he had beginning of dayes, and
ende of lyfe. Whereas the Apoſtle expreſly teacheth, That
it is ordeyned, that all men once ſhall die. Now of Melchiſedek
it is as welHeb. 7. Gene. 3. affyrmed, that he lyueth: as that he
is without father and mother. But by the Scripture we
may gather, that he dyed: therefore as well, that he had father
and mother. Wherefore it is not properly ſpoken.
            Let none thinke, that the ſpirite of God is controlled, by
ſeeking his name and parentage. Iob woulde tell vs, that
it is not good to defend Gods cauſe with an errour,Iob. 13. 7. (pretending
a religion.) Neyther is the Figure hereby deſtroyed.
For it is not ſpoken ſimply, but in relation. And euery
By S. Auguſtnes leaue. wyſe man wyl graunt, that he had both father and mother.
And why ſhoulde the Figure be more defaced, by a certayne

father taught vs, by ſundry argumentes, by Moſes when he
wrote, then by obſcure fathers? The Apoſtle diſputeth of
Melchiſedekes caſe, as in Abrahams tyme he was knowen,
when he was alyue, and actually a figure of Chriſt, not medlyng
with that certayntie, whiche is euident ſince Moſes
wrote a Comment vpon that caſe, ſhewyng what man was
then alyue, at Salem greater then Abraham. And without
the ſtory of Sem, I thinke we ſhall hardly performe this
charge:Heb. 7. 
               Conſider how great this man is: or vnderſtande
this:Heb. 6. 
               Of him we haue many thinges to be ſpoken, hard
to be vttered: becauſe ye are dull of hearing. Folow then
the Apoſtle, and marke his wordes: and know both the reaſon
of Moſes ſilence, Gen. 14. and his vndoubted proper
meaning from Gen. 9.Gen. 14. 18. what man he muſt needes be, who
then was king of Salem. It is a frowarde modeſtie, which
wyll not ſearch when God biddeth: and the ſtopping of the
eares, is Serpentlike: when God blameth for dulnes of
hearing.
            The Apoſtle (in deede) from the ſilence of Moſes teſtifieth,
that he was a figure of the Meſſias. But how large
may we expounde his ſilence, to be ouer his whole lawe,
or in the phraſe touching Melchiſedek? Doubtles touching
the open and preſent ſtory of Melchiſedek. For to
whom doth he teſtifie that? but to the Hebrwees: which ſo
holde it vnto this day, as the Apoſtles ſpeach doth handle it:
who both conſider the Figure repreſenting one more then a
man, & alſo can playnely proue, in hiſtorical kinde, by Moſes
from other places, who helde Salem then: and who then
alyue might be holden greater then Abraham: whereby it
might well be knowen, what perticular perſon, both the
Apoſtle meant, and the Hebrewes knewe to be ſpoken of.
And why then ſhoulde men draw the matter otherwyſe then
euer the Hebrewes woulde ſuffer it to be drawen? Sickerles
the Apoſtle woulde reaſon, as the Iewes might vnderſtand▪
and neuer woulde his argument, which muſt be playne,

bring more entanglementes then all religion had. But the
Iewes ſhoulde haue been more entangled by a doctrine making
any then alyue greater then Abraham, but ſuch as had
the promiſe of Chriſt before. Therefore the Apoſtle would
neuer go about, to thruſt an opinion vpon them: for one
greater then Abraham, but woulde talke accordyng to their
meanyng. Let none thereon frame a godlyer modeſty vnto
him ſelfe, then the whole ſway of Hebrewes, touching an
Hebrew poynt, wil ſuffer: and the Apoſtle writing to them:
expounded by their continuall iudgement. Neyther let any
euer thinke, that God would forbid ſearching of the Scripture
for a matter of ſtorie: as the kinred of a man is: but
rather charge vs to marke al poyntes, the firſt and the later:
that in all, Gods playne conſtancie of bleſſing myght appeare
in a man: whom wicked Canaan knew to be glorious,
but no more regarded his ſtate, or knew his kinred, byrth,
or death: then yf he had them not at all: Yet might haue
knowen, yf their Fathers had delyuered the memorie of
Noes bleſſing from age to age vntyll theyr tyme: and had
taught them who dwelt at Salem, borne before the worlde
now,2. Pet. 3, 7. not of their kinred: nor lyke to ende his lyfe in theyr
dayes, by reaſon of luſty ſtrength. An higher poynt Melchiſedek
reſembled,Conferre Gen. 9. & 11. & 14. to which the proper* ſtorie woulde
bring by degrees: whiche to knowe we are bounde.
The ignorance of that bred the Melchiſedekians: The confuting
of them, I truſt, ſhall not be needefull in this age, but
ſo farre as men ſomewhat touch them, in miſtaking the
ſpech: without father, without mother. &c.
            
            2 There ſprang another opinion that was ſomwhat holden
of ſome olde Latines,The seconde opinion. otherwyſe the beſt learned: But
Epiphanius fathereth it vpon Hierax, which taught earneſtly
that Melchiſedek was the holy Ghoſt, becauſe he was tearmed
to be lykened to the Sonne of God: and applyeth theſe
wordes, Abydeth a Sacrificer continually, to that which

the Apoſtle ſayd:Rom.▪
                
               The ſpirite maketh interceſſion with
groninges vnſpeakable. But Hierax hath miſt extreamely.
For the Holy ſpirite neuer tooke fleſh: Wherefore he coulde
not be a king of Salem, and a ſacrificer of one certaine place:
For, euery (high) Sacrificer is taken from men.
               Heb. 5. 1. Some
pardon muſt be geuen to them that helde this errour, more
then to the former: by reaſon that of two other opinions,
which haue had ſome ſtroke: neyther coulde greatly pleaſe
the Grekes Vntyll this day, as ſhal appeare by the diſcourſe.
Alſo amongſt the Latines S. Auguſtine was a mighty wreſtler
for ye defence of Hierax minde, ſtyrred Vp by ye fondnes of
that one opinion, which Greekes ſomwhat liked of,That Melchiſedeck was a Cananite by kinred. Epiph. in Here. 55. oecum. vpon Heb. 7. either
not knowing, or not conſidering cleerely the Chronicle and
ſtorie fortifiyng the other. Theſe two opinions agree in one
poynt, that Melchiſedek was a king of a ſmal kingdome in
Chanaan: Or as one tranſlateth Tremelius, (a lytleThat he was no farther a Chananite then by place. Chanaanite
King:) for as the Iewes language is called in Eſay. 19
The ſpeech of Chanaan: ſo any one dwelling there, might
as well be of Tremelius called Chananeus. Now by both
ſides, who holde this opinion, Melchiſedek cannot be any
ſpirite: but one that hath Adam and Noe to his father,
and doubteles to his mother Eue namely: and had both beginning
of dayes, and ende of lyfe in proprietie: and lyueth
not continually on the earth: nor can abyde a Sacrificer
for euer, otherwyſe then by the deſcription of Melchiſedek.
Gen. 14. Vnto which onely the Apoſtle woulde haue
vs to referre thoſe ſpeaches: ſeeing the reſt of Scriptnre,
woulde teach otherwyſe of the very man, which we muſt
marke, vnleſſe we be dull of hearyng: to know who by many
degrees, ſhoulde be greater then Abraham. From this one
ſtocke of this king in Chanaan, growe two branches: one
beareth vp them, who make him to be of Chanaans ſeede: an
other holde they, who ſay that he is Sem the ſonne of Noe.
The firſt the Greekes brought in, who helde that Sem could
not then be alyue: The other helde the Hebrewes.
            
            
               
               A discourse touching the Greeke tranſlation.
               
                  I Will ſeparate theſe two from the former,A diſcourſe touching the Septuagint. by a diſcourſe
touching the Greke tranſlation: and that the Grekes caſe
and iudgement may better be knowen, I wyll here enterlace
a long diſcourſe, to ſhew how Gen. 5. & 11. the Greke
tranſlation differeth from the true grounde and infallible
the Hebrew text: wherof from Ezras age, eueryRabbi Sadaias hath made a Treatiſe of that: which Elias hath ioyned to his Hammaſoreth letter in the
Hebrew was reckoned. I wyl lay downe the vſual tranſlation
accordyng to the Hebrew, and alſo that of the Greeke,
from the Septuaginta: Whoſe tranſlation, though we haue
not ſincere, but for many ſentences, patched of ſundry other
tranſlations, a ſentence being repeated ſundry wayes, and
tymes, where the Hebrew hath but one ſaying: yet for the
body of the worke, it is the Septuagint, as may be gathered.
For the newe Teſtament writeth many hundredes of proper
names, accordyng to the common Tranſlation which
is called the Septuagint: as Ar, not Har: Mageddon, not
Megiddo: Sadduc in Sadducees, as Sadoc is Sadduc. Ez.
                   7.
and many ſuch: But theſe examples I bring, to ſhewe that
the GreekeApocal. 17. Mat. 3. Mar. 12 Luk. 20. Act. 5 copies are not (as ſome write) in thoſe wordes
corrupted. Such alſo are 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Hope, Ruth. 1. 12. Heb. 3.
14. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   to oppreſſe. Iob. 35. Luk. 3. 14. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pro. 3, 6.
2. Tim. 2. 15. to ſettle a ryght, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pſa. 53. Eph 6. 6.
And as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   for vnreligious, or robbe Altar Act. 17. cannot
wel be expounded, but by Demoſtines frō his oration,
for Cteſiphon: as Vlpian expoundeth him: and agayne
as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Luk. 22. 25. cannot be expounded ſo well as from
the ſame orator, making a difference thereby betweene the
equall voyces in Attens gouernement: and the ſole principalitie
of a kingdome, where all paſſeth by one voyce and
commander: ſo many places of ſeuerall common wordes,
vſed by the Apoſtles, and alſo hundredes of phraſes may and
muſt be referred for examination to the Greeke tranſlation

whith we haue now: though ſo much mangled, and differing
in ſundry copies, that ſome tymes it woulde ſeeme a
ſeuerall worke by diuerſitie of copies. And this I dare affirme,
that who ſo is not acquainted with it, vnderſtandeth
not fully the Greeke of the new Teſtament. That being
ſo, as the common vſe helde, we may holde that the common
Greke tranſlation (though in ſome poyntes compounded of
others fiueAquilas, Symmachus, Theodotion: and two without the Authors names. Theſe ioyned, made Hexaplun: that is a ſixfold worke: the Hebrewes both in Hebrew letters, & alſo in Greke letters, but Hebrewe wordes made vp Octaplun the eyghtfolde worke. The tranſlation of Lucian the martyr: & that of Sophronius, though not from the Hebrew, were of good accompt. Moſes of late dayes is ſet foorth, in a Greeke tranſlation: but in Hebrew letters, by a wicked Iew: to deface the Greke now vſed. or ſixe, which Athanaſius & Epiphanius reckon,
and wholly is an other for the booke of Daniel:) yet that for
farre the greater part, it is the olde Septuagint. That alſo appeareth
by the Greekes citations. Doubtles the Romiſtes
thynke the Edition of Pius quintus, to come neare to the Septuagint.
According to that will I tranſlate the 5. and 11. of
Geneſis, and ſet it ouer againſt the Hebrewe, ioyning ſome
obſeruations, not vnprofitable for them that loue the trueth.
Herein you ſhal ſee yeeres more then the Sunne meaſured,
haſtenyng to the North, and returnyng to the South. For
ſeuerall hundredes be added to all theſe men, to Adam, to
Seth, to Enoſh. to Kenan, to Mahalaeel, to Enoch, to
Arphaxad, and to hym a new Kenan (a man of Vtopia, that
neuer was) with yeeres lyke the reſt: after him to Selah, to
Eber, to Peleg, to Regu, to Sarug, to Nahor: to eche one
of theſe ſeuerall hundrethes of yeeres. Theſe dayes God
ſought not out: and lyght dyd neuer ſhyne in them. The
Starres that brighten the day knewe them not, nor the
Horizon of the Ocean that beareth vp VVhales. But as
the Egyptian Greekes folowed the old Egyptians and Chaldeans,
that faygned yeeres: whoſe dayes neuer came in
number of monethes: So for their weakenes did the
Greeke learned Hebrewes fayne a thouſand yeeres, and many
hundredes, that neuer ſaw the eyelidde of the mornyng.
               Great cauſe they thought offered ſo to dally, with prophane
folke that ſought for the Hebrewes learnyng and
bookes, onely for brauerie of a Library, nothing for conſcience
to the Law of God: and would come with ſuch mindes

to ſpie likelyhood of errour, to catch at: as the men of Iericho
came vnto the houſe of Rachab, to haue caught the ſpies.
Therefore as Rachab vſed a mockage with her enemies:
and ſayde an irony or floute, that they taking her wordes in
proprietie, let the Spyes eſcape ſafe: So the Ebrewes
coueted to do: being requeſted to turne their Prophetes into
Greeke, by a King whoſe father, before that tyme, pretendyng
fauour to the Iewes religion, and comming into their
towne on the Sabbath quietly, ſtraight way by force did
ſurpriſe their Citie.R. Abraham, Ben-Dauid in Kabala. They were in feare leaſt the ſonne
woulde folow his fathers ſteppes, and picke quarrelles at
their wrytinges: which he woulde try by Heathen, no whit
further eſteeming them, then with Heathen they had ſame
likelihood of agreement. They thus fearyng harme, ſeeing
no hope of doyng good with proper trueth, woulde not caſt
Pearles before Hogges, nor holy thinges before Dogges:
to tread them vnder their feete, and to be rented them ſelues:
but altered ſuch poyntes, as moſt woulde haue ſtirred Egyptians
to contention. The tyme and Chronicle was the chiefeſt
poynt, wherein the Heathen woulde fight agaynſt them.
For ſome inckling they had of theHomer, Plato in Timaeo. Creation, of aHeſiod in Pandora. woman
full of giftes, that brought ſorowe into the worlde,Nicander Ther. of diſdayning
a perpetual youth, and enuying that a fireAlexander polyhiſtor. (which
Clem. 1. Strom. is lyght of knowledge) was hid from them: of olde age,
brought in by a Serpentes counſell: and yetIoſeph out of Heſiod: and Diod. Sic Ouid. 1. Metam. Herod 2. Euſeb 1. praep. reaching to
Manethus, Molus, Eſtiaeus, Ecataeus, Ellanicus, Acouſilaus, Ephorus, Sibylla. a thouſand yeres, whoſe infancie might endure an hundred
yeeres: of lyuing by foode of Plantes,Beroſſus Chaldeus, Hieronymus aegiptius▪ Ni colaus Damaſcenus, Mnaſeas. of the deluge: of
Eupolemus. Euſeb. 9. prap. the Tower buylding, of the Sunne twiſe altered in his
courſe, of Moſes, of Chanaan ſubdued. Theſe poyntes, and
many ſuch dyd ye heathen ſomwhat know: but for the times
would they chiefly haue bralled. Great is that matter, and
greatly to be conſidered. For that ſentence which Tatianus
in Euſebius vſed as one ſufficient to ouerthrow all the Philoſophers
learnyng: and of late for the contemners in our
tyme, M. Ioſeph Scaliger, that rare learned man, prefixed in

the entrance to his booke de Emendatione temporū: The ſame
doubtles had the ancient Hebrewes in their mynde. And this
is that ſentence, which wayeth ſo much: VVhere the deſcription
of time is not well ſetled togeather, there can be
no trueth of ſtorie. Wherein the Egyptians and the Chaldeans
were extreamely deceyued, as may appeare by Greeke
recordes.Diog Laer. in his Proaem. Marke for theſe howe the Greekes reckon their
tymes. Laertius writeth of the Egyptians, that Vulcane the
ſonne of Nilus was authour of Philoſophy: of whom continued
a ſucceſſion of Prieſtes and Prophets.In Egypt the learned were called Hiereis, and Prophe
                           •
                         ae thence the Septuagint borowed theſe two termes to tranſlate Cohenim and Nebyir. Th' Apoſtles in Greeke reteine the Septuagint termes, and for Cohenim put Hiereis▪
                      but neuer for o
                        •
                     e vnder the Goſpel, that is ſeruant in the worde and Sacramentes. Wiſedome woulde thinke their termes the beſt: but cuſtome will rule. Nowe from
this Vulcane to Alexander the Macedonian were yeeres,
eight and fourtie thouſande, eight hundred ſixtie and three,
Iump forſooth. They woulde ſeeme not to miſſe one yeere
of ſo great a tyme: whereas at Alexanders byrth, the whole
worlde neuer had yet ſerne yeeres three thouſande fyue hundred
and eightie: by the Scripture accompt, conferred with
the greateſt conſtancie of the Heathen. And to make their
tales ſomewhat more notable: they ioyne further obſcruations,
to make all more ſure, that in this ſpace there were
Eclipſes of the Sunne three hundred ſeauentie and three:
of the Moone, eight hundred thirtie and two.
               The Chaldeans for profeſſion are lyke the Egyptians, as
thinketh Diodorus Siculus. In him they bragge for Aſtrologicall
experience of foure hundred and ſeauentie thouſande
yeeres. Mar. Tullius much agreeth with Diodorus Siculus,
who recordeth in his booke de Diuinat. 2. that they affirme
foure hundred thouſand yeres to haue been ſpent of them in
tryall & experimentes of obſeruing chyldrens byrthes, with
the ſtarres ſituation, to caſt their deſtiny.
               With ſuch mates had ye Greke learned Hebrewes to deale.
Their hatred toward Abrahams ſonnes & learning, Moſes
and Daniel ſheweth.Baal Aruch 
                        〈◊〉
                      lachnai or Iannes: who alſo citeth the Talmud: and Numenius in Euſeb. Praep. 9. 
                  Iewes & Heathen kept the memorie &
name of Iannes & Iambres. For ſuch weake heades the Septuagint
altered the text: not to be holden ſo in good trueth of
the faythfull, but done for preſent neceſſitie of their caſe.
               
                  But now I wyl returne to the Text: of the Hebrew the
infallible: and the Septuagint: ſettyng one ouer againſt the
other: and addyng ſome Obſeruations, where I thinke it
needefull.
               
                  The Hebrew
originall.
                  
                     ADAM liued an hundreth
and thirtie yeres, and begate
Seth. And the dayes of
Adam after he had begotten
Seth, were eight hundreth
yeeres. So all the dayes that
Adam lyued were nine hundreth
and thirtie yeeres: and
he died.
                  
                     Seth liued an hundreth
and fiue yeeres▪ and begate
Enoſh: and Seth liued after
he had begate Enoſh, eight
hundreth and ſeuen yeeres.
So al the dayes of Seth were
nine hundreth and twelue
yeeres: and he dyed.
                  
                     Enoſh liued nintie yeeres,
and begate Kenan. And Enoſh
lyued after he begate Kenan,
eight hundreth and fifteene
yeeres. So all the dayes of
Enoſh were nine hundreth &
fiue yeeres: and he died.
                  
                     
                     Kenan liued ſeuentie yeres
and begate Mahalaleel. And
Kenan liued after he begate
Mahalale
                           •
                        l, eight hundreth
and fourtie yeeres. So all the
dayes of Kenan were nine
hundreth and ten yeeres: and
he dyed.
                  
                     Mahalaleel liued ſixtie and
fiue yeeres and begate Iered
Alſo Mahalaletl lyued after
he begate Iered, eight hundreth
and thirtie yeeres. So
all the dayes of Mahalaleel
were eight hundreth ninetie
and fiue yeeres: and he
died.
                  
                     Iered lyued an hundreth
ſixtie and two yeres, and begate
Henoch. Then Iered liued
after he begate Henoch, eyght
hundreth yeeres. So all the
daies of Iered were nine hundreth
ſixtie and two yeeres:
and he died.
                  
                     Henoch liued ſixtie & fiue
yeeres, and begate Metheuſelah.
And Henoch walked
with God, after he begate
Methuſelah three hundreth
yeeres. So all the dayes of
Henoch were three hundreth
ſixtie & fiue yeeres: and God
tooke him away.
                  
                     
                     Methuſelah liued an hundreth
eightie & ſeuen yeres,
and begate Lamech. And Methuſelah
liued after he begat
Lamech, ſeuen hūdreth eightie
and two yeeres. So all the
dayes of Methuſelah were
nine hundreth ſixtie & nine
yeeres: and he dyed.
                  
                     Lamech liued an hundreth
eightie and two yeeres, and
begate Noah. And Lamech
liued after he begate Noah,
fiue hundreth nintie & fiue
yeeres. So all the dayes of Lamech
were ſeuen hundreth
ſeuentie and ſeuen yeeres:
and he dyed.
                  And Noah was fiue hundreth
yeeres olde: and Noah
begate Sem, Cham, & Iapheth.
And Noah was ſixe hundreth
yeres olde when the flood of
waters was vpon the earth.
So Noah entred and his ſons,
and his wyfe, and his ſonnes
wyues, with hym into the
Arke, becauſe of the waters
of the flood.
               
               
                  
                  The Greeke
Tranſlation.Obſeruations.
                  
                  
                     ADAM liuedIn the former tymes ſome note
                           •
                        , as it appeareth yet, very badly, and blaſphemoſly, that Moſes omitted an hūdred yeres. So at the fyrſt they woulde deface all his authoritie. What wyll they ſay for his later ſumme, hauing more thē the Greeke hath by 
                           •
                        n hundreth yeeres: and yet the whole ſumm
                           •
                         in moſt equall: in all ſauing Lamech.
                      two hundreth
and thirtie yeeres,
and begate Seth. And the
dayes of Adam after he
had begotten Seth, were
ſeuen hundreth yeeres. So
all t
                        •
                     e dayes that Adam liued,
were nine hundreth and
thirtie yeeres: and he died.
                  
                     Seth liued two hundreth
and fiue yeeres, and begate
Enoſh. And Seth lyued
after he had begate Enoſh.
ſeuen hundreth and ſeuen
yeeres. So all the dayes of
Seth were nine hunreth &
twelue yeres: and he died.
                  
                     Enoſh liued an hundreth
and nintie yeeres, and begate
Kenan. And Enoſh lyued
after he bgate Kenan ſeuen
hundreth and fifteene yeres.
So all the dayes of Enoſh
were nine hundreth and fiue
yeeres: and be dyed.
                  
                     
                     Kenan liued an hundreth
and ſeuentie yeres, & begate
Mahalaleel. And Kenan liued
after he begat Mahalaleel,
ſeuen hūdreth & fourtie
yeeres. So all the dayes of
Kenan were nine hundreth
and ten yeeres: and he dyed.
                  
                     Mahalaleel liued an hundreth
ſixtie and fiue yeerres,
and begate Iered Alſo Mahalaleel
liued after he begate
Iered ſeuen hundreth
and thirty yeere. So all the
dayes of Mahalaleel were
eight hundreth ninetie and
fiue yeeres: and he dyed.
                  
                     In him the Greeke tranſlation altereth nothyng: her in Noah.
                      
                     Iered liued an hundreth
ſixtie and two yeres, and begate
Henoch Then Iered
l
                        •
                     ued after he begate Henoch,
eight hundreth yeres.
So all the dayes of Iered
were nine hundreth ſixtie &
two yeeres: and he dyed.
                  
                     Henoch liued on hundreth
ſixtie and fiue yeeres,
and begate Methuſelah.
And Henoch walked with
God, after he begate Methuſelah,
two hun
                        •
                     reth
yeeres. So all t
                        •
                     e dayes of
Henoch were three hundreth
ſixtie and fiue yeeres:
and God tooke him away.
                  
                     
Methuſelah liued an
hundreth
                     So he ſhould be a Father twenty yeres ſooner then he was in the Hebrew trueth. And of 955. yere old at the Flood: wherfore the reſt of his age he muſt be 14. yeres ſomwhere. Some woulde beleeue that he was with Henoch tyll the Flood was paſt, rather then beleeue ye 
                        Hebrew text. Aug. Ciuit. 15. Cha. 11. As though al the lewes would, or could corrupt the Hebrew text: cited ſo muche in Commentaries, and founde vniforme yet. By this impoſſibilitie, the Septuagint would haue the worlde to knowe, that they for a cloſer purpoſe woulde not communicate the trueth of the Fathers ages with prophane Heathen. It is a pittifull thing to ſee how tyl this day men are bent to imagine vntruethes agaynſt the Hebrewe trueth, to diſanul the holines of the worde. 
                     ſixtie and ſeuen
yeeres, and begate Lamech.
And Methuſelah lyued
after he begate Lamech,
eight hundreth & two yeres.
So all the dayes of Methuſelah
were nine hundreth
ſixtie and nine y. & he died.
                  
                  
                     Lamech liued an hundreth
eighty and eight yeres
and begate Noah. And Lamech
liued, after he begate
Noah, fiue hūdreth ſixty &
fiue yeere. So all the dayes of
Lamech were ſeuen hundreth
fiftie and three yeeres:
and he died.
                  And Noah was fiue hundreth
yeres olde: and Noah
begate Sem, Cham, & Iapheth.
And Noah was ſixe
hundreth yeres old, when the
flood of waters was vpon the
earth. So Noah entred and
his ſonnes, and his wyfe, and
his ſonnes wyues with hym
into the Arke, becauſe of the
waters of the flood.
                  As they dealt with the Fathers of the fyft chapter: So
dealt they with them that be in the eleuenth: and ſome what
more ſtrangely, as touching additions of one man, and of
this ſentence: And he died. To nine of them Moſes for ſpeciall
cauſe hath omitted it. Marke that poynt likewyſe.
               
               
                  
                  The Hebrew. GEN. 11.
                  
                     SEM was an hundreth
yeeere olde, and begate
Arphaxad two yeeres after
the Flood. And Sem liued
after he begate Arphaxad,
fiue hundreth yeeres.
                  And Arphaxad liued
fiue and thirtie yeeres, and
begate Selah. And Arphaxad
liued after he begate
Selah foure hundreth and
three yeeres.
                  And Selah liued thirtie
yeeres, and begate
Eber. So Selab liued after
he begate Eber, foure
hundreth and thirtie
yeeres.
                  Likewyſe Eber lyued
foure and thirtie yeeres,
and begate Peleg. So Eber
liued after he begate Peleg,
foure hundreth and
thirtie yeeres.
                  And Peleg lyued thirtie
yeres, and begate Regu.
And Peleg lyued after he

begate Regu. two hundreth
and nine yeeres.
                  Alſo Regu lyued two and
thirtie yeeres, and begate
Serug. So Regu lyued after
he begate Serug, two hundreth
and ſeuen yeeres.
                  Moreouer Serug lyued
thyrtie yeeres, and begate
Nahor. And Serug lyued
after he begate Nahor, two
hundreth yeeres.
                  And Nahor lyued nine
and twentie yeeres, and begate
Terah. So Nahor liued
after he begate Terah, an
hundreth and nineteene
yeeres.
                  So Terah lyued ſeuentie
yeeres, and begate Abram,
Nahor, and Haran. So the
dayes of Terah were two
hundreth and fiue yeeres,
and Terah died in Charan.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Greeke.
                  
                     SEm was an hundreth yeere
olde, & begate Arphaxad
two yeeres after the Flood.
And Sem lyued after he begate
Arphaxad, fiue hundreth
yeres: and he died.
                     
                        Moſes in the Hebrew omitteth mention of Sems death, to ſtay the reader in expectation of ſome rare dignitie of his perſon: and that men ſhoulde not thinke that he died before the bleſſing was faſtened vpon Abraham: as in trueth he lyued after Terahs death, or the promyſe, ſeuentie & fiue yeeres, vnto the fiftieth yeere of Iſaaks age: by the Ebrew vnfallible.
                  
                  And Arphaxad lyued an
hundreth fiue and thirtie yeres,
and begate Cainan. And Arphaxad
liued after he begat
Cainan, foure hundreth and
thirtie yeres: and he dyed.
                  
                  And Cainan liued an hundreth
and thirtie yeeres and begate
Selah And Cainan liued
after he begate Selah,
three hundreth & thirtie yeres:
and he dyed.
                  
                  Here the Greekes enterlaced
that fayned ſentence: And Ca
                           •
                        nan
liued. &c. (that neuer was) and
he died. And here a man mayſe
                        •
                     
that they did but dally with the
Heathen, by this fained name, as
in Chap. 10. they make a Ca
                           •
                        inan
the ſixt ſonne of Sem.
                  
                  And Selah liued an hundreth
and thirtie yeere, and begate
Eber. So Selah liued
after he begate Eber, three
hundreth and thirtie yeeres:
and he died.
                  
                  Likwiſe Eber liued anBy the Greeke accompt Sem ſhould die in the 105. yeere of Ebers age. hundreth
thirtie and foure yeeres,
and begate Peleg. So Eber
liued after he begate Peleg,
                     Becauſe Eber doubled the ages of the men borne after Babels buylding: the Septuagint to hide that, ſhorten his time much. two hūdreth & ſeuentie yeres:
and he died.
                  
                  And Peleg liued an hundreth
and thirtie yeres, and begate
Regu. And Peleg lyued

after he begat Regu, two hundreth
& ninty y. and he died.
                  
                  Alſo Regu liued an hūdreth
thirtie and two yeres, & begat
Serug. So Regu liued after he
begate Serug two hundreth &
ſeuen yeeres: and he died.
                  
                  Moreouer Serug liued an
hundreth and thirty yeeres, and
begate Nahor. And Serug liued
after he begat Nahor, two
hundreth yeres: and he died.
                  
                  And Nahor
                     The Septuagint for 29. geue Nachor 179. to ſurmount Terahs 130. according to his age compared with Abrahams. But Epiphanius copies wyll differ in this, and many other poyntes, as ſhall 
                           ••
                        one appeare▪
                      liued an hundreth
ſeuentie and nine yeeres,
and begate Terah. So Nahor
liued after he begate Terah,
an hundreth twentie and fiue yeers:
and he died.
                  
                  So Terah lyued ſeuentie
yeeres, and begate Abram,
Nahor, and Haran. So the
dayes of Terah were two hundreth
and fiue yeeres, and Terah
died in Charan.
                  
               
            
         
         
            And thus much touching the alteration made by the
Septuagint▪
                to which I muſt adde one Narration touching
Terahs age of 130. yeeres, when he begate Abram: which
inequalitie with the former, might be a ſpeciall cauſe why
the Septuagint, did adde hundreds to many, leaſt the ſtrangenes
of Terahs caſe ſhoulde make Heathen amazed. Thus
Moſes ioyneth to Terahs death Abrams callyng, promyſe,
and age, ſaying▪ 
               And the Lord ſayd vnto Abram. Get thee

out of thy
               Land of dwelling, not of byrth. 
               land, and from thy
               
                  Nachor and his houſe. 
               kinred, and from thy
               Seeing he is dead.
               Fathers houſe, vnto the
               Where Melchiſedek dwelleth, to pronounce the bleſſing receyued from Noah, vpon thee. 
               lande that I wyll ſhew thee.
And I wyl bleſſe them that
               Then faythles Nachor went not with him after this ſpech. 
               bleſſe thee, and curſe them
that curſe thee, and in thee all the families of the earth
ſhal be bleſſed. And Abram
               
               If Abraham toke Lot when he went vppon Gods commandement, and not Nachor, this muſt needes be an other ſpeeche, then that which remooued from frō 
                  Vr, him ſelfe, Terah, and Nachor.
                
               went as the Lord commaunded
him, and was ſeuentie fiue yeeres olde, and Lot went
with him, as partaker of the ſame bleſſing. Zoar vpon Gen.
and that appeareth in Ruthes commendation. Ruth. 2. 3.
Where Booz ſayth: Thou haſt forſaken thy father and
thy mother, and thy countrey, and thou art come to a
people which thou didſt not know before. The Lorde
wyll recompence thee: and thy rewarde ſhalbe perfect
from the Lord. It is manifeſt by this Text, that after his
fathers death, God remooued his dwelling from Charan,
as S. Stephen expoundeth it. And Philo the Greeke writer
in Abrahams Peregrination expreſſely noteth that to be
the common iudgement of the Iewes of this tyme. This
he writeth. It is lyke that none is ignorant that haue read
the Lawes, how Abraham firſt remouing his dwelling frō
               Chaldea dwelt in Charan. And after that his father dyed
there, he remooueth alſo from it. And in the ſame worke
alſo he ſayth, that Abraham left Charan, being ſeuentie
and fiue yeeres olde. I am perſwaded, that of olde time
the Greekes were of Philoes iudgement. Yet of later
times two opinions haue been much holden: which I
cannot allow off. The one, that Abraham ſhoulde be borne
when Terah was ſeuentie yeeres olde, as he is fyrſt in order:
the other, that the Promiſe vpon the former wordes
was geuen in Vr of Chaldea. The later Iewes holde both.
And alſo aBecauſe ſaint Stephen for Abrahams calling from Vr, vſed theſe wordes. Get thee from thy countrey, & from thy kinſefolke: which wordes ate vſed alſo Gen. 12. (though after mention of his fathers death, wt many other, that coulde not agree with his firſt callyng) many thought that the wordes Gen. 12. were ſpoken in Chaldea though he affirme the appearance of the God of glory, and wordes to that effect, from other the like ſcriptures, & not from an expreſſe teſtimony. ſpeche of S. Stephens, cauſed many to holde the
later. Bucholcherus ſufficiently anſwereth that. Yet agaynſt
S Stephen, the former, the Iewes holde for ſome rancor, becauſe

he ſayth, that after Terahs death, God remooued
Abrahams to Charan. Nothing but rancor coulde thruſt
them into that opinion, agaynſt expreſſed wordes, and their
owne knowledge. They knewe well enough that the order
of their names no more made Abraham eldeſt, then it
coulde make Sem eldeſt: whom the Septuagint, and moſt
Rabbines holde to be younger then Iapheth. Moreouer,
they holde Sarah, who was but ten yeeres younger then
Abraham, to be Harans daughter. Genebardus lyketh well
of this, that Haran at eight yeeres of age ſhoulde beget her.
But the Iewes rather woulde thinke that he vnderſtoode
not their dalliance: then holde that. An other reaſon agaynſt
the Iewes is this: that they obſerue how Moſes ſpeaketh
of Terah onely, in that Chapter that he died:R. Bochai vpon Gen. 11. leaſt men
ſhoulde thinke that Abraham would leaue his Father aliue
behinde him. But he muſt be left ſixtie yeres behinde him,
yf Abraham were borne when Terah was ſeuentie: therefore
Moſes by their grant would not haue men to thinke ſo.
An other reaſon agaynſt them is this: of the preſent caſe.
If Sem delyuered the bleſſing to Abraham, Abraham did
out liue him: for it coulde not be a propheticall worke to deliuer
the inheritaunce to one that ſhoulde not ſuruiue: and
he ſhould out lyue Abraham many yeeres, yf he were borne
in Terahs ſeuentith yeere. But they graunt that Sem deliuered
the bleſſing to Abraham: for they holde him to be
Melchiſedek: as witneſſeth Aruch in the worde Ieruſalem,
and whole troupes, whom I elſwhere cited. Therefore
Abraham out lyuing Sem, muſt be borne as Philo caſteth his
age: whereupon doubtles the Tranſlatours were moſt
mooued to alter the Text for yeeres. Now I wyll returne
to my diſputation for the other two opinions touchyng
Melchiſedek.
            
            The Greekes helde, that Melchiſedek was a man of Canaans
race:The thirde opinion. 
               Epiphanius and Oecumerius are playne in that.
Haer. 55. 
               Chryſoſtome vpon Ebr. 7. ſpeaketh more circumſpectly, that

they knewe not who he ſhoulde be,The Iewes dallying, fayne them who were reckened for Gods in time of Heathen, to be Melchiſedeks parentes, carying him aboue the age of Abrahams tyme. but deemeth not that he
might be a Chanaanite. Epiphanius
                woulde ſeeme to lyke
ſomewhat of this opinion, That Melchiſedeks father was
called Heraclas: a man of that countrey, dwelling at Salem:
and his mother Aſtaroth. Theſe tales, ſome belyke faigned,
ſomewhat to ſtay the Melchiſedekians folly: But
they droue S. Auguſtine to an other groſſe errour, while they
diſpute agaynſt Samaritans onely, as though ſome Iewes
had thought otherwyſe. In deede Epiphanius dealing is
ſtrange. He being a Chriſtian from Palaſtina, and a Iew, as
Iohn byſhop of Nicea recordeth,In an Homely not yet printed, but to be ſeene in Emmanuell colldege in Cambridge: with Planudes, who condemneth Purgatory playnly, yet wrote about the yere▪ 1100. durſt not openly deny the
Septuagint: both for the Iewes vow, that bounde their nation
vnder payne of curſe, not to alter it: and for heathen Chriſtians,
who had conceyued a better opinion of it, then of the
Hebrew. Yet he diſgraceth the 70. muche, as touching
varietie of Copies: and ſo diſputeth, as willing to yeelde,
that Sem muſt needes he Melchiſedek: though he were loth
to ſeeme a deſtroyer of the 70. aucthoritie, which Iewes fables
aduaunced, & Grekes vnſkilfulnes too much embraced.
Thus he would ſeeme to confute Sems defenders, ſaying.
            And theſe ſhalbe found to be rediculous. For the Scripture
making al ſure, hath fortified the trueth in al poyntes,
hauing ordered the tymes and yeeres not in vayne. For
when Abraham was eightie yeeres olde, or ninetie, more
or leſſe: then Melchiſedek met him. Now Terah the father
of Abraham begate Abraham beingThat he ſpeaketh, but as the phraſe at the firſt woulde ſeme to meane, we may knowe by the like, in the Iewes maner yet quicke in Talmud. Saned. Cha. 9. pag. 69. where Sarah ſhould ſo be within eight yeeres of her fathers age▪
                ſeuentie yeeres
olde: ſo yeeres ariſe an hundreth and ſixtie, more or leſſe.
And Nachor begate Terah at ſeuentie and nine yeeres olde:
ſo ariſe two hundreth thirtie and nine yeres. Sarug begate
Nachor at an hundreth and thirtie yeres of age: ſo ariſe
yeres three hundreth ſixtie and nine. Regu begate Sarug
being an hundreth thirtie and two yeeres olde: ſo aryſe
yeeres fiue hundreth and one. Peleg begate Regu at an hundreth
and thirtie yeeres of age: ſo aryſe yeeres ſixe hundreth
thirtie and one. Eber begate Peleg an hundreth thirtie

and foure yeeres of his lyfe: ſo aryſe ſeuen hundreth
ſixtie and fiue yeeres. Selah begate Eber being in the yeere
an hundreth and thirtie of his age: ſo ariſe eight hundreth
nintie and fiue yeeres. Arphaxad being an hundreth thirtie
and fiue yeres olde begate Selah:
               Here he is ſo bold as to leaue out Kenan, but in three other places he doth name him: and yet as a cypher, holding ſtyll Iacob to be the two and twentith from Adam. ſo are yeeres one thouſande
and thirtie. Now the foreſayd Sem. whom Samaritanes
phantaſies woulde haue to be Melchiſedek, begate
Arphaxad being an hundreth yeeres olde: all maketh yeres
one thouſande an hundreth and thirtie, vnto the tyme
of Abraham when he returned from the ſlaughter of the
kinges. But Sem lyued not ſo many yeeres, accordyng to
theſe mens doting phantaſie: but being an hundreth yere
olde, he begate Arphaxad two yeeres after the Flood, and
lyued after that, fiue hundreth yeres, and he died: Therefore
he lyuing ſixe hundreth yeeres, and dying, howe
coulde he reach to one thouſande an hundreth and thirtie
yeeres, that Sem the ſonne of Noah, being ten ages before
called of them Melchiſedek, ſhoulde be thought aliue
after ten ages?He ſhoulde ſeeme to be in earneſt: but that in the wordes folowyng, he commeth as neare the Hebrew as he durſt, well in that age. O great wandringes of men. Now by the
accompt of other Copies, from Sems age ſince firſt he
was Sem, vnto the foreſayd tyme of Abrahams meetyng
Melchiſedek when he was eightie, or ninetie yeeres olde,
are yeeres ſixe hundreth twentie and nine, more or leſſe:
ſo that in no caſe can Sem reach to the foreſayde tyme
of Abraham, that he ſhoulde be counted Melchiſedek.
Therefore on euery ſide, this tale of the Samaritanes falleth
to nothyng. Anone I wyll try further his meaning:
Now thus I haue layde downe the force of his ſuppoſed
opinion agaynſt: That Sem ſhoulde be Melchiſedek. Tedious
to mee was this ſpeech, ſtanding vpon a falſe grounde:
which yf it myght be receiued, it woulde ſhake the certainty
of Scripture: yet needefull at this day is the confuting of
him.
               The Hebrew falleth. yf 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               For I haue heard Learned men, more then one, obiect
earneſtly this aucttoritie of Epiphanius, litle conſidering
how thereby the authoritie of the ſcripture copies ſhould periſh
               
wholly. He, & they, ſhalbe anſwered both at once: if they
wyll ſtart to no further ſkapes then Ep
                     •
                  phanius him ſelfe
would like off: that is, yf they ioyne not with Melchiſedekians,
and Hierax, in the expoſition of the wordes, without
father, without mother. I wyll graunt Epiphanius, that
the tymes make ſure the cauſe: and agree with his dealyng,
that he coulde bring no other reaſon agaynſt it, that Sem
ſhoulde be Melchiſedek: but from the Greeke accompt of
tyme. Yet I muſt needes tell him: that he (as other natiue
Greekes) hath hindered ye trueth exceedingly, and wrought
great annoyance to Religion, in vrging the Greeke tranſlation
for proprietie, where it dallieth: for a ground againſt
the grounde: for trueth where touching ſadde meanyng,
it is further of then any HeathenHauyng a written ſtory before them. woulde or coulde lightly
miſſe. The Hebrew text hath Gods aucthoritie, and ſad
propriety: it ſtandeth ſure ſtyll, and of the wyſeſt was alwayes
holden true. Of it moſt ſenſible reaſons may be
rendred, amongſt them whoſe ſenſes by vſe are made fit to
iudge: though it ſeeme ſtrange at the firſt. Variety hath
not been founde in the Hebrew text, nor Hebrew commentaries
ſince Ezras time: whereas nothing is more vnconſtant
then the ſundry copies of the Greekes, and theyr
citations in the Greeke Doctors. Now in the Hebrew
text it appeareth that Sem, who lyued ſixe hundreth yeeres,
was but about fiue hundreth and thirtie, when Abraham
met Melchiſedek: and therefore Epiphanius hath nothyng
for his defence. And the more is he to be blamed, in that
by ſome copies he found from Sems birth to Abrahams
warres but ſixe hundreth twentie and nine yeres: which varietie
might haue hardened him to haue ſought for ye original,
in true plainnes. I thinke he might haue found in ſome
Greeke tranſlations, or commentaries, the letter phi, which
ſtandeth for fiue hundreth, in ſtead of chi: that he citeth, and
woulde make ſixe hundreth yeeres, and ſo the Hebrew
aye was. But to conclude, all Europe, where Vniuerſities

haue had Hebrew: and all our Bibles in theſe weſt partes,
(that I haue ſeene) Englyſh, Latine, Italian, Spaniſhe,
French, Duch. &c.In worke they condemne him, in that they follow the Hebrew. condemne Epiphanius for this poynt, as
going about to ſhake the Hebrew text, the ſtrongeſt poſt of
Diuine buylding. In the ſame blame muſt they be wrapped,
that vſe for their defence the authoritie and teſtimony of
his concluſion. And thus much for turnyng agaynſt hym,
that which he chiefly leaned vpon, in his outward ſhew.
            Now that Melchiſedek is not a Chanaanite, two poynts
are handled therein by S. Auguſtine. The one, that no Chanaanite
coulde be greater then Abraham: An other, that
Abraham coulde not be the father of many nations, to reuiue
fayth decayed, yf a Chanaanite helde it ſtyll: of theſe
two, neyther wyll ſuffer other to fall: but eyther wilbe ſure.
            And for their obiection that make the ſuperioritie to
ſtand in the bleſſing,Auguſt. in qq. ex vtro
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mixtim
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   c. 109. * that is alwayes doubtles, that the rule
of bleſſing is aboue them which are bleſt. But here the
worthynes of the perſon is conſidered, whereby the bleſſing
from his mouth was regarded. Yea and Abraham him ſelfe
was a ſacrificer, and therein coulde not be inferiour to any
Cananite for office. Moreouer, what warrant ſhould Abraham
haue to acknowledge a Chananite, of a nation curſed,
his ſuperiour? They whoſe tongues were confounded, alſo
loſt religion, by the wrath of God. But the Chananites had
ſeuerall Dialectes, therefore they all had loſt religion: neyther
was the name of the One true God, knowen to them.
In deede Euſebius recordeth. 1. Praep, their religion, as ſomewhat
ſounding towardes a voyce of good, but in trueth bad
to them ſelues. For, whereas God is called in Sems houſe,

                     
                        •
                     l. Elion, the Chananites had ſeuerall Gods, one called El:
an other called Elion: as often hearing ſomewhat of Melchiſedek,
who was ſacrificer to God, knowne by the termes
El, and Elion. But they not holding the trueth, and being
rather ſcattered from the face of the preſence of God,
went on eche one after their owne goddes: wherefore I

can not ſee how agaynſt a generall rule, one of a curſed
Nation and ſtrange language in the lyfe of Sem, ſhoulde
excell Abraham and Sem.
                And thus much for the thirde
opinion: wherein alſo I was conſtrayned, beſide the naturall
methode to anſwere the obiections agaynſt the fourth.
            Now the fourth is that of the Hebrewes, which holde it
doubtles (the learned of them,Cha. 49. who caſt Sem to be yet then
alyue) that Melchiſedek can be no other but Sem. For the
better ſatiſfiyng of all, I wyll name here ſome of the chiefe
Authours, with their teſtimonies. Syracides ſayth, that Seth
and
               Accordingly Talmud in Such
                     •
                  , pag. 52. b bringeth the Sacrificer of Iuſtice. Gen. 14 in catalogue with Adam, Seth, Chriſt, Elias. &c. and there Maſſoreth Haſhem, handleth it, namely of Sem, who was Carpender of the Arke with Noah: whereby we may gather that the olde opinion continued ſtyll. 
               
                  Sem were moſt glorious amongſt men. For Set
                        •
                     , it is
manifeſt, in that all men are. Num. 24. called the ſonnes of
Seth: But for Sem, I ſee not how he ſhoulde be manifeſt in
ſuch glory, but in the perſon of Melchiſedek. And vnleſſe
he were a Prophet, I ſee not howe he ſhoulde excell: nor
yet how he may be counted a Prophet, but in the bleſſing
of Abraham.
                So Seder Olam Rabba Cha. 21. reckoning Sem
in the catalog of olde Prophetes, vſed Melchiſedeks ſtory
for a profe. Such Hebrewes as I haue, that handle that caſe,
recorde not onely their owne iudgement, but alſo the iudgement
of others agreeing thereunto, that Sem was thought
to be Melchiſedek. R. Bochai
                is peremtorie in that. Fol. 23.
col. 2. line. 42. and there in a kinde of Rabbinical deſcantyng
vpon the phraſe, ſheweth how Abraham was named by him
So S. Paul calling Abraham heyre of the worlde. Rom. 4. ſhould take his ſpeche from his countrey Doctors, as are th'other ſpeches touching Melchiſedek. heyre of the worlde, from the attributes ſpoken of God: in
the wordes, Bleſſed be Abraham to El. Elion, (the Mightie,
the Hygh) poſſeſſor of heauen and earth. There alſo he
handleth Thamars caſe, that ſentence was geuen by Iudah
vpon her to be brent: becauſe ſhe was (ſo they the Rabbines
talke) 
                  Melchiſedeks or Sems daughter: and burning was the
puniſhment of the ſacrificers daughters, in ſuche faultes.
Marten Luther in ſadnes confuteth that: reckonyng howe
long before, Melchiſedek was dead, and ſhewyng that the
tyme wyll not agree. As I thinke, they nooriſhed that tale,
to teach their babes to weigh Melchiſedekes caſe: and no

further thought that Sem ſhoulde be her father in deede. For
we ſhoulde not ſoone imagine them to be ſenſeleſſe, from
whoſeThough all our Rabbines be later then the Apoſtles: yet ſeeing they onely of foren writers haue ſome hundrth of ſpeches vſed in the new Teſtament, we may well conclude that the olde Hebrewes before vſed them: whom the Apoſtles folowed. kind of ſtudy & learning, the new Teſtament bringeth
many ſpeches, in them yet to be founde commonly, and
in no other writers: though touching their fables, we haue
a warning. Salomoh Iarchi handleth the cauſe of this bleſſing,
whoſe wordes be theſe, vpon Melchiſedek: Gen.
                14.
He in Midras Hagadah is Sem the ſonne of Noah: and he
brought forth bread and wine, as vnto men wearie in battell:
and he ſhewed the other, that his hart was not ſtyrred
agaynſt him, for killing his Children: For Cedarlaomers
people of Elam, muſt needes be of Sem. This Iarchi and
Epiphanius in Ancorato, are of one iudgement: that many of
Sems poſteritie (ſuch as had not their tongues altered) kept
about Ieruſalem: though in tyme Chanaans families wearied
them out. For that I wyll not ſtriue, as Ramban doth
agaynſt Iarchi: but both he (citing the Fathers) and I alſo,
wyll graunt that Sem met Abraham.
            
            I omit their ſhort ſpeaches in this poynt, that onely cite
other mens iudgementes: as Dauid Kinchi vpon Pſal. 110.
Rabbi Nathan in the recorde of the Fathers. Aben Ezra vpon
Gen. 14. and Baal Hatturim, in his nootes of memorie from
the letters of Melec Salem, whereby S. and M. in the wordes
turned, make Sem. Though ſuch toying can be no proofe in
ſounde argument, yet it argueth that to haue beene alwayes
the common opinion: otherwyſe that dallying ſhoulde neuer
haue been admitted, whereas yet moſtAs that Michael (who is Chriſt) is the Angel that ſhould goe before Moſes, in whom was the name (that is) the nature of God. Exod. 23. 22. whom S. Iarchi calleth Shaddai, God Almightie. weightie things
are founde in that worke, from the letters in appearaunce:
but in trueth from the matter ſtrong and cleere of antiquity,
and for memorie wittely contriued, to ſome note vpon the
letters, for better preſeruation alſo of the Text. Ralbag confirmeth
the Rabbines conſent, by the great matters which are
in Melchiſedek, and muſt alſo be in Sem. Midras, Pſal.
                76.
maketh a lyuely diſcourſe vpon the name Salem: which the
very ſame is in Bereſhith Rabba
                     •
                  ; alſo in 
                  Sepher Aruch: The

name of that place was Iehouah Iireh. Abraham called it
Iireh: Sem called it Salem, as hence appeareth, Melchiſedek
king of Salem, the holy bleſſed God ſayd: If I call it Iireh,
Sem a iuſt man wyll be greeued: yf I call it (ſtill but) Salem,
Abraham a iuſt man wyll be greeued: for his monument
forgotten. Beholde, I call it as they both call it, Ieruſalem:
Iireh Salem:
                That is, The ſight or reuerence, or religion of
peace. I woulde Ieruſalem had as ſadly looked to thoſe
thinges, which were her peace, as Midras doth pleaſantly
open the name. The ſame Midras hath alſo a ſtrong argument
from the place: For that was the place of Sems dwelling,
whence in time Iapheths ſonnes ſhould learne to dwel
in the tabernacle of God.Eſai. 2. But from Sion came foorth the
Law,Mich. 4. and the worde of the Lord from Ieruſalem:
                  Actes. 1
                        •
                     
                   whereby
God had his Tabernacle amongſt vs of Iapheths houſe:
therefore Sion and Salem was the place of Sems dwellyng.
Thus reaſoneth Midras: that being ſo, doubtles Salem and
Sem were deſpiſed by the buylders of Babel, whereupon
many tongues ſprang: and contrariwiſe, by clouen tongues
vnderſtoode at Salem, that Ieruſalem was founded, in which
Iapheth and Sem might both dwell togeather.
            The Iewes at Wormes, beingBy my ſelfe 1590. demaunded, When they
thought Iapheth and Sem ioyned? ſayd, at the ouerthrowe
which they gaue to Babel, and ioyned paynes to buylde Ieruſalem.
And in deede, it is ſomewhat that they ſay: but a
ſmall deale to the whole meanyng. Then Darius, of Madai
and Iapheth: and Cyrus, of Elam and Sem, both pulde
downe Babel, and ſet vp Ieruſalem. But the fulnes of their
dwelling is in that Ieruſalem, named Heb. 10 Apo. 3. & 21.
Now that we caſt no ſtumbling blocke before thoſe blinde,
we ſhoulde furnyſhe our ſelues to agree ſkilfully with them
for the writ, and take heede leaſt we vrge the Apoſtle as a
new teacher of an olde ſtory: in which kind Apoſtles would
not be conuicted, diſputing with their enimies, to teache that
which Moſes and the Prophetes taught not. I will paſſe

ouerTanchumah & Elias folow R. Sal. Iarchies wordes. 
               Tanchuma, Elias, Abrabaneel,
               Iuchaſim, pag. 5. & pag. 134. b. where the Rabbines ſay, that he buylt Ieruſalem. 
               Zakuto, to haſten to
thoſe Hebrewes, which by type myſtery or callyng of the
matter to an high vnderſtanding, deale in Melchiſedek as
doth the Apoſtle, conſidering how CHRIST in him is repreſented:
that thereby the Apoſtles wordes may leſſe amaze
vs, when we ſee that ye 
               Iewes of them ſelues bryng Melchiſedek,
to repreſent the eternall name of God: and diſtinctly
the Meſſias: agaynſt their preſent religion, at this day.
            Let vs marke R. Symeon ben Iochai a Rabbin, of which a
man may ſpeake, asOdyſſ. Delta. verſ. 230. 
               Homer ſpeaketh of Egypt: that therein
been receites many good and many euyll. I am to regarde
him as a recorder, and not a iudge: as citing other mens
wordes, and of ſmall aucthoritie for his owne. He is thought
of Genebrard, to be a very olde writer: as of Galatinus: and I
finde R. Symeon Ben Iochi, cited in Talmud Sanadrin. pag 70. b.
But doubtles many rare thinges for a Rabbin he hath yeelded
to many Chriſtians, very agreeable to the Apoſtles
doctrine. Thus he ſayth: 
                  Melchiſedek king of Salem, Salem
properly: VVhen is he king of Salem? In the daye of reconciliation,
when all faces are made lyghtened. What
can be better ſpoken, or more fitly for the party reſembled by
Melchiſedek? For when our Lord Ieſus ware the crowne
of Thornes, then the daughters of Ieruſalem were to beholde
the true Salomon, and king of Salem: euen in that
day, when the moſt Holy was killed, not for him ſelfe, but to
make expiation, or reconciliation for ſinne: Therefore the
Angel doth vſe Daniel 9. the verbe capper, for to aunſwere
Moſes worde cippur: expiation, and reconciliation. The
ſame Rabbin Col. 83. ſpeaketh, that the ſpirite of God. Gen. 1, 2.
is the ſpirite of the Meſſias, who is alſo Shiloh:
               
               Zoar vpon Shiloh. Gen. 49 
               in which
name is
               The aduerſaries confeſſion, for the matter in controuerſie. 
               
                  Iah, the Eternall. And there he ſpeaketh of the
Serpent deſirous to ſhed blood: ſo that Chriſt ſhoulde be
kilde, and many of Iſrael with him. This may well be admitted
in the Cabalist, who yet properly helde Melchiſedek
to be Sem, as S. Iarchi & theNedarim. cha. 3. pag. 32. b. 
               Talmud doth. This olde Cabaliſt
               
ſhoulde be the more eſteemed, for that out of him many cite
from theſe wordes, Iehouah, our God, Iehouah:
               In Zoar I can not finde that ſentence: Sebaſt. Lepuſculus citeth not Zoar, but Vezoar for it. the perſons
of Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt: Yet I may for his ſkill
ſpeake as of one, that of late wrote a Booke vnperfect and
vnpermitted, and forbyd to be printed: of the Lyues of the
Fathers: A diſcourſe framed by a rude Seruing man, who
had ſcraped notes from ſundry men: and ſtayned all, eyther
with argumentes vnapt, or with blaſphemous errours: He
citing Zoar, (a booke whereof he can not read one worde)
cauſed his booke to be fathered vpon ſuch as woulde loath
it: and by ſuch meanes many were diſperſed, and the ſimple
much intangled. The ſame is the caſe of theſe Rabbines:
who haue much from olde writers, agreeable to the Apoſtles
doctrine: but ſtayned with dogged blaſphemies: notwithſtanding
their readines in the text, and recordes in peeces of
ancient trueth muſt be regarded. And who ſo dealeth with
them, and is founde erronious in ſtory, as they who woulde
make the rare type of Melchiſedek to be of a nation curſed:
he ſhall geue them great occaſion to diſdayne the trueth: as
was geuen to Hierax and S. Auguſtine, to runne to a ſpeculation
vnprofitable.
            I may well ioyne R. Menachem to the authour of Zoar:
for his wordes Menachem moſt commonly foloweth. Thus
he writeth vpon Sedek, part of the name, and ſignifieth Iuſtice:
The meaning is, that the terme Sedek hath a cloſe betokening
of S
                        •
                     cinah:
                that is, the Diuine nature. More plaine
is Rabbi Iſaac ben Arama vpon Geneſis: whoſe wordes Sebaſtianus
Munſter, & Auguſtinus Nebienſis vſe vpon Pſal. 110.
where Melchiſedek is a figure of Chriſt. Thus he writeth:
VVe haue not founde any man, not any Prophet, whoſe
natiuitie was prophecied before natiuitie of father or mother,
but onely that of Meſſias, our iuſtice: to that, this is
ſpoken: And before the wombe, before the mornyng
hadſt thou the dew of thy byrth, before the wombe of thy
mother was created, thy byrth was prophecied: And a

cloſe ſignification to the ſame matter is this: (Before the
mornyng, his name was Sonne.) The meaning is, That before
the Sunne was created, ſubſiſting and firme was the
name of our Chriſt, and he ſate on the right hand of God.
And according to this, ſpoken is that: Sit on my right hand:
and agayne: The throne ſhalbe eſtabliſhed with mercy,
and he ſhall ſit vpon it in trueth. This much doth this
Rabbin confeſſe. Marke R. Moſes Hadarſan vpon Gen. 14.
And Melchiſedek king of Salem▪ 
                  He was Sem the ſonne of
Noah. An other expoſition. Melchiſedek. &c. as it is written,
The Lord ſware, and wyll not repent: Thou art a Sacrificer
for euer, after the order of Melchiſedek king of Salem:
And who is he? This is the iuſt king: and the ſauiour
Chriſt the King: as it is ſayd: Beholde thy King, a ſauiour
alſo, that ſhall come to the iuſt. This noteth Galatinus from

                     Hebrewes: Rabbi Phinees the ſonne of Iair ſayd: Melchiſedek,
that is, Chriſt the king. Now he is tearmed Melchi, that is
king: becauſe he is king of the whole worlde: and Sedek,
that is iuſtice, becauſe he ſhall ſende his iuſtice and his
grace vpon the whole worlde: as it is ſayd. Pſal. 83. Trueth
ſhall budde from the earth, and iuſtice ſhall be ſeene from
heauen. King of Salem: that is of the high Ieruſalem.
Conſider now, whether the Apoſtle doth not ſpeake to the
ſame effect, ſtyring them vp which are dull of hearyng,
to weigh many thinges from Melchiſedek vnto Chriſte:
many and hard to be made playne: thinges fit for men which
haue their ſenſes confirmed by vſe. This Malchiſedek king
of Salem, the Sacrificer of the mighty moſt high, who met
Abraham as he returned from the ſlaughter of the kinges,
and bleſſed him, to whom alſo Abraham gaue tythe of all
thinges: who firſt is by interpretation, king of righteouſnes:
after that he is alſo king of Salem, that is, king of peace:
without father, without mother, without kinred: hauing
neyther beginning of dayes nor ende of lyfe, but lykoned
to the ſonne of God, continueth a Sacrificer for euer. Conſider

how great he is vnto whom, euen the Patriarke Abrabam
gaue the tyth of the ſpoyles: without all gaineſaying,
The leſſer is bleſſed of the greater. Who can not ſee this
ſpoken fitte for the opinion of the Hebrewes, which hath
continued vnto this day: as may appeare by their wordes,
whom I brought foorth to ſpeake.
            A litle more from them, touching the heauenly Ieruſalem,
or Salem: much as the Apoſtles do ſpeake of it. Thus
wryteth Aben Ezra, vpon Cant. 1. in Praeſ. Know that in
this ſpech, O Daughters of Ieruſalem, many haue ſtaggered
(ſeeing the Sinagoge of Iſrael ſpeaketh it) what that,
O Daughter of Ieruſalem ſhoulde meane. Some ſay there
be two: one in Heauen, an other on the Earth beneath
it, anſwereable vnto it. And Midras Pſal. 180. he ſayth,
that it ſhall haue one hundreth fourtie and foure Gates,
for the twelue Tribes: vſyng a phraſe lyke that in Apo. 7.
where one hundreth fourtie and foure thouſande, are ſealed:
And Apo. 14 One hundreth fourtie and foure thouſand,
are on Mount Sion. Aben Ez. affirmeth, that 
                  Salomons
name in the ende of the Song ſignifieth Chriſt.
                And Iarchi
vpon the ſame Booke, ſayth: that the families of the Gentiles,
are called the Daughters of Ieruſalem.
                Then by the
beſt of their wordes the families of the Gentiles vnder
Chriſt, make that heauenly Ieruſalem. Midras
                vpon Pſal.
122. where Ieruſalem is excedingly prayſed, expreſſedly nameth
The high Ieruſalem, and the low. But moſt plentifully
in that is Zoar, of the former R. Symeon Ben Iochaj,
who lyuing withIn S. Paules tyme. So by Zachuto in Sepher 
                     •
                  uchaſim I finde his times to be: that antiquiti
                     •
                   is elder then the great Talmud. 
               R. Akiba eſquire to Bar Choſha the pſeudo
Chriſt, though he miſt to holde the true Chriſt: yet he is
plentifull of good phraſes, ſuch as the Apoſtles haue, and
ſpeaketh better then he knew in the Apoſtles kinde.
            Conſider an other poynt what y• Apoſtle meaneth, when
he ſaith of Melchiſedek ſtrangely: he is by teſtimony faid to
liue ſtyl. Although Learned men expounde it ſo, that the not
mentioning of his death, is the teſtimony of his lyuing ſtyl,

I dare not therein folow them, to call ſilence a teſtimony:
neyther can I thinke that the Apoſtle writing to men, profeſſing
deepe ſkill in learnyng, and ſkant his fauourers,
woulde vſe any worde that might not abide tryall of the
aduerſaries. Now I holde that the Hebrewe wordes,
VE HV COHEN, that is, And he the ſame ſtyll
was ſacrificer, are vrged euen after Ben Iochais manner,
who was aliue when that the Apoſtles wrote, and amongſt
that nation. So in Zoar he the Rabbine expoundeth: AND
HE ſhall bruiſe the Serpentes head, to import the nature
euerlyuing. So properly Pſal 102. The worde HV, importeth
GOD, who ſtill is the ſame: though the Heauens
change. Whoſe yeeres fayle not, though the heauens waxe
olde as doth a garment. In that ſort had I rather expounde
the Apoſtle, by the Hebrew maner, then drawe him
to be a coyner of new phraſes. Whereas the new Teſtament
in 4640. wordes, and ſome more, hath not ſkant any
worde or phraſe but vſuall in that age: ſpecially it regarded
the Iewes maner of ſpeeches, and in euery booke floweth
with ſuch: which when we neglect, we wander. Now for
the Sacrificer in Heauen, whom Aaron on the earth reſembled.
The godly in that age made the ſpech ſo vſuall, that
the wicked graunt Michael (who is Chriſt the eternall Angell
of the couenaunt) to be Sacrificer in the Heauens.
So R. Symeon etteth from Exodus, Thou ſhalt make all
               Page. 19. col. 75. And againe vpon Num. 6. Hebr. 8.
               thynges according to the forme ſhewed on the Mountayne,
to teach men of a Sacrificer in Heauen: who is Michael.
Which very ſame text the Apoſtle citeth, diſputing of ye Sacrificer
entred into the Heauens. Moreouer in wordes they
confeſſe that Chriſt ſhould be kilde: andKinchi and S. Iarchi vpon Zach. 12. 10. Chriſt (ſuppoſed)
the ſonne of Ioſeph, though preſently they ſtart aſide and
wrangle, the later of them, that there ſhould be two Chriſtes:
one of Ioſeph Rachels ſonne, who ſhoulde be killed: But
their wordes may be cited as reaſon and art ſheweth, they
were to vnderſtand their fyrſt aucthours. Them ſelues confeſſe

Chriſt, that was killed, to ſpeake as Iehouah. Zach.
                12.
And they haue no whit of glaunce, to their other way in
Scripture: For it is expreſſedly tolde by Gabriel, of the
moſt holy Chriſt, the gouernour or King, that he ſhoulde be
killed, and ceaſſe Sacrifices: who is Michael, Dan 10. 13.
21.
                and 12, 1. Apo. 12, 7 and Iud. 9. who doth the worke of
Iehouah, that buried Moſes. Deut.
                34. and ſpeaketh the
wordes of Iehouah: The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Now
as S. Iude and S. Iohn do folowe their kinde of phraſe and
maner, here and in other places: So I aſſure my ſelfe, that
the Apoſtle doth, in the deſcription of Melchiſedek.
            
            The teſtimonie of Ioſephus touching Chriſt, a iuſt and
holy man, or rather more then a man, who taught the people
truely, is cited by Euſebius. So to good purpoſe in Mid.
Pſal. 10. one R. Iochanan, who might well be of the Apoſtles
age: for one of that name was ſcholler to Hillel, of Gamaliels
tyme, he ſpeaketh thus: Three yeeres and a halfe was
the Maieſty ſtanding vpon mount Oliuet, and preachyng:
Seeke the Lord, whyle he may be founde: but they regarded
not. And that Chriſte was holden the ſonne of
God (by the olde Rabbines) it is manifeſt in Cayphas, ſpeaking
of God,Math. 26. 63. in their tearme Baruc HV, The bleſſed:
                ſaying, I
adiure thee by God, tell me whether thou be Chriſte the
ſonne of the bleſſed (GOD).
            
            And of later tymes, Aben Ezra ſayth vpon Pſal. 2. Kiſſe
the Sonne: that Chriſt is that ſonne. Now yf the man is
curſed, that maketh fleſhe his arme: and yet happy is he
that truſteth in that Sonne: that ſonne muſt needes be not
a bare man, but alſo God, after the ſpirite of ſanctification:
ſeeing they are not curſed, but happy, that truſt in him.
Wherefore ſeeing the Iewes ſpeake the ſame thinges that
the Apoſtles do, reaſon woulde that the Apoſtles ſpech lyke
theirs, and to them, and differing from all others, ſhoulde be
expounded according to their dialect and peculiaritie of
ſpech. Eſay reporteth this of them, that their eyes be opened,

but they wyll not marke for to ſee. And our Lord tolde
them, that yf they were blinde, they had no (ſuch great) ſinne:
but now their ſinne abideth, ſeeing after ſo great knowledge
of the trueth, they fall quite away, againe crucifiyng Chriſt,
and prophaning the holy blood of the Couenant. But as
touching their ſayinges,Heb. 7. &. 10. fighting for vs againſt them ſelues.
I thinke them profitable,For want of ſkyll in the Rabbines, they are folowed by our ſelues beſide trueth in ſundry poynts. when they are cited with ſkill,
what they do meane, or ought to meane: otherwyſe they
wyll trouble much, men litle acquainted with them. And
thus much for the iudgement of the Hebrewes touchyng
Melchiſedek. Next them, let vs beholde the Latines what
they taught: and after that, we wyll examine Epiphanius
better, and conclude by examinyng the text of Moſes by it
ſelfe.
            And firſt S. Ierom muſt come foorth from his Epiſtle to

                  Euagrius: who knowing how he was ſure to be blamed
of captious people (as he telleth) what ſoeuer he ſayd. yet
proceedeth couragiouſly.
               He myght meane S. Auguſtine. And firſt taunteth a writer, that
affyrmed Melchiſedek to be the holy Ghoſt. Next Origen.
and Didymus, commyng much in the ſame kinde: who by
the ſame reaſons make him an Angel.
                  This opinion I paſſed ouer: for that with the other it ſhould alſo fall, and needed not new argumentes. Thence he toucheth
Hippolytus, Euſebius Caeſarienſis, and Euſebius Emiſenus, Apollinarius,
and Euſtathius: which thought him to be a Canaanite.
Laſtly, he bryngeth the Hebrewes, ſaying, thus to

                  Euagrius: Becauſe you gently demaunde, and all that I
haue learned, ſhoulde be commended to faythfull eares:
I wyll lay downe alſo the Hebrewes opinion: and that
no curioſitie be wanting, the very Hebrew wordes wyll I
hereto ioyne: Vmalchizedec melec
                        •
                      Salem hozi Lehem vaiain
vehu Cohen leel elion vai
                        •
                     barchehu Vaiomar baruch Abraham lee
                        •
                     
Elion kone ſamaim vaarez Vbaruch El Elion eſcher migen Zarecho
beiadecho naijten lo maaſer michol. And Melchiſedek king of
Salem brought foorth bread and wine: and he was Sacrificer
to the hygh God: and he bleſſed him, and ſayd: Bleſſed
be Abraham, to the hygh God, which hath made heauen

and earth: and bleſſed be the hygh God, which hath
deliuered thine enimies into thine handes: and he gaue
him tenth of all. Alſo they teach, that he is Sem the ſonne
of Noah, and was aged when Abraham was borne 390.
yeeres: which thus are reckoned. 
                  Sem, the ſeconde yeere
after the Flood, when he was an hundreth yeeres olde, begate
Arphaxad: after whoſe byrth he lyued fiue hundreth
yeeres, that is altogeather ſixe hundreth yeeres. Arphaxad
being thirtie fiue begate Salem, who him ſelfe at thirtie
procreated Heber: who, as we read, at thirtie foure yeeres
begate Phaleg. Agayne Phaleg when thirtie yeeres were
come begate Rehu, who at thirtie and two ſince his byrth
is father to Serug: of whom when he came to thyrtie yeres
Nachor is borne: who being twentie and nine begate
Tbare, of whom we reade that he being ſeuentie, begate
Abraham, and Nachor, and Haran: Now Abraham dyed being
an hundreth ſeuentie and fiue yeeres olde. The ſumme
being caſt, Sem is founde to outlyue Abraham his nephew
in the tenth degree thirtie and fiue yeeres. And ſoone after.
Alſo they teach, that it is no maruel that Melchiſedek went
to meete Abraham, and brought foorth for his repaſt bread
and wine, and bleſſed him: ſeeing he owed this a duetie to
his grande Childe. (And agayne.) This haue I learned
of the beſt learned, of this opinion: who are ſo farre from
thinking Melchiſedek to be an Angel, or the holy Ghoſt,
that they aſſcribe the moſt certayne name of a man. And
in good ſooth it is foolyſh, that, vpon a ſpeech in type,
one ſhoulde concernyng Chriſtes ſacrificehood, not hauing
ende, how he being king and Sacrificer, geueth vs
both, to become a kinred Regall and Leuiticall: and being
as the Corner ſtone, ioyneth both walles: and of two
flockes, being a good Shepheard, maketh one flocke: this
ſhoulde ſo be referred to 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or fit anſwereablenes
as to take away the trueth of the ſtory: and ſay, that he
was no kyng, but an Angell ſhewed in a mans Image:
               
               whereas the Hebrewes ſo vehemently endeuour, to ſhewe
openly that Melchiſedek was Sem the ſonne of Noah.
Thus the fadde Father, loth to ſtriue with the Greeke, ſheweth
what he beſt lyked vnder the Iewes aucthoritie: which
Epiphanius in Greekes to Greekes durſt not ſo well do. In the
times of blindnes,When Satan was looſed. Apo. 20. yet in this tory men were not blind. For
Gulielmus Tyrius when Satan was looſed, made Byſhop of
Ieruſalem, wrote, that Sem, called Melchiſedek, there dwelt.
Alſo many others of Romiſtes are content to folowe lerom,
as Petrus Someſtor in Scholastica hiſtoria, Aquinas, Lyra, Iohannes
benedictus vpon Gen. 14. Caſſaneus, Nauclerus, and whole
troupes of others. And euen to this day Romiſtes holde that
moſt commonly. Genebrardus hauing therein the helpe of
Hebricians, and conſidering many circumſtances, by trueth
herein, ſomewhat beautifieth his Chronicle, otherwyſe
peſtered with lyes: and often returneth to the ſame aſſertion,
as mynding to diſgraee ſome that there in ſeeme to ſtagger
or ſtriue: yet good Melanthon before him, was no leſſe
ſenſibly and certaynely perſwaded herein. Alſo Iohn Lucidus
was plentifull in this matter in his Chronicle:In Iohn Luridus. 
               Iſidorus
lykewyſe, who maketh Salem buylt by Melchiſedek, treadeth
in the ſame ſteppes with the Hebrewes.
            
            But Romiſtes, I neede not to name many: for the ſimple
of that ſect, Genebrardus him ſelfe is of two great credite
with them. Men of better religion, and more of Ieromes diuinitie,
are fitter for the cataloge of his folowers. The three
folde thred of Carion Melanthon, and Peucerus, wyll not ſone
be broken. Melanthons wordes bring a great light to Moſes.
narration. Iſuppoſe (Noah) came from Armenia, into the
olde Countrey: that is, the places neare Damaſcus, where he
had Iyued before, and where he knewe that the firſt Fathers
were made. For it is certayne, that Sem the ſonne
of Noah, lyued agayne in that Region, ſeeing that he was
king of Salem, which was afterwardes called Ieruſalem. For
Sem is the very ſame man that was called Melchiſedek.

Therefore the Church of God was in that place, where
was Noah, Sem, and Sems ſonnes, ſo long as they kept the
true doctrine. Doubtles Sem kept the lyght of doctrine:
But whereas his poſterite were in Babylon, there by a lytle
and lytle true doctrine was extinguiſhed, and wicked religion
receiued and eſtabliſhed. Therfore God brought
Abraham from Babylon to Sem, the father of his anceſtours,
to ioyne agayne a notable company of the Church, ſoone
after the death of Noah. Now when Abraham with his
Coſen came to Sem, what a goodly Colledge had Sem?
who had ſeene the Flood, and ſuch deſcent of poſteritie.
Let vs conſider the ſweete company of Sem, Abrabam,
and their
               Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Lot, & Iſaak. 
               kinſmen: when Sem ſaw the eight of his Nephewes
in deſcent, called to the ſocietie of the Church,
and the promyſe of the Meſſias renued: for whom,
death being deſtroyed, eternall lyfe ſhoulde be reſtored.
Theſe good meditations, good Melanthon yeeldeth.
            
               Victorinus Strigellius in his notes vpon Geneſis. 14. and
vpo Melanthons Chronicle, is no leſſe plentifull to the
ſame effect. And Chytreus
                   a long ſtudent in ſtory, yet alyue,
but very aged, Nc a reuerencer of Melanthon, deſerueth that
reuerence, to haue his wordes ſet downe: and fyrſt for the
name what it meaneth. SEM, a name, in whoſe poſterite
the name of God ſholde alwayes remayne, vntyll
that name which is aboue euery name, ſhould come
downe from heauen: and in Sems poſteritie take fleſhe.
And Melchiſedek it is a nowne appellatiue, the epithet of
Sem the ſonne of Noab which dwelt in the citie Salem,
which was called afterwardes Ieruſalem, and was diſtaunt
fiue myles from Hebron, where Abrabam dwelt. Therefore
thoſe firſtlyghtes of the Church myght, often meete, and
conferre of great matters, and teach and ſtrengthen theyr
hearers.
            
            
               Seln
                     •••
                  rus, an other Witenberge man ſhall conclude my
Latine teſtimonies: who for his reuerence to Melanthone

opinion touching the Sacrament, ſhall not for the ouerſight
of his owne iudgement therein, be neglected for his
great paynes and large comment vpon Geneſis.. Take his
wordes. Melchiſedek ſignifieth a king of Iuſtice. And it is
the vſuall iudgemt of the godly Doctors of the Church,
that this Melchiſedek was Sem the ſonne of Noah,
               The common iudgement. who was
the greateſt Patriarch of that tyme: for he lyued before
the Flood nintie eight yeeres, and outlyued Abraham
               The errour of 60. yeeres. In that errour many be, which miſtake Geneſis. 11, 27. which place of late, Codoman
                     •
                   Witenb. man, & many more, haue rightly expounded by verſ. 32. and chap. 12, 5. thirty & ſixe yeres, and was a keeper of true doctrine, &
ſaw great calamities, change of Tongues, a new Empire,
Idoles of Babylon, horrible luſt, the deſtruction of Sodom.
The name Melchiſedek he had by his office, which he
bore: becauſe he alone (though poore in reſpect of other
kinges, ſpecially his neighboures) was a iuſt king, looking
to his Churches and callyng, and gouerning them well.
And alſo, becauſe he bare the type of the Eternall king,
I meane Chriſt.
            Now that the ſimple may knowe that our NationVer. 1. aeneid. beareth
no blunter beaſtes then others, nor the Sunne dryueth
his Chariot ſo farre from Englande: I wyll lay downe
their teſtimonies of our countrey, who neuer thought that
the Apoſtles woulde forbyd to ſearch a Story: nor thynke
that a greater then Abraham coulde be out of the ryght
lyne of the Fathers. Thus ſayth an olde Chronicle. Sem
the ſonne of Noah other why le is called Melchiſedek, the
which firſt after the Flood made the citie of Salem: and
now it is called Ieruſalem. An other olde Englyſh Chronicle
ſpecially deſerueth accompt: his letters ſpeake thus.
Mee redeth, that Abraham yaf firſt tithinges: but Abel
yaf rather the firſt that God ſent him of all maner kinde.
The Hebrewes tell, that this Melchiſedek was 
                     Sem. Noahs
ſon, & telleth, that he lyued vnto
               So Terah at 130. yeeres begetteth Abraham, yf Sem ſaw not lacob. 
               Yſac. Thoſe Hebrewes
agree with S. Stephen and Philo: And they who differ from
them about Abrahams byrth tyme, to make Sem ſee Iacob,
greatly entangle the narration. Wherfore this olde Chr
                  •
               
               nicle

of our countrey, ſhoulde not be diſdayned, for ſome
lyes: but embraced in ſome woorthynes. Maiſter Bale deſerueth
well, for his true detecting of the Popes antichriſtianity.
If we folow him therein, we ſhoulde not thinke him
worſe aduiſed, where y• very Romiſtes with their greateſt aduerſarixs,
Nl our beſt learned, agree with him. In his Preface
of the Englyſhe Votaries: Melchiſedek a iuſt and a
peaceable king, is Noahs ſonne: As many read his workes,
and that to very good vſe: ſo they ſhoulde take all before
them, and holde that, not the weakeſt where he hath moſt
conſent with him. Ioyne to him Lanquets Chronicle:
wherein alſo the iudgement of the reuerent father Thomas
Cooper B. of Wincheſter, is to beSo it may be geſſed by that to Lanquet he p'utteth additions. weighed. This is Lanquets
voyce. Pag. 5. b. Sem the Prince of Aſia, called alſo Melchiſedeck,
a iuſt and peaceable king, and Prieſt of Almighty
God, from whom Chriſt lynially deſcended, poſſeſſed
all Aſia with his chyldren. And agayne, Pag. 11. a. openeth
the Apoſtles meanyng, ſaying. Abraham receyued with
bleſſing of Melchiſedek king of Salem,
                   and high Prieſt of
Almighty God (called alſo Sem the ſonne of Noah) Bread
and VVine: to whom Abraham gaue the tenth of his
pray. The Apoſtle ſayth, that this Melchiſedek was without
Genealogie,That in this Parentheſis is put for expoſition of Lanquets meaning▪
                   becauſe his progenie (vnder the name
Melchiſedek) is not rehearſed in the Scripture. Some I
paſſe ouer for brcuitte ſake: but here I wyll not omit the
ſpeche of a learned man, a friende of myne, M. D. Peny, a
D. of Phiſicke, a man of great iudgement, and gyftes in
Diuinitie: who now is with the Lorde, and re
                  •
               eth from
his labours. Of him I take occaſion to ſpeake, partly to
leaue ſome token behinde of our Chriſtian friendſhyp, and
agreement in Scripture: partly to ſhew his experience
how the teaching of this matter obſcurely, cauſed ſome to
blame the moſt part. He tolde of a Gentewoman that ſaid
thus to him: VVhy do the Preachers now teach, that
Melchiſedek
                had neyther father nor mother? Of olde

time they taught otherwiſe: for I haue ſeene an Englyſh
booke, founde in Douer Caſtle. 400. yeeres olde, that
affyrmeth Melchiſedek to be Sem the ſonne of Noah.
He marked offence geuen to the Matron in the chiefeſt
ſtory of our Lordes Grandfathers after the fleſhe: in that
the phraſes for a type & figure, taken from the deſcription
of Melchiſedek are not cleerely diſtinguiſhed, from that
which in ſtory from other Scriptures muſt be gathered.
To her he gaue a right erpoſition, in what ſenſe the Preachers,
of his iudgement ſo ſpake: and how by the type,
they did not ouerthrow the trueth of the ſtory: but in
proper ſpech helde him to be Sem.
                With the learned
Doctor, I wyll ioyne their commendation, who in Tables
ioyned to the Bible, or explaning the names vſed in Scripture
in the worde Melchiſedek, ſhewe the ſimpleſt, that he
is commonly thought to be Sem: that they ſhould not miſtake
the Apoſtles wordes. Thus for the weakenes of our
ſimple ſoules, I cite our Countreymen: agaynſt Iewes▪
                I
bring Rabbines: to Antiquaries in Latine fathers, I bring
Ierome: by Romiſtes, I perſwade Remiſtes: by Melanthon
and Luther, with others of their opinion, I deale for
the beſt religious. For the Greekes, I muſt take ſome more
paynes, who to this day miſtaking their Tranſlations meaning,
make leſſe accompt of the conſtant Hebrew trueth,
holden certayne of all other ſydes: but that a few leaue all
Learnyng to folow them. For them now wyll I returne
to the Grecians, that ſuch as folowed Epiphanius, may be
knowne to haue miſſed of his meanyng.
            Firſt I wyll proue, that Epiphanius did but dally, being
content to ſhake off Melchiſedekians,
               Epiphanius hidyng his iudgement. and Hierax. &c.
Secondly, I wyll ſhew great reaſons that mooued Epiphanius
to diſpute agaynſt his meanyng: but ſo, that one
ſkilfull in the cauſe, myght vnderſtande what he woulde
haue to ſtade. For the firſt, thus I reaſon: Yf Epiphanius
leaneth in appearance vpon that which cuſtome helde, and

he knew to be moſt vntrue, he folowed cuſtome, and would
not ſimply be thought of that iudgement: but he is euident
in ſundry places to folow for cuſtome, that which was not
true: therfore he might alſo here be expounded to meane no
otherwyſe, then as a bearer with cuſtome, agaynſt propri
etie of trueth. One place prouing this kinde of dealyng,
and dallying, he hath. Page. 8. where from Adam to the
Floodde, he counteth yeres. 2226. folowyng the Greeke
tranſlation: whereas he knewe the Hebrew to haue leſſe,
euen. 1656. and knewe alſo that the Hebrew was moſt
true, and neuer blamed. For being ſo cunning in Hebrew
affayres, as his workes ſhew, he coulde not be ignoraunt of
the Maſſorites miraculous diligence, for preſeruation of
euery letter in the Prophetes, how many they were in all:
which was the middle letter of all Moſes: which wordes
were written with other Characters then their felowes:
What wordes had prickes ouer their heades, and ſuch other
things, which being handled in Zoar, and ſome by S.
               Zoar & S. lerom vpon Gen. 19, 33. touching a pricke ouer Van in the Hebrew. Ierom,
were doubtles well knowen in his age, and coulde not be
hid from him. Wherefore, I may well conclude, that for
the Greekes weakenes, he bare with the Greeke tranſlation,
and in trueth thought as Ierome did: that not it, but the
Hebrew had the trueth: euen as well for them betwixt
Sem and Abraham, as for the former ages. Now yf you
maruayle not at1. Antiquit. 4. yeeres. 2656. 
               Ioſephus, hiding his minde for the ſame
ages, folowyng the Greekes: and inReckoning from Adam, Floodde, Promiſe, Lambe, to the buylding of the Temple: wherin for the Iudges tymes repeating twiſe (after y• phraſe) 111. yeeres, he maketh the Temple to be founded, in the yeere of the world 3102. It was 3000. ſeuen yeeres after, when it was finiſhed. 
               Salomons age, commyng
to the Hebrew accompt, ſtriuing with hym ſelfe,
marueyle neyther at Epiphanius.
            
            Moreouer in bringing a Kenan betweene Arphaxad and
Selah (whō ſome times he leaueth out) it is manifeſt that he
regarded cuſtome. S. Luke was his warrant in this poynt:
who amongſt our Lord his fathers, bringeth in the ſame
Kenan, leaſt the Grecians that vnderſtode not y• minde of the
70. Tranſlatoures, ſhould take offence, if he had left it out.
Alſo, in that Epiphanius maketh Iacob the two & twentith

from Adam, where he nameth the foreſaid Kenan, he reckoneth
him not for one of that number: yf he had, Iacob ſhould
haue been the three and twentith. Moreouer, he ſo handling
the ages of Noahs ſonnes, as to make Sem the* eldeſt,Page. 5. 15.
               Cham the next, and Iapheth the youngeſt, as the phraſe at
the firſt woulde ſeeme to teach: therein declareth that he
had a mynde to folowe cuſtome for quictnes, agaynſt the
trueth, amongſt ſuch as woulde not ſoone vnderſtande the
depth of the matter. Notwithſtanding he knewe that Iapheth
was the eldeſt: and in the Greeke, Gen. 10. 21. compared
with Sem, is called (the elder:) and Gen. 9. 24.
Cham in compariſon with both, is ſaid to be (the younger.)
Moreouer, ſeeing Noah at. 500. yeers was a father, and
Sem was not. 100. yeeres olde at the Flood, when Noah
was. 600. yeres, but two yeres after: Epiphanius could not
be ignorant that Sem muſt be younger by two yeeres, then
ſome of his brethren. Yet he folowed common cuſtome:
though Iapheth was holden eldeſt by the cuſtome of exact
trueth, amongſt the Rabbines: as D. Kimchi recordeth in the
Roote Gadal: and many Hebrewes that comment vpon Geneſis,
                  Two, Aben 
                        •
                     zra, and Rabbaneel: none 
                        •
                     ls, that I haue read, and remember. thought ſome take the ſpech as it lyeth, at the fyrſt
ſyght. Of both Abraham & Sem the Rabbines of Epiphanius
age (from whom came the Talmud) in Maſſe. Sanad in, page
69. b. write many thinges, wherein the Iewes ſharped
their Schollers: which ſhould fall to great obſurdities, yf
they tooke not good heede to the Scripture phraſes, by the
matter to examine them. Marke the Hebrewes well and
you ſhall better vnderſtande this matter. Terah begat
                     •
                  
                  Abraham, Nachor, and Haran: So Abrabam is elder then
nachor an yeere, and Nachor elder then Haran an yeere,
Abraham is founde two yeeres elder then Haran. Alſo it
is written: Abraham and Nachor toke the wyues. &c.
R. Iſaak ſayd, Iſcha, ſhe is Sarah. Now how much was
Abraham elder then Sarah? tenne yeeres, and elder then
her father two yeeres. So it is founde that Haran begate

                     Sarah at eyght yeeres. In deede Abraham is younger
then the brother. But by a myſtery ofA Rabbine ſpeaketh of other Rabbines. theyr art, thus
they reckoned. Know that this their reckonyng, they
call a myſtery of their art, by this: And Noah was fiue
hundreth yeeres when he begate Sem, Cham, and Iapheth:
Sem being elder then Cham by one yeere, and Cham elder
then Iapheth by one yeere: Sem ſhoulde be founde elder
then Iapheth two yeeres. But now agayne: Noah was ſixe
hundreth yeeres olde when the deluge of waters was vppon
the earth. And agayne: Sem was a hundreth yeeres
olde, two yeeres after the deluge, and begate Arphaxad.
So he is at once an hundreth yeres, an hundreth and one,
and an hundreth and two. Nay it is a myſterie of art, as
they reckon heere. VVhat is that myſterie of art that ſo
it is reckoned heere? Rab Cehuneb ſpake of a tradition before
Rab Zebed of Nahardea, he ſayth; Ye are taught from
that place. Gen. 5. we are taught from an other Gen. 10. Sem
alſo had iſſue, he was father to all the ſonnes of Heber, and
brother to Iapheth the eldeſt, the eldeſt of the brethren.
Thus farre the Talmud in this kinde ſpeaeth: the ignora
                  •
               nce
whereof bred a falſe tranſlation in Latin, to make
Sem eldeſt: whereas Moſes wordes ſhould ſtyrre the Iewes
to an other conſideration, how they were choſen of the
younger houſe, through fauour. Alſo that they ſhoulde not
deſpiſe the Greekes, and Iapheths ſonnes, who commyng
of a good father, the eldeſt brother, in tyme (when the Iewes
ſhoulde kill and deny Chriſt) they ſhoulde obteyne theyr
dignitie in the High Ieruſalem, and doctrine of the kingdome:
beginning from their Ieruſalem, and tentes of Sem.
            
            By not marking the Rabbines, here we noryſh vntruethes
in two ſpeciall ſtories: Sems fyrſt, and Abrahams lykewiſe:
by not diſcirnyng in what kinde of ſpech Hebrewes
make Sem and Abraham eldeſt: where they helde it in
trueth, for both to be otherwyſe Lykewyſe. Epiphanius not
being marked droue ſome to expoſitions, which him ſelfe

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
had blamed in Melchiſedekians. But boubtles he muſt nedes
be holden to hide his minde, bringing but one reaſon, & that
from a falſe grounde. And for reaſons agaynſt that in him
he is ſtrongly reſolued, that Sem helde the place, after
geuen to Abrahams ſeede. This diſſemblyng in wryters
ſhould not ſeeme ſtrange, ſeeing that euen Poetes in kinges
perſons ſet it foorth, and Rhetoritians thence gather preceptes
for that kinde.
                  
                     •
                  liad Beta. 
               Homers Agamemnon,
                preparyng a
ſet fielde, maketh an oration of going home, to try his
Souldiers myndes and courage: but his reaſons are
ſtrong agaynſt returnyng. He vrgeth a goyng home, becauſe
the warres were long, and it was ſhame to leaue all
vnperfect: and their ſhyppe tymber was rotten, and their
ſayles were ragged: which poy
                  ••
               Tres, all were contrary to
returnyng: notwithſtanding the multitude tooke holde on
his ſpech quickly, and ſo preparde homewarde, that ſkantly
coulde all the wyſedome of Neſtor perſwade them, that the
King meant otherwyſe: or the witte of Vlyſſes ſtay them
from returnyng.Hermog. Pag. 425. 
               Hermogenes helde this dealyng to be ſo
common, that he thought good to teach from Homer, how
to do it artiſtcially. But moſt common was hiding of the
minde amongſt the Iewes nation, touching the Septuagint.
Euſebius
               
               Praep. 8. pag. 208. recordeth out of Ariſteas, that they bound their nation
by paine of a curſſe, that none of them ſhould alter the
Greeks Tranſlation. Aquilas, Symmac
                     •
                  us, and Theodotion,
were hated, not onely for their hereſies, but alſo for theyR
TraINſlations, though they were not of their nation.
Wherefore Epiphanius had two thinges to bridle him: the
one, that he might not drawe in the ſame yoke with Heretiques:
the other, that he myght not run into the curſſe, for
altering the Greke. I thinke that the Apoſtle writing to the
Hebrewes was alſo to regard that, & wyſhed not to offend
the nation, where no neede required. And we ſee that S.
Paule was loth to differ from the common maner in reckonyng
of the Iudges tyme, after a ſort 450. yeeres, as Ioſephus
               
in effect doth: which tyme was nothing neare that
in proprietie, and yet in a dobble reckoning by Oppreſſours
and Reuengers, moſt exactly ſo much. Alſo S. Luke
reckonyng Iacobes familie to be ſeuentie and fiue ſoules,
accordyng to the Sep
                     •
                  uagint, was loth to breake the agreement
or cuſtome of their nation. So I thinke that Epiphanius
to Greekes durſt not diſcloſe the ſecretes of the Elders.
            And thus much for teſtimonies of Hebrewes, Greekes,
and Latines, touching Melchiſedek: where for Latines I
broughe many of Witenberge: becaluſe that to an abridgement
of Codomans Chronicle there ſet forth, an opinion
vnlyke theirs is faſtened by one, which woulde not haue it
ſearched who the perſon ſhoulde be: and in a ſeconde edition
is agaynſt him ſelfe, drawing men not to miſlyke, that
he ſhould be a litle Cananite king. That the ſimple might
knowe this opinion not to come from Witenberge, I 
                  〈◊〉
               
authours thence otherwiſe minded. Vnder the teſtimonies,
and vpon ſome diſcourſes, many reaſons were brought:
which by the matter without mans countenaunce, ſeeme to
ſtande, each one. But leaſt by them ſelues, and ſeuerall,
they ſhew not all their ſtrength: or beyng ſcatttred, cannot
be ſo well vewed, nor make ſo good a ſhew: To conclude
this cauſe, I thinke it good to bring them togyther, and to
ſtrengthen them, yf neede be. And fyrſt to take away that,
which moſt ſeemeth to hinder, the miſtaking of the Apoſtles
wordes, of being without Father, without Mother,
that I confidently affyrme to be ſpoken onely by relation
to Gen. 14. without any condemning of ſuch, as from other
places affyrme who in trueth Melchiſedek was. Now
that Moſes meant that Sem ſhoulde be knowen to be that
King, and the Apoſtle lykewyſe: the matter it ſelfe cryeth
out aloude. For Moſes ſpeaking of Sem bleſſed front
Noah, by theſe wordes: Bleſſed be the God of SEM:
               
and of Chanaan curſed, vpon Chams badnes, and to be his
ſeruaunt: alſo of Iapheth to fetch religion from SEMS
               
               
               houſe: Firſt ſheweth how the curſſe came,Moſes narratiō obſerued from where Sem rece
                     •
                  eth the bleſſing, how it is continued vntyll the iuſt king deliuereth it in the tenth generation, when Sem is yet aliue, that narration ſheweth who he muſt needes be that hath right to deliuer the bleſſing to Abraham. in that Babel
was buylt: rebellious Nemrod of Chams race, and the
youngeſt brother, erecting a tyranny, and ſetting forwarde
a worke, for men to make them ſelues a Shem, that is, a
Name. He reckoneth the Languages that came vpon
that worke, wherewith they that were puniſhed, were ſcattered
from the preſence of God: of which we ſhoulde not
fayne any to holde Religion, nor by their owne abilitie to
recouer Grace, nor without hearyng of the worde, to be
made faythfull, nor to affyrme of ſpecial preaching to them,
without warrant from Scripture. Now as for bleſſed
Sem, Moſes returneth to his ſtrory, telleth of his lyne to
Abraham, reckoneth how long they all lyued, omitteth
mention of death, Gen. 11. far otherwyſe then he dealt Gen. 5.
caſteth Sem to be aliue very long after Abrahams calling,
and lykewyſe for a good whyle Arphaxad and Selah, men
borne before the confuſion of Tongues. Heber alſo, that
forwarned it longeſt of all: but none borne after Babel, as
Peleg, Regu, Sarug, Nachor, Terah: and expreſſely mentioneth
Terahs death, that fell to Idolatrie, that we ſhould
conſider him dead, before the Promyſe, as the wrath vpon
the Towre-buylding: yea and vpon the Fathers borne after,
vntyll Abraham, that none of them lyued to ſee the
Bleſſing continued. Then ſheweth how Abraham called,
to l
                  •
               aue his Countrey, going to Chanaan, going to Egypt,
returnyng to Chanaan, recoueryng his Lot partaker
of the bleſſing, killing of the king of Elam, was after this
bleſſed of Melchiſedek repreſentyng CHRIST: and
ſaying, Bleſſed be Abraham to El Elion, and bleſſed be the
God of Abraham.
                Doth not the golden chayne of the
ſtory thus ſetled, and of the phraſe alyke continued, drawe
Sem hither? who as he receyued the Bleſſing from Noah,
deliuereth it vnto Abraham. Shoulde we thinke that in
ſo great a matter, Sem ſhoulde haue a bleſſing, and lyue
obſcurely all his lyfe: and ſome vpſtart of Families curſed,

ſhoulde pronounce it vpon Abraham? Whyle Libanus
beareth Snow, and Iordans waters flowe, that wyll not
ſtande, I trow. Such a ſtately matter falleth not out without
a prophecie. If Adams fall beyng ſo ſpeedy,A prophe
                     •
                  y ſhould be ſearched for, touching the authority of hy
                     ••
                   which coulde bleſſe the Patriarch as ſuperior. yet had
with a warnyng a kinde of foretellyng: If the Floodde at
Noahs byrth was cloſely foretolde: and alſo the Languages
confounded vpon Cham churſed through his families:
I woulde alſo thinke that the bleſſing of Abraham ſhould
not be a late tolde thing: but depende vpon auncient ſpeches.
As the Lordes workes are knowen to him of eternitie:Act. 15.
ſo it is vſuall in his worde, that he ſheweth thinges before
they aryſe:Eſa. 42. and doth nothyng but that he telleth his
ſeruauntes the Prophetes. In this kinde I aſſure my
ſelfe, that Moſes purpoſedly continueth the bleſſing of
Sem to Abraham. The matter wyll better appeare by
conſidering other attributes of the man that bleſſeth Abraham.
He is a King,Melchi, a king
                     •
                   Sedek, Iuſtice▪ Heb. 7. and iuſt in ſuch high degree of commendation,
that thoſe tearmes turne in him to be as a proper
name. And doth not this honour driue vs to ſearch for
ſome man ſpecially bleſſed, to be this King? Alſo in that
Noah called his ſonne by a generall tearme, in our language
(Name:) this falleth out fitte for him, who is in
ſtory ſet foorth by a generall name, without a proper.
Moreouer, the office of a King is fitte to haue a beginning
from ſuch a man as Sem was: for a Kingdome is a Diuine
policie. Religion doth require exact properties of a
King: and Heathen by naturall lyght, ſpeake to the ſame
purpoſe: both by diuinitie & humanitie,All the notes of a king De
                     •
                  . 17 are 
                     •
                  ounde in Sem. the office is of an
heauenly force. Theſe properties God requireth to be in a
King. A king commendable to the faythfull Deut. 17, 15.
ſhoulde be of their brethren, not ſeeking the fauour of
Chams land, not a louer of many horfes, nor many wyues,
nor much golde, nor proude harted among his breathren:
but a keeper of the 
                  ••
               w, to prolong his dayes. Of this, Sem
before the Law was a pattern: beyng not of Leuy Heb.
                7.

but anceſtor to Leuy, as to all the ſonnes of Heber, Gen.
                10.
and the ſtocke of Iſraels branches: and for kinred in Abraham,
agaynſt his kiured in blam, he woulde be glad of a
victorie. He knew that Cham was curſed: and being a
Prophet, myght foreſee through Gods ſpirite Pharaohs
dealyng, and woulde hate curſed Cham, with his race.
As touching many Horſes, that age yet was not much in
that kinde: neyther is there the name of an Horſe ſpoken
of before Ioſephs tyme. Gen. 46, 17. But for the ſame in
force, I meane for the quietnes of the mynde reſting in
God, who then ſhoulde be ſo ſetled as Sem, whom ſo great
experience of deliuerances had taught? How for the other
poynt, of Wiues, he had but one, Gen. 6. and knowyng beſt
how the beſt byued from the beginnyng, would ſo continue.
Now for Golde, yf he had loued it, he myght haue choſen
the lande of Chauilah:
               Gen. 1. but that he did not choſe, as the
name ſheweth: tearmed not from him, but from the ſonne
of Chuſh and Chams houſe. That he was a keeper of the
Law there is no doubt. For this is the worke of God, to
beleeue in him whom the Father woulde ſende: who was
promiſed to come of him. Gen. 9. And God was not aſhamed
to be called his God: for he had prepared him a ſonne
after the fleſhe, who after the ſpirite of holynes, is the ſonne
of God: and God to be bleſſed for euer. Rom. 9. and the fayth
in this ſonne, was the very ende of the Law: wherein doubtles
Sem was a notable ringleader. As touching long lyfe,
none euer was comparable to him for ſight of poſteritie:
he onely ſame an eleuenth deſcent in the faythfull lyne:
whereas of all others in the faythfull lyne, n
                  ••
               e ſawe ten:
though Arphaxad ſaw faythles Iſmael, in the tenth. Thus
for the holy deſcription of a King before the Law, his ſtate
myght be ſome forme to a Law. The Heathen, that had no
more written Lawe then Sem had, by the Lawe written in
their ha
                  •
               tes agree in the worthynes of a Kinges office.
Xenophon ſayth well, that a good Ruler differeth nothyng

from a good Father. Now Sem,
               Semis fatherly gouernment beſt deſerued the name of a King: & might be ſome great reſtraint to his neare poſterity a great tyme, from working in Babylon. who was not to
be ruled, but to rule amongſt his ofſpring, he acquainted
with the fatherly gouernement that was before the Flood,
woulde beſt practiſe that. And we ſee. Gen. 10. where the
Families be counted that bad tongues ſkattered, by the rebellious
pride for buyldyng the Towre: that his families
in that curſſe were not halfe ſo many, before the ſixt age in
Ioktanes
               Ioktanes houſe deſpiſing Hebers forewarnyng was puniſhed with more tongues then any familie, and diſceauered fartheſt from Salem
                     •
                  by deſpiſing Sems bleſſing. thirteene ſonnes: as Chams ſonnes were in the
th
                  •
               rde poſteritie puniſhed with parted & diuers languages.
He that wyll may there marke, and count the houſes of
ſpe
                  •
               che altered, and he ſhall finde it ſo. Whereb we may
gather, that ſundry families of Arphaxad, Selah, and Peleg
continued in Adams or Hebers tongue. And doubtles
hereto the fatherly gouernement of Sem was a great helpe.
And as Ioktanes ſonnes dwellinges are fartheſt now from
Ieruſalem, as by Heathen writers we may ſee, by ſuch as
geue teſtimony to Moſes, whom they knewe not: But
Arams chyldren neare Ieruſalem had better ſucceſſe: So
this in myne opinion, may very well be attributed vnto the
happy neighbourhood of the good and fatherly Emperour
Sem. And as Grandfathers are moſt tender, ſo he the
greateſt Grandfather muſt needes excell in fatherly aflection
and ancientie, to cary away the generall name of a
King, as proper to him ſelfe: more worthyly then Greekes
               As to Greekes the Poet is Homer, and the Oratour Demoſthenes: ſo to Diuines, the iuſt King ſhould be Sem.
by the common name of Poet, meane Homer particulerly:
or meane Demoſthenes, by the tearme of Oratour. Moreouer yf a king be wel defined,Plato in definit. to be One ruling according
to Lawes vncontrollable: and agayne diſtinguiſhed from
a Tyrant,Plato in Politico. by rulyng men willingly ſubiect, where a Tyrant
ruleth men agaynſt theyr wyll: Sem muſt needes be
ſupreame in theſe properties. We ſee by his obedience in
Noahs houſe, procuring an eternall bleſſing, that he would
be fitteſt to rule when tyme ſhoulde come. For as none can
well rule, but he that can wel obey: ſo he that beſt can obey,
can beſt rule. But Sems obedience in willing care for his

Father was the beſt, amongſt his breathren: wherefore
lykewiſe Sem ſhoulde be the fitteſt ruler, to care as a father
for his ſubiectes. Alſo moſt willingly woulde men ſuffer
ſuch an one (yf any) to be vncontrolled, that ſame ſo many
yeeres.Pla
                     •
                  . 1. Pol. Tull. de ſenect. As men learne the way of one that hath gon it before:
ſo they that will learne, moſt willingly learne of the
aged, how quietly to tread the way of their lyfe, to come to
olde age: and ſooneſt ſuffer experience to be farre from
checke. It was not ſo in Nemrod: For he ſtarting vp from
the youngeſt houſe, to be ſo great a Tyrant, as God from
heauen ſhould ope
                  •
               ly looke to, did not long thriue nor liue.
For in Sems lyfe Cedarlaomer being the king of Elam,
had Amraphel the king of Synear as his Vaſſal: yea whyle
Sem was yet alyue, and deubtles of continuance in kingdome.
Wherefore by the generall name of a King, whom
then but Sem coulde he meane? One ornament of Kinges
may not here be omitted, which Sems ſtory doth ſhew, that
is,A kingdome ancienter then Tyranny. 
               The antiquitie of a Kingdome: that before tyranny
ſprang, it was. Now by expreſſed wordes ofBy Sems ſtory Scripture,
(that a political cauſe muſt chiefly bePolicy ſhould for open decrees ſeeke rather warrantes from expreſſe tearmes, then farre fetched collections. Rom. 13. looked vnto) vnleſſe
we make Sem to be Melchiſedek, we can not playnely
proue, that a King reigned before Nemrod. Wherefore the
honour of Kinges for the antiquitie of them, ſhoulde with
great delyght embrace him to be the firſt King, who had
iuſtice as a proprietie, and repreſented the firſt and laſt, the
ſonne of God. As the perſwading to obedience is goodly
before God, and profitable for men, ſo Sems kingdome is
the fitteſt for that: being ſhewed how ancient it is, contrary
to Nemrods confuſion: of which moſt properly the
Gyantes wordes for their common weale may be ſpoken:Silenus in Eurip. Cyel. Sems ſtory a ſtudy for kings. This lyfe
                     •
                  s called a way of Gods iudgement
                     •
                  s, Eſ. 26.
               Not any in any thing heareth any. Verily it is a ſeemely
thyng for the Kinges of the earth to know the antiquity of
their owne ſtate: as an healthy thing to kiſſe the Sonne,
leaſt he be angry: to ſeeke in gouernement a vertuous and
quiet iudgement in this life or way of Gods iudgement,

               Nemrods dealyng was ſo hatefull in procuryng the buyldyng
of Babel, that not onely Moſes ſchollers, but alſo
H
                  •
               athen, coulde ſpeake of the Gyantes warres, fighting
agaynſt Heauen. It was to be wyſhed that the lyke care
had been to know the trueth, for the recorde of the firſt king.
Doubtles Homer diuinely touched the marke, and clam
hygh to the gyft of a Kingdome from God. For Il. Beta,
thus ſpeaketh Vlyſſes appeaſing the tumultes of the Greeke
ſtate:

                  A ruling by many is not good: let there be but One ruler,
                  One king, to whom the Sonne ofSo I fauourably tranſlate Homer. eternitie manifolde in wiſedome
                  Gaue Scepter and Lawes to rule by them.
               
This Homers ſaying is a diuine ſaying: the prophaneſſe of
one tearme in his language being taken to a better ſenſe:
as S. Paul citeth Aratus, turnyng his Iupiter from a prophane
religion, to the authour of thoſe workes in trueth,
which Aratus ſpake of: who warranteth me to do the lyke,
with this Poets wordes. Now the Heathen Poet not being
able to aſcende aboue Iapheths tymes, nor the Flood:
and yet making a King the moſt ancient ſtate, maketh
Kinges ancienter then Tyrantes, and to receiue the gouernement
from God. Which opinion woulde ſooneſt
agree with Sems caſe: pronounced ſuch an one, as from
whoſe tentes Iapheth ſhould fetch his comfort of religion.
If Homer by playne wit myght ſee ſo much, and yf Fables
condemne Gyantes vnloyalty: Chriſtians helped by ſtory,
ſhoulde not pleade vncertainty, ſpecially hauing ſo many
Diuines of all ſortes to warrant them, Plat
                     •
                  
                in his ſoph
                  •
               
               ſter,
called Sopheſters fightSo 
                     •
                  ome amongſt vs, otherwiſe learned and profitable men, haue in Pulpit condemned ſuch as folowe herein the ancient opinion, & moſt common. 
               gigantomachian Gyanteswarre.
Pitiful it is, that by miſtaking the Apoſtles wordes,
ſuch fightes haue been by Melchiſedekians, Hierax, and ſuch:
yea and by men otherwyſe of rare commendation, by obſcuring
the ſtory of a man, made ſuch a ſtay in the firſt diſcorde
after the Flood: to whom ſtyll there myght be an
open recourſe, for ſuch as woulde repent of fallyng away

from Chriſt. And thus much touching the terme King in
royaltie, appropriated vnto Sem.
            
            For the next attribute of IVSTICE, it is a nayle faſtened
in a ſure place, and a certaine witnes. That in Iuſtice
euery vertue is conteyned, euen by the Heathen language,
Theoginis the Poet cited of Ariſtotle teacheth vs. Doubtles
by Iuſtice the holy worde, conteyneth all partes and parcels
of vertue: For, that which geueth life, hath perfection
of vertue. And it is written in great letters, that one runnyng
by may it reade, That IVST SHAL
LIVE. Ab. 2. Rom.
                1. Notwithſtanding we muſt with
all the Lawe, Prophetes, and Apoſtles, vnderſtande that
this iuſtice is not found by workes, but moueth vs to fayth
from God: and fayth aryſeth by hearyng the worde. Alſo
the ſame Iuſtice beareth fruite before men: So that in
Melchiſedek we muſt conſider fayth gotten by hearyng:
and a lyfe commendable, euen to the tongues of Chanaan.
Now yf we affyrme no more then the open ſpech hath in
any Scripture for that tyme, none but Sem can be founde
then alyue, of whom the Scripture pronounceth particulerly
that he is bleſſed of his God: andPſalm 32. Rom. 4. therefore hath his
ſinne forgeuen, his iniquity couered, and his mouth made
without guyle. Doubtles there were many good men:
but as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to the bare deſcription for his
beginnyng of dayes, or ende of lyfe, that he had none: ſo
we in lyke ſort may ſay, that he onely in recorde was iuſt:
and iuſt not onely in humane iudgement, but iuſt in fayth
before God, reſembling in office the Sonne of God: who
after the fleſhe, ſhoulde come of him. Of thoſe which had
their tongues confounded, the wordes of the diuine king
may doubtles in moſt exact proprietie be ſpoken: As Siluer
purified in an earthen veſſell, and purged ſeuen tymes.
Conferre with Moſes Gen. 12, 1. Theſe wordes: Nabal (the

                  •
               oole) ſayth in his hart, there is no God: they worke corruption
and lothſomnes: there is not one that doth good.

The Lord looked downe from heauen vpon the ſonnes
of Adam: euery one turned away.
               Rom. 3. This is ſpoken to them
that were vnder the Law: but as there be degrees in ſinnes,
ſo moſt fi
                  •
               ly in manifeſt ſtory it falleth vpon the buylders
of confuſion in Sinear: whom the earth ſhoke into ſundry
quarters. And in all the Scripture we reade not of any
ſince Babel bredde bablyng languages, called to the fayth,
but men acquainted with Abrahams houſe, with him ſelfe,
or Iſaaks lyne, or the Chyldren of the Eaſt, the ſonnes of
Keturah. And whereas S. Paul Act.
                17. ſayth,S. Paul would not holde one of a faythles family to become Melchiſedek. that God
paſſed ouer the times of ignorance: and in his time biddeth
euery man euery where repent: He cloſeth in ignorance
all Families once fallen away, but ſuch as were bleſſed in
the bleſſing of Abraham. So the learned Hebrewes vnderſtande
Moſes: and I doubt not but ſo S. Paul meant. To
Moſes he looked. Yf we holde any Family vncalled in the
Scripture, to recouer fayth, S. Paul wyll not commende
vs:Rom. 11. in whom fayth commeth by hearyng: Rom.
                11. and we
may not minde any thyng,
               1. Cor. 4. aboue a warrant written:
1. Cor. 4. And as he bade men iudge what he ſayd,1. Cor. 10. and would
not be a lorde ouer their fayth: ſo all that he teacheth,2. Cor. 1. may
be prooued by the Olde teſtament:Act. 26. neyther may we drawe
hym into any other meanyng.The Apoſtles bring not new reuelations for olde ſtories, but diuinely expound the ſtoryes agreed vpon. Chanaanites are farre from Melchiſedeks iuſtice. As for the iuſtice of Chananites,
and their behauiour, the lawes in Moſes are faythfull
witneſſes. For where decrees are made agaynſt moſt
loathſome fylthineſſe, this concluſion doth ſhut vp all:
Ye ſhall not do any of theſe abominations: For all theſe
abominations do the men of the lande which is before
you: and it is defiled, and it vomiteth out the nation
which is before you Leui. 18▪
                27. Though their ſinnes were
not in all ſo ripe in Abrahams tyme, yet they were ſo rife,
that their Lande was geuen to Abraham from them: and
in ſome ſo rife and ripe were they, that they ſerued Elam
for twelue yeeres chaſtiſement: and vnpenitent, at the laſt
were by fyre from heauen, made an enſample of fyre in hell.

And this ſtory in Chanaan, fell not out without a prophecy.Prophecies & ſtories ſhoulde be tryed togeather.
For by Noahs mouth Cham was curſed vnto Chanaan.
Now yf Chanaans hiſtory of curſſe fell not out without a
prophecy, why ſhoulde we agaynſt a prophecy of Chanaan
curſed, beleeue that a King came of him goodlyer then
Abraham, or any King in all the Scripture, with a ſtory
without blemyſhe?Gen. 23, 10. 
               Abraham was a ‡ Prince of God, yet
Hagarenes to this day are his ſtayne. Moſes was aMoſes a king King,
and faythful with God: yet ſo ſinned, as to come ſhort of the
Land.Gen. 36. 30. 
               Num 20. The Kinges properly tearmed kinges,Deut. 33. 5.
ſoone eyther altered houſes, or needed new annoyntyng,
vpon troubles in their ſtate.What kinges in Iudah were annoynted. 
               Saul of Bemamin annoynted,
within two yeeres loſt Gods fauour. Dauid annoynted of
Iudah, in his life time, and by his life, ſaw his ſonnes ſtriue:
and Salomon was fayne to be annoynted, becauſe of Adoniahs
contention. Likewyſe Ioas for Athaliah, and Ioachas
for Ioakim: ſo was the houſe ſhaken: and Ioſias who excelled
al, and is called the annoynted of Iehouah, (though viſibly
he was not annoynted:) yet miſt once to loſſe of life,Lam. 4. in Reſh. &
his ſonnes ouerthrew all.2. Chr. 35. 22. To be ſhort, Dauid tolde that his
houſe woulde not be vpryght with God:2. Sam. 23. 5. And yf Dauides
houſe coulde not be, which had Moſes to direct them, and
Prophetes to warne them: ſhoulde we thinke that Chanaan
coulde yeelde ſuch a King? let Eſay iudge. Thus he ſpeaketh
vpon Abrahams victory:Chanaanite kinges by the terrour vpon Abrahams victory, fel further to Idolatrie. Eſa. 41. There againe S. Ierom maketh Sem Melchiſedek, by Hebrewes. 
               VVhom God rayſed from
the eaſt, callyng him in iuſtice after his foote, he gaue nations
before him, and made him ouercome kinges: He
made them like duſt by his ſworde, lyke toſſed ſtubble
by his bow. He purſued them: he paſſed in peace, by a
way which with his feete he neuer had gone. Now the
countreis ſawe and were afrayde: Carpenders, Smythes,
Founders, wrought for them goddes to helpe them.
So farre were thoſe countreys from hauing any King of
true religion. And ſhoulde we deeme any of their broode
greater then Abraham, the friende of God: the high father,

the heyre of the worlde? Yf Chanaan had had a iuſt King of
their race, his ſubiectes woulde ſome of them haue folowed
him. But no ſuch goodnes may be affyrmed of them: therefore
neither of a King in their line. Sickerly they had ben
the happieſt in the worlde then, yf they had ſuch a King:
but they were openly curſed: that farre from their fathers
or mothers, muſt that Kinges lineage be holden. Long after
the death of Melchiſedek, his fame of Juſtice was great
with men that had denyed the power of it. For the King of
Ieruſalem was called Adom-Sedek: but we may be ſure
that he was not of Melchiſedeks poſteritie. For ſome memorie
& monument woulde haue continued of his fayth, in
him or in his neighbours ſomewhere:Neyther Adoniſedek, nor his neighboures any whit, but in part of his name remembred Melchiſedek: as ſtrangers to his line▪ Ioſ. 10. As in Hoham king
of Hebron, or in Piream king of Iarmuth, or in Iaphia king
of Lachis, or in Debir king of Eglon: who ioyned with
him to fight againſt Gibeon for making peace with Ioſue.
But as Hoham king of Hebron was no kinne to Abraham,
no more was Adoni-Sedek to Melchiſedek: and as
they were vtterly eſtranged from the policie of the faythful,
and godles in the worlde, ſo their puniſhment is more from
God then from men. For the Lorde did caſt vpon them
great ſtones from heauen: and more dyed by the Hayle
ſtones, then Iſrael ſlew with the ſworde. If they had come
of a famous King that vnderſtoode the bleſſing of Abraham,
ſome ſparkles muſt needes haue remayned of the ancient
ſtory, and true religion. But as Moſes in Melchiſedeks
ſtory ſheweth of no familiaritie betwixt him and Chanaanites,
but in his office doth moſt certaynely diſtinguyſh
him from all of their curſed religion: ſo the Apoſtle doth
ſharpen vs to vnderſtande. Moſes aright. For in that he
tearmeth Melchiſedek to be without kinred, he doth warne
vs to gather by Moſes, that he is not a Chanaanite. Els as
Adoniſedek is to be holden a Chanaanite, by the place, and
all the other kinges of Chanaan: ſo ſhoulde Melchiſedek
be counted, yf ſure argumentes did not exempt him from

their nation. But by the attribute vnfallible the terme of
IVSTICE mentioned in the Name, whereof here much
might be wel ſpoken, the Apoſtle boldly affirmeth to Hebrewes,
& as he knew that they held, that he was not of Chanaans
nation, no more then of their religion. Now Iob was
not further from the minde of Eliphaz, Sophar, and Bildad,
in any poynt, then I am from theirs, who woulde not haue
vs to ſearche who the man is. Therein (I trow) the Apoſtle
woulde ſummon vs for ſleepers, when he expreſſely biddeth
vs to conſider how great he is: which his greatneſſe cannot
be fully knowen by the bare action of bleſſing Abraham.
And yf the Apoſtle had been thought ſo to meane, and by
ſuch a type for bleſſing onely, or yet for ſacrificehood, to require
Iewes to leaue off circumſicion, and all ceremonyes
peculiar to Abrahams ſeede, and to yeelde to the greatnes
of Chriſt by a figure of a knowne Chanaanite: which Chanaanites
caſe ſhoulde repreſent a worthyer caſe then that of
Abraham ye Patriarch: they would ſone haue ſtopped their
eares at ſuch a collectiō, ſeeing they did at S. Stephen, hauing
Gabriels countenance in his face, and Gabriels wordes in his
ſpech. For yf expreſſed wordes woulde not moue them to alter
Moſes, much leſſe would a bare collection. The Scripture
foreſeeyng their weakenes, woulde auoyde all argumentes
weake amongſt them. We ſhould take ye like heede.
The families that are in the booke of Iob,
               Melchiſedeks kinred was alſo Abrahams, and they onely kept in diuers places true religion, or ſome memory of it. and in the lande
of Arabia, as Eliphas of Eſau, Bildad of Suach of Ketura,
wyfe to Abraham, Iob their brother, doubtles of Abraham,
(though the olde Greekes bring him rather of Eſau, then as
more certayne it is of Ketura, and the ſonnes of the eaſt:)
theſe with Elihu the ſonne of Baracheel the Buzite of Nachor,
all kept religion in hygh degree of knowledge: and
name God El, and Elohim: once Iob doth name Iehouah
not in diſputation:Iob. Ch. 1. 21. thriſe. as doth he that wrote the booke, in the
preface and in the concluſion. As all theſe kept Religion
vntyll Moſes tyme, ſo woulde ſome haue done in Melchiſedeks
               
houſe in Chanaan, yf he had not been anceſtor to
Abraham and to theſe men, but ſome freſh Chanaanite excelling
all kinges that euer were in glory of religion and
iuſtice in gouernement. Now whereas Elihu is called a
Buzite but of Aram: of whether family he be, or be of both,Buz commeth of Nachor. Alſo one Aram Gen. 22, 21. Elihu may take part of the firſt Aram the ſon of Sem. Gen. 10. Seth named amongſt Madianites.
it maketh nothing agaynſt me, but rather with me, that
Arams houſe ſhoulde keepe monumentes of Religion.
Balaam a falſe Prophet, yet a Prophet, confirmeth that.
His example is very fit for this my purpoſe, to ſhewe how
religion once kindled in the myddeſt of blindnes, wyl leaue
ſome lyght, who ſpeaking to Madianites nameth olde Seth
as famous with them. So yf ſuch a iuſt king had been of
Chanaans ſeede, ſome remnant would haue cōtinued of the
houſe. But when olde Melchiſedek or Sem vnknowne, was
dead, then the good men of his houſholde diſſoluing family,
went away to ſome family, as of Aram, Buz, Vz, &c.
when Chanaanites had mightely encreaſed and preuayled
in the lande: who in Abrahams tyme ſo went on that with
the Chanaanite, alſo Kenite, Kenezite, Kadmonite, Perizite,
and Rephaim, grewe on ſo, that Abraham and Lot
coulde not haue in one place lande enough for both theyr
Flockes. By ſeuenty yeeres more, & Melchiſedeks death,
they woulde more multiply: and more vſing the ſoyle for
them ſelues, leſſe woulde they ſuffer Melchiſedeks houſe-holde
to lyue amongſt them. And thus much for the terme
Iuſtice, conteyned in Sedek, part of the Name Melchi-Sedek,
whereunto alſo I drew Religion as a chiefe ſpice vnder
Juſtice. Now for the place SALEM: that helpeth not
a lytle to know who the perſon is.
            The worde SALEM betokeneth Peace,Of the place Salem. and ſo the holy
Ghoſt noteth the power of the worde. Heb. 7. Now it was
not a ſhort continuance of peace that could make a famous
name of peace: wherefore long before Abrahams tyme it
ſhoulde ſeeme to haue had quietnes. But it wyll not ſoone
agree with likelyhood, that curſed Chanaans brood ſhoulde

excell all in that bleſſing.Phil. 4, 7. For the knowledge and loue of
Chriſt onely gardeth men in a continuall peace: which the
buylders of Babel hauing once deſpiſed, coulde neuer finde
in their families, vntyll Chriſt came: Onely ſome fewe
Proſelytes yeelded vnto Abrahams religion. As for the
wicked,Eſa. 57, 20. 
               Eſay maketh them as a Sea toſſed, which caſteth
vp myre and clay.Dan. 7. And moſt liuely doth Daniel deſcribe the
enemies of the Iewes (while they were the high Sainctes)
being as foure beaſtes commyng out of a Sea toſſed with
foure wyndes. Alſo, agaynſt the Heathen Chriſtians,Apo. 13. Rome damned from
out of the Sea ariſeth Romes power: as both Greekes and
olde Romiſtes confidently expound it. So for a long time,
more then the thyrde part of time ſince timeMore then 2000. yeeres of 5520. was, we haue
a determination for prophane kingdomes, how farre they
are from ſuch a ſtate as God woulde call peace. In all ages
we ſee the ſtate of peace and warre to be alyke. The olde
Serpent from Adam Gen.
                3. to Iohn Apo.
                12. executeth the
ſame hatred: that Salem properly can be no place but
where God geueth a ſpeciall bleſſing. Expounders at
Sichem buylt a Salem: and make itIohn Lucidus. 
               Melchiſedeks citie:
where Iacob becommeth ſalem (that is ſafe) not to Salem
or Peace-Towne. Gen 33, 18. The warres made in
Abrahams tyme, and the leagues of men there, teach vs to
examine this ſtory. When the kinges of Elam, Synear, Ellaſar,
and Goym, fought with the kinges of Sodom, Gomorra,
Adama, Seboim, and Bela, the king of Salem had
nothing to do with the warres, nor with the twelue yeeres
ſubiection, nor with their rebellion. As Abraham was in
league with Mamre, Eſhcol, and Aner: ſo much rather than
Melchiſedek woulde haue been, yf he had been of kinred.
When the foure kinges ſtroke Rephaim, Zuzim, Emim,
Chorim, and En-Miſpat, to the playne of Pharan, and the
Emori in Chazazon-Thamar: Woulde they haue ſuffered
Salem ſo neare to be in peace, but for ſome greater cauſe,
then woulde ſoone befall a Chanaanite to be in? Wherefore

the ſhort Hebrew Commentary, called An expoſition
of euery hard worde: in that place calleth Melchiſedek
Sem, induced not onely by aucthorities, but alſo by the matter.
Whereas Chanaan by the curſſe ſhoulde ſerue Sem,
               Chanaan was to ſerue Sem: for which ſeruice the open ſtory muſt be looked vnto.
and doubtles Sem woulde not omit the open vantage of
ſuperioritie: it may well be that for ſome encrochment
vpon the poſſeſſions of Sems families the firſt contention
did ariſe. Whereupon the king of Elam, as the eldeſt houſe
of Sem, ſhoulde reuenge his younger coſens quarell. That
Sem ſhoulde ſettle in Salem, it is by many reaſons moſt
lykely, forAs for Selahs and Hebers families. Epiph. in ancyroto pag. 516. ſome his poſteritie: and for his breathren.
Epiphanius ſo farre diſputeth of Sems ſonnes, in ſuch ſort
to haue been there, but weeried thence by Chanaanites encrochment,
that there was a ciuill right, and not onely the
ſole lordſhyp of God in geuing Chanaan to Abraham.
And R.
               In Neuath Salom, pag. 39. cityng their fathers. Vpon Dionyſ. Alex. pag. 130. 
               Abra, Ben Iſaak thinketh, that Iacob the dweller in
Tentes, learned religion from the tentes of Sem & Heber.
Now for Sems breathren: the Greekes beare memory of
Iapheth. Anchiale a daughter of Iapheth, is by Euſtathius
recorded to haue buylt the towne of that name. As for
Cham, the lande of Egypt is expreſſely named of him.
Now for the middle brother, the middle ſpace betwixt both,
is the fitteſt: The middle Seas moſt fitly ſeruing ſuch vſe
of their lyfe. And yf the firſt dwellinges by any partition
from Noah were appoynted: they geſſe well, which geſſe
at this partition, for the firſt dwelling to be from Noahs
appoyntment. Abraham Ben Perizol a Iew, in his Coſmographie
foloweth Chriſtians,The Iew foloweth and nameth Supplementū Chronichorum. not only for placyng of Sem
at Salem: or for Cham (of whoſe place none doubt:) But
alſo for Iapheth to be ſetled where we place Iapheths
ſonnes.1. Geor. We haue good reaſon: becauſe Virgil, Ouid, and Horace,
               1. Metam.
from Heſiodus and other ancient Greekes,
               1. Od. ſuch as Euſtathius
afterwards foloweth vpon Homer,
               1. Erg. making Iapheth
one of the Gyantes, in whoſe tyme they warred agaynſt
heauen: AlſoIn Cor, &c. 
               Lucian before him, making Iapheth the eldeſt

of all folke: becauſe theſe carry the memory of Iapheth,
we haue good reaſon to place him in thoſe countreys
whence we came. Horeouer Egyptians made a God of
Ammon: ſo Ch-am in Greeke may be written, where Cheth
is in many names (as in Eue for Cheue) vnpronounced, and
the Greeke termination obſerued. That religiō doth credite
ye narratiō. As that of our anceſtors: who were much better
taught by Iapheth to auoyde Idolatry, and to tearme hym
one that had been in the Gyantes age: and neuer to make a
God of him:Fables glaunce at a trueth. Plut. De Deo Soc. or as that of the Fable which telleth that Prometheus
the ſonne of Iapheth made men of the ſlyme of the
earth: which thing came from his ſpech, wherin he taught
how God made Adam, and Eue a pandora full of al goodly
vertues: that Heathen Charites, Pallas and Venus coulde
not be ſo well imagined of, as Eue was Goodly in deede.
It is vſuall in all kinde of writers, to attribute the worke
vnto the narration. So Chriſt was crucified before the
Galathians, not by the Souldiers of Cittim or Italy, that
with nayles and ſpeare wrought the foreſpoken tyranny:
but by the tongue of the Diſciples. So Prometheus tongue
made men. And yf we from fables are called ſomewhat to a
trueth for our ancetour: ſhall not a more certayne recorde
for the place of Sem, fit for the ſituation, fit for religon,
helde ſo continually of his poſteritie, moue vs to folowe
ancient plainnes? Or coulde there be any reaſon why Melchiſedeks
ſtory ſhoulde be hid vntyll the Apoſtles tyme:
to haue an other meanyng afterwardes, then euer it had
before: that the Apoſtles ſhoulde not be able to teach the
olde ſayth, but by a new meaning in the ſtory, which Iewes
neuer did, neuer wyll lyke of. The Apoſtles woulde haue
no ſuch reuerence geuen to their wordes, as to bryng them
to a meaning vnheard of by the Apoſtles nation. Furthermore,
yf Mount Sion be ſo fayre in ſituation, and the glory
of all the earth: where Iſaak was offered, where Salomons
care buylt the firſt Temple, where Cyrus decree buylt the

ſeconde Temple, where Chriſt the true Temple powred
out the waters of lyfe: ſhoulde we thinke that Sem being a
Prophet,Eſay. 2. woulde not enquire from what place the Lawe
and the worde of Iehouah ſhould come.Mich. 5. Nay it is expreſſely
manifeſted and obſerued by the very Iewes, that the place
whence the Greekes ſhoulde learne Religion was Sems
tentes of olde tyme, as I haue touched before, their owne
wordes from a threefolde aucthoritie. And this their obſeruation
is good to helpe them. For as the bleſſing was performed
before Salem was aboliſhed, and the worde of the
Lord did not fayle: ſo they and we were to looke vnto the
curſſe. Moſes telleth, that vpon denying the Lord, the
Lande ſhoulde haue an eternall deſolation. Gabriel telleth
their particuler denyance, in killing of Chriſt, not eſteeming
of the couenant blood, wherewith we are ſanctified.
Our Lord tolde, that by the abomination of deſolation,The Romans are tearmed abominable, Dan. 9, 25. Mat. 24. conferde with Iohn. 11. and as bad for their laſt times. Apo. 17. the laſt verſe.
(Math. 24.) an hoſt beſieging (Luk. 22.) Ieruſalem ſhould be
deſtroyed, and continually abyde deſolate: whyle the Gentiles
calling continued. Great errour hath been herein
committed, by not marking the force of Noahs wordes:
purſued by Moſes, Gabriel, the Lord, and full euent: and
the glorious erecting of the Church, tearmed The heauenly
Ieruſalem, in ſteade of it. The Apoſtata Iulian to falſifie
our Lord his wordes, ſtirred faythles Iewes to repayre
Ieruſalem, being him ſelfe at great charges: but Chriſt
ſhewed his trueth. For the Moulde which thouſandes caried
on the day time, was on the nightTheodorite booke. 3, 20. Greg. Naz, againſt Iul. 2. pag. 301. remoued: lykewiſe
their Morter and their Playſter, wyndes, tempeſtes, and
ſtormes diſperſed. Their further madnes an Earthquake
terrified. Vpon many their buyldinges fallyng, quelled
them: and playne tokens of Chriſt, were agaynſt them.
The Apoſtata woulde neuer haue been ſo mad, yf he had
knowen how long Noahs graunt for Sems place, to heare
a prerogatiue did continue.Apo. 8. The Popes when they had fallen
as Starres from heauen,Apo. 9. and brought from the pit a

ſmoke to darken the Starres: euen when that Helbrande
was manifeſted to haue the throne of Satan, and all hisApo. 13.
power: then they woulde falſifie our Lorde his wordes,
and would recouer Ieruſalem, to ſet vp there a ſuperſtition.
They ſtyre warres for to recouer the low Ieruſalem: to
weaken Princes, that their Cleargy myght afterwardes
haue Emperours and Kinges at their commaundement.
So the force of the Weſt, was ſent to the Eaſt: and there
the foure quarters of the earth made greater warres for the
Citie which had been once beloued, then the Seleucide and
Ptolemei of olde tyme made: brynging thyther the force
of Gog and Magog: who alſo wrought and ſuffered greater
ſlaughter, then euer the worlde ſaw before or after, for
the holding of one place. And reaſon woulde, that men going
about to diſanull the wordes of our Lord, ſhould know
the price of their folly: Seeing they would helpe the Citie
that killed Chriſt, to repayre Ieruſalem where he was killed,
to proue the wordes of trueth vntrue: to buylde there,
whereupon Chriſt had pronounced in Daniel, and in the
Goſpell, a perpetuall deſolation. Our Lorde in wrath
agaynſt that place, remembred mercy towarde the ſonnes
of Abraham. For whereas this was and is amongſt the
Iewes a grounde of all their errour, that Moſes Lawes and
Ceremonies continue for
               Ramban in Halachoth leſode Thora. Cha. 9. and in their dayly Creede: called any Maamin: that is, I beleue. 
               euer vnchanged: and yet them
ſelues confeſſe, that whyle they be out of their Lande, their
Law can not haue his practiſe: and that they are bounde
to affyrmatiue commaundementes, only in thynges about
their body, as Phylacteries,
               In N. Salom pag. 3. out of Ramban: there Mezuzothdoth meane writing vpon poſtes this: Iehouah our God Ieho
                  
                     •
                  ah is one. and poſt-writinges: The Lord
in Moſes, Deut.
                28. and in the Goſpell, Math. 23. leauyng
an unchangeable decree for a perpetuall deſolation, doth
playnely tell them: that Sems tentes hauing receyued Iapheth
into the ſame dwelling, muſt be enlarged on the
right and on the left hande: that they may dwell in deſolate
Cities ouer all the worlde, and buylde a larger Ieruſalem
then that where Sem dwelt. Wherefore it is a great

               
                  •
               mperfection in vs, that in ſo weighty a cauſe Chriſtians
ſhoulde be founde vnſkilfull: vnable to expreſſe the open
prophecies, for the open place, and continuance of Sems
Citie: and alſo for the perpetuall Deſolation, and the vſe
of that Prophecy. If for the fyrſt poynt we be founde ignoraunt,
where Sems tentes were: we ſhall neuer eleerely
conclude agaynſt them, when Sems tentes loſe their glory.
Through our foolyſh deuotion towardes Ieruſalem, in that
Pilgrimages be continued thyther: and we do not openly
profe
                  ••
               e that place a burden of impietie, ouerſlowen with
an eternal Deſolation: Ramban a Iew, writing vpon Leu. 26.
ſheweth him ſelfe ſtroken with blindnſſe and aſtonyſhment
of hart. For he ſayth, that God wyll not ſuffer Chanaan to
be repleniſhed with Heathen: becauſe God doth (forſoth)
reſerue it for Iſra
                        •
                     l to returne thyther. Becauſe theſe
poore ſoules are not mad enough of them ſelues, Popyſhe
ſuperſtition wyſhe pricking them forwarde: which as it
is bad, not limityng the ende and tearme of Sems houſe: ſo
let vs not be founde vncertayne for the firſt places of it.
Concernyng Mount Sion, how ancient the dwelling of
the holy Fathers haue been there, the ſame is ſpoken of
Hebrew doctors, that the old Latines haue deliuered vnto vs.
Rabbi Moſes Ben Maimon ſaythBooke. 6. Halachoth Beth-habbechira. cha. 2.: It is a tradition holden of
all handes, that the place where Dauid and Salomon buylt
the Temple in the floore of Arauna, the ſame is the place
where Abraham buylt the Alter, and bounde Iſaak vpon
it: and the ſame is the place where Noah buylt, when he
came out of the Arke: and there was the Alter where
Kain and Abel offered: where alſo the firſt Adam offered,
ſoone after that he was created. Then if this be holden
true, the ſeconde ADAM fi
                  •
               liſhed his courſe, where the
firſt Adam began his. By this we may vnderſtande, that
the Apoſtle woulde not hope to perſwade the Iewes of any
to dwell at Salem but Sem in thoſe dayes: ſeeyng this was
their vniuerſall opinion, and ſo fit for helpe of memory for
the ſtory. And this much for the place Salem.
            
            
               
Moſt certayne of all notes poynting at Sem,
               Sem is the Sacrificer. is the Sacrificehood:
which though I haue touched already tymes,
one, two, three, yea and the fourth (as Plato phrazeth in
Timoeo.) I muſt ſomewhat yet handle it a new: and ioyntly
with it the continuance, without beginnyng of dayes, or
ende of lyfe. As the Sonne of God tooke not of hym ſelfe
the function of Sacrificer, but was called by him who ſaid,
Thou art a Sacrificer for euer, after the order of Melchiſedek:
               
So neyther woulde Moſes haue vs to thynke that
Melchiſedek had not a caller, or had an obſcure callyng:
But this open callyng and warranted in ſtory, and the
higheſt that wordes coulde expreſſe, was faſtened by Noah
vpon Sem: wherefore it muſt needes be, that he woulde
holde it, and not yeelde his honour vnto any other. The
Lorde was not aſhamed to be called the God of Sem
                in his
lyfe tyme, yea and in his young yeeres, in reſpect of his
whole age: Iapheth his elder brother being a Prophet, as
the Iewes rightly thinke, and perſwaded by God to preferre
Sems tentes. Now yf Iapheth were his inferiour, woulde
Moſes haue vs to thinke any other man his ſuperiour, to
repreſent a Sacrificehood of lyfe vndiſſolued? Neyther
Moſes nor the Apoſtle woulde euer wyſh any ſuch thought
to climme into our heades. And ſeeing the Mightie, the
moſt High, would be deſcribed by an adiunct of his ſeruant,
and after his name the God of Sem: it cannot ſtande with
reaſon that than Sem being alyue, an other and not Sem
ſhould haue the higheſt place in worſhyp of the moſt High,
the God of Sem.
               The worde Shem, or Sem with additions, is Gods name in Heb
                     •
                  . A learned Hebrew woulde not deſpiſe
this reaſon alſo, that God in Moſes is called in Hebrew
the Shem (that is Name) the great and the terrible.Leu. 24, 11. And ſo
the Iewes to this day call God the Name.Deut. 28, 28. Wherefore the
man alſo called Name, or Shem, was fitteſt for this name
and honour, to be knowen by a generall name: Noah foreſeeing,
and in his name foretelling, how in tyme he ſhoulde
not be named but by a generall name IVST-King,
               
ſacrificer to the great & tirrible Name. Sem the Father of
our Lord, Sem of whom yet lyuing God would be named
the God of Sem, Sem the Prophet, Sem who doubtles was
a religious ſacrificer, Sem the fyrſt King, Sem & Sem only
was then greater then Abraham the Patriarch, of whom
being dead, God is named, the God of Abraham:
                greater
then Abraham the Prophet, the buylder of Alters, the
ſacrificer of Iſaak, and the Prince of God: Sem in euery
degree is before him: But now we view Sacrificehood.
Abraham was the ſonne of an Idolatrer once: but none
of Sems fathers worſhypped ſtrange Goddes. Alſo his lyfe
being without recorde of blemiſhe, he was fitteſt to vſe the
higheſt office. The other is a moſt high honour, that he
had fathers in order in ſuch honour: yet his two breathren
matched him in that. But with godlynes to winne the
prerogatiue from his elder brother, to haue the faythfull
diſcent, vntyll his God came in the fleſhe: this was an vnſpeakeable
glory: as that all the worlde ſhould looke vnto
his Tentes. But as The VVorde comming in the fleſh,
               Iohn. 1.
               came vnto his owne, but his owne receyued hym not:
So Sem, whom Chanaan ſhoulde ſerue, was to Chanaan
vnknowen, who was his father, or his mother: when was
the beginning of his dayes, or the ende of his life. The men
of the worlde then without knowledge of God of the creation,
of the beginnyng of the continuing of man, coulde not
in their fables come neare the antiquitie of Sems byrth.
A lytle weigh their wayes.Sem elder then Heathen gods. Plat. in Epitaphio. D
                     •
                  onyſ. Alex. and Euſt. They who repleniſhed Attens
pleade, that there the earth did firſt yeelde vp Men. Wiſe
Socrates in his tyme was no wyſer then ſo to thinke. The
Riuers Ladon and Iaon in Moraea may well be thought
memorialles in name of Laud or Lud, and Iauan. Euſtathius
               
from Greekes, recordeth that there they ſayde men
fyrſt ſprang.In Euterpe. 
               Herodotus telleth a chyldyſh tale of Chyldren
that heard no voyce of men: who were kept ſo, that they
myght be marked what language they woulde ſpeake:

               Bek they firſt ſpake: (in Egypt it was done) and the king
learned that Bek in the Phrygian language was Bread:
And thereupon a concluſion was gathered, that the Phrygians
were the moſt ancient people. Seeing Englyſhmen
bake Bread, they myght as well make vs eldeſt. Trogus
Pompeius wrote of a contention betwixt Egyptians and Sythians
for ancienty full of babyſhneſſe. The Ethiopians of
Cuſh, in Diodorus Siculus, thought that all the earth beyng
couered once with water, the Sunne did fyrſt dry vp theyr
Countrey, and men out of the Mudde fyrſt bred there.
And in Arabia, Alilat is their God, as Herodotus recordeth:
he ſeemeth to be Chauila or Euila the ſonne of Cuſh. For
that cauſe I thynke the Septuagint tranſlated the name
Euilat is in LL. VV. the common copies, noted in Sixtus quintus edition. 1. Chr. 1 though in his text, and ſome others it be altered: belike by ſome that marueyled at the ſtrangenes of the matter. But as Ioinan is for Iauen, to ſh
                     •
                  we that the Iones came of them, ſo I doubt not but Euilat was for Euila for the lyke conſideration.
               Euilat, putting a, t. to the worde: that Grammer neyther
required, nor permitted. But they would teach the Heathen
of their forged Goddes. Phayt or Phut
               Iohn Lucidus. was holden to be
Phaeton, begotten by the Sunne: and as the hot Lybea
was an intemperate Zone, ſo they faine that he droue the
Charot of the Sunnes lampe out of courſe, Anubis in
Egypt of Anum or Anub, Chams nephew, was their God.
And commonly it was holden, that the earth bare Iapheth,
Cham, and the buylders againſt Heauen. Such was their
blyndnes. Moſes knowyng very well how the Gods of the
Heathen, and their moſt ancient monumentes of Riuers,
Mountaynes, Towers, Countreys, Goddes, and Fables,
(ſauing ſome few of Adam) ſkant matched Sems firſt yeres:
deſcribeth Sem (keeping his name cloſe) in ſuch ſort as
Chanaan vnderſtoode his caſe. For in him Melchiſedek
hath, as the Apoſtle doth teach vs to marke, no beginning
of dayes, nor ende of lyfe. How ſimply it is no wonder
for a man to be in Scripture, for the open phraſe without
father, without mother, without beginnyng of dayes, without
ende of lyfe. So are Pilate and Tiberius, Annas and
Cayphas, whoſePro. 10, 7. name doth rot, and theyEſa. 50, 11. lie in ſorrow:
And it is rather a baſenes then an honour ſimply to be ſo

recorded. But when a man well knowen, as a priuate man
is ſodenly in the ſtyle of the ſtory, ſet downe as a ſtranger,
full of royall maieſty, by a new name, vnknowen to them
that lyued about him, and to ſuch as read his ſtory: vnleſſe
it be ſome Angel, one of a thouſande, as Elihu tearmeth
godly Preachers, the caſe of ſuch a man is to be conſidered,
and is lyke to conteyne long ſpeech, and hard. Such is the
caſe of Sem. What Infidel wouldYf Moſes writing had not firſt made it common amongſt the faythfull. beleeue that Sem borne
before the Deluge, weakened a quarter of mans former
age, by it: yet by worſhypping EL ELION, kept a
Language originall, kept, almoſt only, true religion, ſawe
mens age agayne halfed, ſaw not three ages, as Neſtor in
Homer, but ten ages in the Male line: what infidell would
thinke that in the tenth age Sem ſhoulde ſeale the bleſſing
to Abraham? Moſes full of the moſt wyſe ſpirite, coulde
both mocke the mockers, and make the ſame wordes ſeene
to the Godly whyter then the Snowe, of any Vliſſes eloquence.
He doth not onely ſhew how much,Homer Il. 3. verſ. 222. or rather how
nothing the wicked vnderſtoode that then were alyue, or
the wicked would that ſhould reade his booke afterwardes:
but alſo moſt liuely teacheth the Godly the ſumme of the
Goſpell, in that the bleſſing of the bleſſed God of Sem, is in
Sems lyfe geued to Abraham: in whoſe Seede (not ſeedes,
but ſeede, as of one, who is CHRIST) all Families of
the earth ſhould be bleſſed. So the doctrine of lyfe euerlaſting
is opened, that Chriſt that ſeede of Abraham after the
fleſh, is the God of Sem after the ſpirite of ſanctification.
This was the counſell of the Apoſtle wryting to the Hebrewes,
to ſhew how the Sonne was made heyre of all: by
whom God made the worlde. Who in Eſa. 4. beyng
Zemach Iehouah to glory, a bright ſpring, and Iehouah that
waſheth away the vncleannes of the daughters of Sion:
               Heb. 1, 3. Zach. 3, 8. in the. 70. & Luk. 1, 78.
Being in Exod. the Angel that hath within him the name
of God: Being in Geneſis, Elohim, that by ſpeaking made
and vpholdeth all: Being Pſal. 110. the Lord of
                   Dauid,

ſitting on the right hande of God: and an eternall ſacrificer
after the order of Melciſedek: is honoured by the
Apoſtle, with moſt goodly ſpeches: as fayrer then the
ſonnes or Adam.
                   For he from thoſe places tearmeth him
the brightnes of glory, the Character or grauen forme of
Gods perſon: carying all by the worde of his power: by
him ſelfe a clenſer of our ſinnes, and a ſitter on the ryght
hande of God on high. How the Iewes coulde hardly be
called to an higher manifeſting of the Redeemer, then the
bare ſpeches to Abraham at the fyrſt ſight conteyned: and
were dull in hearyng, that God was in Chriſt, reconcilyng
the worlde vnto him ſelfe. Wherefore the Apoſtle by Melchiſedek,
would drawe them to the God of Sem, and to the
great myſterie of Religion, that God was manifeſted in the
fleſhe. Many others through all ages in their ſtories beare
a ſhadowe of thoſe thinges, which in Chriſt ſhould be more
notable. As Adam, in deriuing his caſe vpon the many:
that is, all:
               Rom. 5, 14. 
               Abel in innocent martirdome:Heb. 12, 24. 
               Enoch in aſcending:Gen. 5, 23.
               Noah in ſauing the worlde by waters:1. Pet. 3, 21. 
               Abraham
in large fatherhood:Heb. 11. 
               Iſaak in yeeldyng him ſelfe to a ſacrifice,Gen. 17, 5.
               Iacob in vigilant ſhepardy,Rom. 4, 17. 
               Ioſeph in ſauyng his breathren,Eſa. 9, 6.
in price of ſickles by Iudas,
               Gen. 31, 40. and his reſtraynt betweene
two,Rom. 8, 32. one ſaued,Num. 12, 7. the other periſhing:Heb. 3, 2. 
               Moſes in faythfulneſſe
ouer the houſe:Leu
                     •
                  t. 4. 
               Aron in ſacrificehood,Num. 13, 17. called the
Chriſt:Iudg. 16, 30. the ſonne of Nun in ſauing into that Reſt: altered
therefore in name from Oſeah to be called Ieſus:
               Eſay. 45, 1. 
               Samſon
in deſtroying many enimies by his owne death:Ezr. 1, 1. 
                     •
                  nd. 6, 3. 
               Dauid in
a ſtoute kingdome: Salomon in a peaceable: and I ſee
not why Cyrus may not alſo be ioyned for his office, though
his fayth be leſſe certayne: yet becauſe he ſet Iſrael free,
and woulde haue buylt the Temple on his charges, therein
he bare the forme of a deliuerer: As all theſe had foreſhadowes
of a body to come, performyng a better thyng anſwerable:
ſo well might a man looke that Sem the rareſt,
or onely for glorious phraſe of Bleſſing, ſhoulde not be left

in meaner degree. Therefore the matter in his ſtory doth
ring and roare, how in obſcuritie he is gloryous: who in
ſtyle, being knowen Sem, bleſſed openly from his bleſſed
God: recorded for all the time of his life, firſt in that kinde
vnrecorded, as touching dying, appoynted to that dwelling
place whence Nations ſhoulde learne Religion, deriued
vnto his tenth deſcent, finding a man ordeyned to the
ſucceſſion of bleſſing: Sodenly commeth on a ſtranger in
a famous name of a iuſt King, to make him vnknowne to
the blynde worlde: ſuch an one as none myght holde for
beginnyng of dayes, for ende of lyfe, or yet for father, mother,
or kinred, to be a Chanaanite: and to ſpeciall purpoſe
a Sacrificer without recorde of ende: to repreſent by ſequell
of matter offering it ſelfe, euen the ſonne of God, that
king of Iuſtice & Peace, without Father in his manhood,
without Mother in his Diuinitie,Iohn. 1. 10. and 11. without kinred for acceptation,
and yet for euer continuyng a Sacrificer. So
an hiſtory one and the ſame becommeth a blacke cloude to
Chanaanites, and cleere to ſuch as take both will and leaſure
to view the cloude that might conduct to folowe God.
            Vpon mention of Ageednes, I may ioyneWithout Sem, ſuccesſion of doctrine hath no record. Succeſſion.
Sem only of all lyuing with Abraham, is recorded to haue
ſeene the olde worlde. Beyonde recorde, we may affirme
no exceeding olde age. Noah was dead before Abraham
was borne. Sem might tell from two men, Lamech and
Methuſelah, who both lyued in Adams dayes, the ſtories
from the beginnyng vntyll his tyme by hearyng: and the
later by his owne ſight, of prophanneſſe, of religion, of
the wrath, of mercy. Such treaſure hid in Sems breſt, holdyng
the glory of God, woulde ſeeme more precious then
any wall of Iaſper or Chriſtall, to beholde the defence of
God cleere in the middeſt of the enemies. Iob woulde not
ſo much eſteeme of anyHeb. Ra
                     ••
                  oth, by the high colour holden to be Corall, as I geſſe from Orpheus, in couralio. 57. Corall orHeb. Gabiſh, in Orpheus I reade Chabazios, by notation it ſhould be like an hayle ſtone. In Greke alſo called Chalazias. Plin. booke. 3
                     •
                   Cha. 11. Chabaz, as Abraham
woulde of Sems authority to dryue away Serpentes, ſuch
as Nachor his brother, and Iſmael his ſoune were, deſpiſing

the wordes of the Bleſſing. By Sem, Abraham and Lot
myght inſtruct Iſaak, who by them myght be brought to
ſee Sem: that foure workemen, foure iuſt men, of whom
Heathen come and not Iſrael onely, meetyng at Salem,
myght begin the buyldyng of the high Ieruſalem, where in
time all their Families ſhould haue a glorious dwellyng.
They though then fewe woulde tell how their chyldren
ſhoulde be taught by Iehouah, when of them he toke fleſhe,
how they ſhoulde haue plentie of peace (or Salom) in the
high Salem, being ſetled in Iuſtice: and their teaching
then amongſt Heathen, was aprecious buylding, where
ſtones were layde with ornamentes: the foundation of
Saphir, the windowes of Emeraud, and their gates with
flamyng ſtones. I more willingly vſe theſe tearmes, by
imitation of Eſay. 54. wherein he telleth of the Heathens
callyng: For that the ſtate of vs now is very lyke theirs:
the partition wall, of circumciſion and Moſes ceremonies,
being ſo broken downe as yf it neuer had been buylt.
Moreouer the doctrine of Moſes delyuered in twelue Pretious
ſtones, wherein were grauen the names of the twelue
ſonnes of Iſrael, not onely to be in remembraunce before
God, but alſo to teach their chyldren to holde the precious
gyft of fayth, as their Fathers did: mooueth vs to conſider
that the lyke were worne not vpon, but within Sems breſt
before: who had lyued in the dayes of ſo many ſeuerall
fathers, and was a high Sacrificer, bearyng Vrim and
Thummim, the forme of holſome wordes, Fayth and Loue,
within his breſt. When Iſaak ſhoulde heare him teach of
Gods loue towardes the worlde, how he woulde geue his
onely Sonne for man: he ſhoulde be prepared before he
knew his owne caſe, to geue him ſelfe to God, at the commaundement
of his owne Father. And well might Sem
be faygned to haue two Onyx ſtones on his ſhoulders: the
one hauing this engrauement: The ſeede of the woman:
the other hauing this, Iehouah Elohe Sem. Theſe poyntes

be more precious then any Stone. For afterwardes by
theſe the white ſtone, with a name which none knoweth but
the receyuer, ſhalbe geuen to ſuch as fight for theſe two
Powſyes. When Sem ſhoulde teach Abraham how Chriſt
ſhoulde come to his owne, but his owne woulde not receyue
him:
               Iohn. 1. he myght ſee a ſtampe of that in Sem, who being
amongſt his owne, was not gloryous but to ſuch as
God drewe vnto him, deſpiſed and reiected for ſpeaking of
Religion.
            Now two thinges yet remayne to be handled: The one
a common ſaying of the Iewes: from the Babylonian Talmud,
which often afore I haue mentioned. Theother in
what ſpeciall meanyng the nation of the Iewes beareth
blame for dulnes of hearyng. Both which cleere the cauſe.
They ſay, from Elias houſe.Maſſecheth Sanadrin, Cha. Chelek. pa. 97. line, the laſt. 6000. yeres the worlde ſtands.
2000. To
                     •
                  u (or before the Law) 2000. in the Law. 2000.
in the dayes of Meſſias: which is by interpretation Chriſt.
By 
                  
                     •
                  ohu they meane a vacuity of ornament, in the rate of
commaundementes,Abraham had the Promyſe in 2083. Ieruſalē was deſtroyed at. 4000. How neare. 6000. the worlde ſhal ende, God only knoweth certaynely: men can but geſſe, by lyke reuolutions. borrowing the terme from Geneſis the
firſt Chapter, where the Earth is ſayd to be Tohu, that is,
voyde. Now by the Law they meane not that which commonly
men woulde thinke, Moſes law. For long after that
was geuen: but they meane the commaundement of Circumciſion,
or any thing that God commaunded Abraham.
The law of Fayth ſtandeth rather in a narration, then in
a forme of imperatiue ſpeech: which being tolde but in
Adams and Sems tyme, for common and open recorde, they
who knew not Chriſt, coulde neuer knowe whom Melchiſedek
coulde repreſent: and they who knew the preferment
of Sem, woulde ſoone knowe why he ſhoulde be lykened to
the ſonne of God. Sacrifices doubtles were commaunded:
but no expreſſe worde is written ſo, that men myght be for
               
                  •
               ed
more to the law of Fayth: which they that knewe not,
thought all a Tohu, or emptineſſe, vntyll Abraham, that
euen Sem in all his royaltie and office, coulde not ſhewe

them an eternall Redeemer. So for the other poynt, of
Dulnes in hearyng. The Lord woulde neuer blame the
Iewes Nation for ignoraunce in the Prophetes language,
open ſayinges,Tau. Reſh. Iod ad Gimel in Arithmetique make. 613. which number of letters they finde. Exo. 20. for the ſpech of the Lord in the Law, and in memory of that haue gathered the Commaū
                  dementes. 613. full blindly enough: omitting the article for Chriſte, holden in their beliefe: and appoynting no law for beliefe in him, which was the ende of the Law. as Therig (that they call the. 613. commaundementes)
nor for the tymes, wherein for all knottes
they yet haue the trueth, nor for the place whyther Chriſt
was to come, nor for the families recorded: who doubtles
at that day agreed with S. Matthew and S. Luke: though
they woulde neyther commende them, nor keepe a recorde
of theyr owne: they neuer durſt reſiſt them. For theſe
poyntes whereupon the Scripture to vs ſeemeth ſealed
with ſeauen ſeales, for want of dayly readyng, wherein
we ſhould be occupied: The Nation moſt cunnyng in theſe
poyntes, touchyng the open phraſe, ſhoulde not be blamed:
but for the cloſe lyfe ſkattered through all theſe ſayinges,
the Scripture blameth for dulneſſe of hearyng touchyng
Chriſt, for his perſon and his office. For the whole worlde
by loſſe of Millions, dayly finde this a great ſecrete: how
God was manifeſted in the fleſhe, was iuſtified in the
ſpirite, was ſeene of Angelles, was preached in the world,
was beleeued of nations, was taken vp in glory. The
Turkes, Iewes, and all other Infidelles, they heare this: but
they heare theſe poyntes dully. Though in the two thouſande
yeeres of Tohu, no expreſſed ſayinges for Religion,That the words of God, for fayth in Chriſt, ſhoulde be better marked, lytle els for 2000. yeeres is written.
to continue are written, but for theſe poyntes, of the Seede
that ſhoulde ouercome the Serpent: and of the bleſſed
God of Sem.
                By neglect of the firſt, came impietie in all
kindes, and thereupon the Flood. The floutyng of Sems
bleſſing buylt Babel, to make a Shem or Name: and that
bredde the ſhame of Languages. Before Abraham and
Moſes, this was a deepe poynt. And after in expreſſed
wordes, it is the ende of the Law. For Moſes Leu.
                26. deſcribing
perfect recompence of Iuſtice, ſpeaketh of plenty
in Corne, VVine, Peace, and ſuch: and of the placyng of
Gods Tabernacle amongſt vs: (which poyntes, Amoz. 9.

               S. Luk. 1. and Apo. 21▪ turne to Chriſt) and neuer enclyneth
towards any ſtory in men, for perfourming any ſuch thing:
but contrary, in the puniſhmentes for breaking. Moſes foretelleth
their ſtory, vntyll they are in Babylon. 70. yeeres,
and how they wyll confeſſe their ſinnes, and the ſinnes of
their Fathers: and telleth how God will remember his
Couenant with Iacob, Iſaak, and Abraham: and that he
brought them out of the land of Egypt. This doth Moſes
tell. Daniel ſheweth the perfourmance. He when the Captiuitie
was ended, confeſſeth his ſinne, and the ſinne of his
Fathers, and that euery curſſe written by Moſes had taken
effect from the iuſt God: and notwithſtandyng that God
would remember how he brought his people from Egypt.
Hereupon God doth worke for vs woonderfull thynges.
He ſendeth an Angel to Daniel to teach him vnderſtanding:
who did ſo, as he him ſelfe recordeth for more certayntie,
that we ſhoulde take his wordes in that meanyng
as he him ſelfe tooke them, and not be wyſer then Daniel.
He calleth the Prophet that gaue God holy prayſe of iuſtice
and trueh, Delight it ſelfe, Chamudoth in Hebrew, and telleth
that the worde came foorth at the beginnyng of his
prayer: (Now he prayed for returne to buylde Ieruſalem)
and from the outgoing of that worde, vnto Meſſias the
king moſt holy, brynging in Iuſtice eternal, to ende Sacrifice,
to ſeale viſion and Prophet. 490. yeeres exactly
were pared out: and thereupon Ieruſalem ſhoulde be deſtroyed.
This he tolde: but who did looke ſo farre to the
ende of the Law?
            As Moſes face did ſhyne to ſuch as coulde looke vpon it:
ſo doth his doctrine ſhyne to ſuch as purſue the tenour of it.
Yet none can come to the ende of it, nor remoue the coueryng
from their hart: but ſuch as the Father doth turne
and draw vnto the Sonne. After the Lord had long taught,
lytle coulde men looke into the perſon of Chriſte. They
thaught him to be Iohn Baptiſt, Elias, Ieremy, or one of

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
the Prophets, but could not know the King Holy of Holy:
therein they were ſtyll dull of hearyng. Neyther coulde
any of the Scribes and Phariſes aſſembled, tel how Chriſt
was both Lord and Sonne of Dauid.
                Let vs come to the
Apoſtles them ſelues, how ſkantly they knewe Chriſte:
Peter doth confeſſe, that he was Chriſt the Sonne of the
lyuing God: but the thunder of his power agaynſt Satan
by his death, that he did not vnderſtande. For when the
Lord ſayd: that he ſhoulde be killed, and ryſe agayne the
thyrde day, he was not now Symeon Bar Iona: a ryght hearer
of Ionas caſe: what ſhoulde be anſwereable to Ionas,
lying in the Whales belly there dayes and three nyghtes:
but ſayd, Chos ve ſhalom: in our phraſe, God forbid: being
a Satan, a ſtumbling blocke, not conceyuing the thynges
of God. Let vs conſider how dull we our ſelues are, for
the worde Rocke. That worde in the Prophetes diuinity,
and in the Apoſtles phraſe, and courſe of the demaunde of
Chriſt, importeth God. So the Septugint tranſlate the
terme ZVR, that is Rocke, by tearmeDeu. 32, 4. 15. 18. 30. 31. and 2. Sam. 22. 1. Cor. 10. and Pſal. 8. 19. 28. 31. 62. 71. 73. 78. 89. 92. 94. 95. 144. 
               Theos, God. And
this ſentence twiſe telleth vs that playnely: there is no
Zur, Rocke, but Iehouah. And S. Paul called Chriſt the
Rocke: and our Lord ſealeth vp the Diſciples anſwere,
how he him ſelfe is the moſt Holy, the Rocke: who wyll
performe viſion and Prophet, by whom alwayes came
forgeuenes of ſinnes. In this poy
                  •
               t the ſharpeſt edge wyll
ſoone turne aſide. The Romiſes do not onely there turne
to Peter the name neuer beſtowed but vpon God, but do the
lyke in Gen. 3. ſaying, She (not HE) ſhall bruiſe the head.
Though the maſculine gender be paſt all doubt in the Hebrew.
Theſe deepe ſayinges they mocked, before the
Flood, and at Babels worke. And when Chriſt graunted,
that he was the Sonne of God: they made that the occaſion
of his death. Moreouer when S. Stephen ſayd, That
Ieſus of Nazareth woulde deſtroy that place, and alter the
lawes that Moſes gaue: what had he then ſpoken more then

               Gabriel ſpake, That Chriſt woulde deſtroy Citie and
Sanctuarie: and finiſhe Sacrifice & Offering? And where
it is in Moſes ſayd, that his lawes ſhould continue Le Olam,
continually: It falleth out moſt fitly in this cauſe. For
Olam ſignifieth a Iubilee. Now Iubilees continued not beyonde
our Lord his death: but the laſt fell out in the ſame
yeere, that Holy yere, the acceptable time, when he brought
vs into our Reſt. For particuler declaration of that, an other
tyme muſt be taken, and for Moſes further meanyng, to be
opened. For ye preſent matter touching dulneſſe of hearing,
it was ſpoken doubtles of not vnderſtandyng Melchiſedek
repreſenting the Some of God: which repreſentation,
how woulde that Nation euer haue looked for in a Chanaanite,
whereas in Sem graunted by them to figuer Chriſt,
and in moſt manifeſt Scriptures, they woulde rather ſtop
their cares, then heare that poynt? Thus all that is ſpoken
of Melchiſedek, ſhineth in Sems cauſe: and it can not be,
that any other then alyue, ſhoulde be thought equall in the
kinde. Sem is the honour of Kinges, for antiquity, and
iuſtice: ended his dwelling at Salem, whence Religion
ſprang to our Fathers: was the worthieſt Sacrificer to
his God, was vnborne in the worlde now, vndead in the
memory of moſt that ſaw him bleſſe Abraham, undying in
deſcription of his age: beſides the maner of ſpech before
vſed, to the aſtonyſhment of men. Sem onely coulde tell
Abraham and Iſaak, the ſtoryes of Adam, from the mouth
of Lamech and his father Methuſelah: onely by the lewes
graunt agaynſt the Iewes can be brought, a keeper of the
worlde from Tobu, by his owne eares teſtimony, as knowing
the law of Fayth before Abraham. Sem onely had before
a promyſe, wherein the learned Iewes woulde be dull
of hearyng, and was meete to be lykened to the Sonne of
God in his caſe then. And neuer was any King more
ſtrengthened to a Kingdome by Warriers, then Sem is by
argumentes, to be Melchiſedek. This I had to ſpeake of

               Melchiſedek, ſtyred vp firſt to defence by ſpech of a Learned
brother, who taught the ſame, and of ſome was blamed.
Afterwardes I wrote in fewe lynes the effect of all this,
ſufficient (as I ſuppoſed) to ſtay the vnſtayed: and ſo I
founde, that in many it tooke place. One Learned man
otherwayes mynded, wrote what he thought good to an
other concluſion. His, and myne, I willingly commende
to the iudgement of the Godly: that the trueth may take
place to common agreement, in buyldyng the kingdome of
Iuſtice in Peace.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Hebrew Rabbines, or Rabbine workes, cited in this booke
for Sem or Melchiſedek: whoſe whole workes, from
Venice, or Francfurt, Studentes may haue.
            
               1. Aben Ezra.
               2. Abrabbaneel.
               3. Abraham Ben Iſaak in
Nauath Salom.
               4. Abraham Zakuto autor
Sepher Iuchaſim.
               5. Abraham Perizol.
               6. Baal Aruch.
               7. Baal Hatturim.
               8. Dauid Kimchi.
               9. Elias Mizrachi.
               10. Iſaak Ben Arama.
               11. Leui Ben Gerſon.
               12. Menachem vpon Moſes.
               
               13. Midras Bereſhith.
               14. Midras Tillin.
               15. Moſes ben Maymon, or
Rambam.
               16. Moſes ben Nachaman,
or Ramban.
               17. Peruſh col millah Kaſha:
that is, an expoſition vppon
euery hard worde.
               
               18. Salomob Iarchi.
               19. Seder Olam Rabbah.
               20. Symeon ben Iochai: he is
cited in the Babylonian
Talmud: but is farre elder
in Zakuto, in Sepher Iuchaſin:
as of S. Pauls age.
               
               21. Talmud Babyloniā, printed
at Baſil: and from
Sucha, Nedarin, Sanedrin.
               22. Tanchuma
                     •
                  .
            
            
         
      
   