
      
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable Rich. Archb. of Canterburie, H. B. wiſheth G.
            
               WHen Barow and Greenwood, R.H. were to be pardoned, if they would haue come to Church: they could finde no barr ſound but this: That none ſhould hold them of good religion, which beleeued that our Lords ſoule went to Hell. Archb. Wh. thought that the Creede was tranſlated in Engliſh, after the moſt learned Greeke: but the wicked tranſlation Engliſh differeth from the Greek: as doth deſcending in ſoules, from aſcending: and Heaven differs frō Hell. Archb. Wh. thought our Lord in ſoule deſcended: and into Hell. But Biſhopp Elmer knew the Greeke meant a going vp to heaven: and had ſaved Barow and Greenwood, ſhewing that by a friend to them: if a Chaplein a meſſenger, had as he promiſed, ſpoken to the partie. vpon new ſtirre, I opened the trueth: and for receiving a Letter from Maiſter Iames Melvin: the vnable in Divinitie, meant to plague in humanitie. But this blew good corne to you, by E. E. helpe, and became your making, and the death of him that preferred you. As you were making friendes, I wrote of our faith and King. For

the King you brent the booke, as having treaſon: that I called him the King of our language. I wil not denie my meaning: I meant to keepe you from bent to P
                     •
                  iamus happines: you & Bar. Abbas. After this, I write to the graue Father, Archb. Wh. a treatiſe that he was deceaved. He ſaw it, and ſent Maiſter Geffrey K. to me, to cōfeſſe errour Maiſter Rob. Beal told Q Eliz. that Archb. Wh. was deceaved: and, I think, Q E. bade Archb. Wh. to confeſſe errour. But witleſſe Bar. ſkopheth his yeelding, and D. Bilſons, as if he were an Ape, and not a body of reaſon, and ſkopheth the Sc. M. as having a minde to vndoe the ſoile that bredd ſo ſenſeles and ſo impudent a wight, and ſkopheth the Concent of Scripture: and ſkopheth the booke of Scripture concent: to graue in memorie howe vnlearned a wight hee is. To Archb. Wh. I write an epiſtle of D. Bilſon his yeelding, for the matter in ſtrife: but by feigning a iourney from Heaven to Hell by the Creed: to make this phāſie heard, our Chriſtian Religion, he was much deceaved. you brent theſe copies: and a ſecond Impreſſion for the King of our lāguage. Conſider how little you feared God and the King in ſo doing: And to teach how ſlender a Doctor you are in Divinitie, I advertiſe of corruptions in your handling of religion: and of betraying the Goſpel to Iewes, & at wordes you chafe: where your libels ſtyle is my warrant. Now I wiſhe you to be a Lucifer, and light giver: But not a Babylonian Lucifer, to exalt your ſelfe aboue the Goſpell, for our Lords paſſage hence: and I wiſhe you not to be a Bargulus Illyricus, to ceaſe vpon other mens good: and an Orthodox, not as Cotton exceter, to burne bookes defenſiue of our religion: and I ſend to your iudgement, the booke made againſt you to the King, if you iudge your ſelfe, the King needeth not

to be troubled. And I will burie all griefes, if you find ſome to anſwer the Iew, for the honour of all Chriſtendome: If you can not, your iudgement is heavie that threatned to hinder others. But take a right courſe, and all wilbe well. I haue no minde to ſtriue with you, but to leaue you to Gods iudgement, where I holde your bent not good. We ſhould heare that Saint Paul telleth: It is appointed for all men once to die: and then cometh iudgement. And our yeares tell vs, there is but a ſtepp betwixt vs and death: that wee ſhould looke ſhortly for death and iudgement: and not ſell our Birth-right in heauen, for a meſſe of pottage: but looke vnto the bleſſing which God hath layde vpp for all that loue his glorious appearance. AMEN.
            
         
      
   