
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Eccle. 38.
                           Altissimus creauit de terra medicinam, & vir prudens non abhorrebit illam.
                        
                        
                           ❧ BVLLEINS Bulwarke of Defence against all Sicknesse, Soarenesse, and VVoundes that doe dayly assaulte mankinde: Which Bulwarke is kept with Hilarius the Gardener, & Health the Phisicion, with the Chirurgian, to helpe the Wounded Souldiours. Gathered and practised from the most worthy learned, both olde and new: to the great comfort of Mankinde: by VVilliam Bullein, Doctor of Phisicke. 1562.
                        IMPRINTED At London by Thomas Marshe, dwellinge in Fleetestreate neare vnto Saincte Dunstanes Churh. 1579.
                        
                           Cicero. 1. Offic.
                           Eos quorū vita perspecta est in rebus honestis, & benè de Rep. sentientes obseruare & colere solemus.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Lord Henry Cary Baron of Hunsdon, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: William Bulleyn wisheth all health, and perfect felicity in Chryste.
                  
                     MAnkynde, whych is called of the Phylosopher, Microcosmos, Orbiculus, or a little World, hauing in it selfe, eyther Misery, Felicity, or a Meane: although it bee of the most beautifull Forme, and fayrest Shape, excelling all other lyuing Creatures vpon Earth: And also is rightly indued with goodly giftes of Nature, in whose Braine is fixed the Iewell called Reason, the Mother of Arte, and Science, by whom bee wrought, & Inuented marueylous thynges, whereby our eternall GOD is perceyued in vs his Creatures, more aboundantly, than in the hygh Lyghtes mooueable, and fixed in the Fyrmament of Heauen: whose naturall influences bee knowen vnto Mankynde. Euen so bee the vertues of euery Creature heere in Earth: as Beaste, Foule, Fyshe, Serpent, Trees, Plantes, Fruictes, Flower, Hearbe, Grasse, Gumme, Stone, and Metall. There is nothing so secret hidden, wythin the Mynerals of the Earth, or lurking so lowe vnder the Floudes of the Sea: but by meanes, and pollicy, they are brought to vse. Theyr Names, Qualities, and Natures are knowen vnto the witty Heade of Mankynde: to thys ende, to help Mankynde in the tyme of hys bodily infirmity. These hath GOD ordayned by his dyuine prouidence, that euery Creature sensible, and insensible, should serue hys best Creature, Mankynde.Luke. 1. To thys ende, that he should serue GOD in righteousnes, & holynesse, al the daies of hys lyfe, for these hys Gyftes. And the Philosopher sayth, in libro de Coelo, & Mundo: Deus, & Natura nihil frustra agunt: GOD, and Nature doth nothyng in vayne, but are euer working, and doing: he the pryncipall cause, and they hys effect. Yet for all these syngular Uertues, gieuen to Man: through the continuaunce of tyme, Calamities of thys World, Woundes in the Body, corruption of the Ayre, aboundaunce of Humours. &c. the same Mankynde doth decay, dye, and returne vnto the Dust, and become as though hee had neuer bin: although hee bee neuer so honorable, yea or poore, death doth make equality betwene them. Euery mans course is appoynted, they cannot prolong theyr tyme: notwythstanding,Iob. 14. GOD hath ordayned sundry Meanes, by hys Mynisters, to help Mankynde in the tyme of Sycknesse, to ease theyr paynes, and heale theyr Woundes. And I being a Chylde of the Common wealth, am bounde vnto my Mother, that is, the Lande in whych I am borne: to pleasure it, wyth any

good gyft, that it hath pleased GOD to bestow vpon mee: not fo thys ende, to instruct the learned, but to helpe the ignoraunt, that they may resort to thys little Bulwarcke, whych I doe Dedicate vnto your honorable Lordship. Where they shall not onely be defended in the same, from sickenesse, and Woundes: but also being wounded, through cruell Assaulters of thys Bulwarke, or Sicke, heere eftsoones they shall haue at hand, all maner of Cordials, and wholesome Salues. Whereby they shalbe the abler, to keepe thys Holde agaynst all bodyly euils: whych I doe call Soarenesse, and Sicknesse: for whose sakes, I haue builded this little Fort calling it my Bulwarke. Not being able to builde any bigger worke of defence agaynst Sicknesse, or euill Dyet: as that Man of worthy memory, Syr Thomas Eliot Knyght dyd, when he builded hys Castle of Health, a Booke very profitable. Would GOD, that all Men of Worshyp in theyr calling, were lykewyse disposed to theyr Countrey, as hee was, and many moe, whose names I doe commend vnto the Reader, wythin thys little Bulwarke. And although there wyll bee many peraduenture, both malicious, spightfull, and cankred of Mynde, that both wyth slaunder and disdayne, will lay theyr Battry, agaynst thys Fort: I shall be able euer to repulse them, through your Lordshippes good ayde. For I haue builded it very lowe, wanting neyther the strength of Ordynaunce, prouysion of Uictualles, nor the Pollycie of most worthy Captaynes, & good Souldeours: as Hippocrates, Galen, Dioscorides. &c. Nowe finally, I shall most humbly desyre your good Lordshyp, to take thys simple Booke, as an Argument of my good Zeale and Loue, that I bare vnto you, for your goodnesse towarde mee. For if I were otherwyse able, to gratify your Honor, according to my bounden Duety: I would not leaue it vndone, as knoweth GOD, who euer geue your Lordship continuaunce of Honour, and prosperous Health.
                  
                     From London. In Marche. 1562.
                        
                     
                     Your Lordshippes euer to commaunde: VVilliam Bulleyn.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE FRENDly Reader, VVillyam Bulleyn sendeth Salutacion.
                  
                     FOr as mutch good Reader, as foure yeares last past, I promysed (in a Booke of myne, called the Gouernment of health, whych I dedicated to a Knyghte of great worshyp in the North, called Syr Thomas, the Baron of Hilton) to set forth an other Booke of healthfull Medicines: Euen so, by the space of one yeare next after the same, I trauayled to performe my Promyse made, & so finished my Copy: whych Copy dyd perishe in Shipwracke, & so my Labour was lost. And not only my Labour, but also my Lyfe, by sundry malicious and deuilishe Inuentions, by, and through one William Hilton: in nature, Brother to the foresayd Baron of Hilton, but in Condicions, nothing lyke at all: for hee wanted hys gentlenesse, & good nature. Now, after that God had deliuered me from the great perill of thys Man, that is to say: conspiring of my giltles death, & hurtlesse lyfe, towards him and hys: Eftsoones this man attempted an other new displeasure agaynst me for debt: colouring hys Malice by a pretence of lawe. By which Action, finally I was imprysoned, me thought a long tyme (for there are but fewe Ghestes, that haue pleasure in sutch Innes.) And being thus in Pryson, me thought I had not onely conuenient tyme, but also a quiet Conscience, to trauel, in renuing my late Booke, or lost Copy, whych in deede, I am not able to finyshe, being preuented wyth so many Troubles, and Lets of my sayd Enemy, whose doings at large, I commit to sylence, least I should seeme to wryte, a Story or Tragedy, or els a description of hys folly, in the place of Phisicke: no lesse also can I, but declare some cause of my let, and why my Booke came not forth ere thys tyme. accordingly as I promysed. But blame mee not, good Reader, although I put hym in my Booke, whych would haue put mee from thys Lyfe. And thys Booke, whych I haue done, Gentle Reader, take it in good part, I pray you, for that is my desyre.
                  Fyrst, I haue made you a Booke of Simples, as Herbes, Fruictes. &c. For I had no small pleasure in the natures of them, being mooued of the Heathen men, so to do: whose names do, & euer shal remayne, among sutch as read of Simples. Galen cōmendeth vnto vs, ye loue & cunning ye 
                     Orpheus, Museus, Hesiodus, Homerus, & Rufus Ephesius had in Herbs. Who can forget Lysimachus, a worthy noble Capitayn to Alexander? who, whē he was woū
                     ded very deepe, found an herb which healed him, & called ye same herb, by his owne name: Artemisia a noble Queene, called Mugwort, after hir owne name. Helena found fyrst ye vertue of Enulacampana. Gentian was named by Gentias king of Illyria: with many mo noble Men & Womē, which delited

in the Flowers, & Fruictes of the groūd whose names for ye most part you shall fynde in the Simples. I cannot forget Attalus, the kyng of the lesse Asia, and Euax a kyng of Arabie, who wroate good Bookes to Nero the Emperour: wyth many good Worckes of Compoundes. Among all, Dioscorides a noble Knyght of Aegypt, whych serued Antonius, & Cleopatra, lyke a worthy Souldiour in the Fielde: and excelled all other in the Noble knowledge of Herbes. &c. Let vs not forget, the passing Wysedome of Salomon, who had knowledge most excellent in naturall Phylosophy, aswell as Morall: and taught the Queene of Saba all the vertues of herbs. How worthy were Archelaus Kyng of Cappadocia, & Agamemnon Prince of the Argiues, whych were noble Kynges, yet were they Heathen, sauing Salomon. Whose chiefe delightes, were not in Bacchus Bankets, or Venus Games: but spent theyr tyme pleasauntly, in the sweete Fieldes amonge Fruictes, Flowers, & Spices of delight. Would GOD in sutch Uertues, the Chrystians were theyr Equalles. When you haue read the Simples following, then approacheth the Chirurgian Plaster, and Salue prepared ready, to make whole the wounded Man holpen by Hippocrates, Galen, and Auicen to finishe hys cunning cure. Then cōmeth the Apothecarie Nicholaus, wyth ryche Cordials, Pilles, Electuaries, and Purgations of eche kynde, wyth hys mayster the Physician, who doth dispense euery Medicine in Tyme, Place, Quantity, and good order, to hys Pacient wyth good Diet, trauell, sleepe: and finally, ye perturbacions of the Mynde. At whych place good Reader, I should haue declared of other Iudgements, as Pulse, Uryne, and the proper Cures of euery Feuer, afflicting the Body: whych hereafter, by Gods grace, I shall bryng to passe, if tyme wyll suffer mee to lyue. And vntill sutch tyme, most gentle Reader, take this in good part, from the hands of him, who thincketh it well bestowed vpon thee, if curteously thou doe receyue the same agayne. Thus fare thou hartily well. Thyne euer to hys small power.
                  
                     VVilliam Bulleyn.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE AVTHOVRS, CAPtaynes, and Souldiours of this Bulwarke▪
                  
                  
                     Moyses.
                     Dauid.
                     Solomon.
                     Esdras.
                     IESVS Christus.
                     Lucas Euangel.
                     Paulus Apost.
                     Hippocrates.
                     Galenus.
                     Lysimachus rex Maced.
                     Auicen.
                     Dioscorides.
                     Auerrhois.
                     Rasis.
                     Ruellius.
                     Isaac.
                     Theophrastus.
                     Fulgentius.
                     Mesue.
                     Paulus AEgineta.
                     Arnoldus de noua Comen.
                     Pandect.
                     Leonardus Euchsius.
                     Conradus Gesnerus.
                     Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus.
                     Leonellus Fauentinus.
                     Iulianus Moristica.
                     Nicolaus Prep.
                     Nicolaus Myreps.
                     Ioh. Placatomus.
                     Ioh. Tagaultius.
                     Iacobus Hollerius.
                     Marianus.
                     Plato de Legibus.
                     Xenophon.
                     Pompeius Mela.
                     A. Gellius.
                     Strabo.
                     C. Plinius Secundus
                     Persius.
                     Textor▪ offic.
                     Ouid.
                     Virgil.
                  
                  XLIII. in number.
               
               
                  
                  Thomas Newton to the Freendly Reader.
                  
                     
                        DUe proofe doth shewe, so doth Experience teach
                     That handcraftsmen (when Sūne is gone to glade)
                     If slender light theyr weary Eyes empeach,
                     Or hindre them, in that theyr toyling trade,
                     (For that theyr sight is dimme with darknesse made)
                     Of custome vse to couet open Ayre,
                     And bryng theyr woorke into more lightsome layre.
                  
                  
                     The Mynde of Man in Bodies Pryson kept
                     Is pressed downe, and fetired lyes full fast▪
                     
                     All rest, all case, all Ioy is from it swept,
                     Unlesse it bee reuiu'de wyth souereygne tast
                     Of sacred Lore, or worthy Woork
                           •
                        s forepast:
                     By which one meane, it bayles it selfe from Gyeues,
                     And (mauger Spight) with comfort great suruiues.
                  
                  
                     This worke thus pend by Bulleins busie brayne,
                     With trauayle, toyle, expence, and mickle charge
                     (Which prooues & shewes how glad he was & fayn
                           •
                        
                     
                     To help ech sorte, and set his Minde at large:
                     As one (saunce f
                           •
                        are) by help of Palias (Targe)
                     Hee franckly heere vnto the learned Crew
                     Beequeathes and giues with frendly eye to vew.
                  
                  
                     It was at first but roughly hewen out
                     Himselfe that tyme in Prison fast detayned,
                     No maruaile thē, though scapes & faults did sprout,
                     Syth hee the while from liberty was wayned:
                     Yet his goodwill, his skill, and loue vnfayned
                     Hee kept not backe, but offred it to all,
                     In hope thereby to pleasure great and small.
                  
                  
                     If God on hygh had lent him longer dayes
                     Hee would the same haue repecus'd agayne
                     And brought in frame, as mountayne Beare astates
                     Wyth licking Tōgue, hir whelpes in shope to traine:
                     But gone hee is, with Christ aboue to raygne:
                     Hee playnly spake, hee playnely wrate also,
                     His Lyte, and Speache did both together goe.
                  
                  
                     His pleasaunt Pen, his mery Minde, and Wit
                     Did most men please, yea all of iudgment found:
                     Tride truth hee tolde, and nayle on head hee hit:
                     Examples stoare in all his Bookes are found.
                     Whose sappe and fruict doth to ech sexe redound.
                     Blinde Empiricke, ne Doggeleach could he brooke,
                     No cosening Mate, no popishe Clawback
                           •
                        s looke.
                  
                  
                     In lieu of paynes thus taken for thy sake,
                     Afoorde him thankes, and good report withall:
                     Of Ashes his so mayste thou some awake,
                     As prest as hee, t'assist thee in thy thral.
                     Few faultes (I trust) and they but very small
                     Are left beehinde: God graunt to thee, and mee
                     (Good Reader) grace our faultes, & sinnes to flee.
                  
                  
                     1579.
                     Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.
                  
                  
                     Ad adyta virtuti aditus.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE BOOKE OF SIMPLES.
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     FIrst of al, my frende Hilarius, bicause I haue no small griefe in my breast,Azarabaccha or w
                              ••
                           de Nardus. I shall desire you, to shewe me the nature of an herbe called Asaron, which I trust will help me by the way of vomit.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           PLinius remembring this herbe lib. xj. cap. xiij. and lib. 21. cap. 6. among al other flowers or herbes (saith he) it is vtterly refused,Azarabaccha is br
                              •
                           ader in Italy, then heere in Englande. & not worthy to bee preferred among pleasaunt Garlands, or sweete Nos
                           •
                        gaies, bicause of the basenesse, and bitternesse of his nature. In forme saith he, it is not vnlike vnto Iuie leaues: notwithstanding it is rounder, softer, and broder: it is mutch like vnto Vngula, called Foales foote. Dioscorides with whom none hath euer bene comparable hetherunto, for the excellent inuention, and knowledge of herbes, lib. 1. cap. ix. sayth that the leaues bee of the foresayd forme. And is so hote, that it doth vehemently bite the tongue, but in vertue it prouoketh vrine, helpeth the dropsie, and painfull ache of the huckle bone called Sciatica. Six dragmes of the rootes of Asaron, sodden in sweete water, the same water drunken will draw forth the termes in women.
                           Asaron prouoketh termes▪ & helpeth Sciatica. 
                        Galen lib. 6. simpli▪ medi. speaking of the rootes of Asaron saith, they be like to Acorus, but yt is marueilous it should so be: for Acorus will not prouoke strong vomites, as Asaron will. Therefore Dioscorides hath sayd the truth, and Mesue sayth, that Asaron hath the vertue of Elleborus, to purge both vp & downe, Choller▪ and fleume, which Acorus cannot do so: it is hot, and dry in the thirde degree. In Latin it is called Vulgago, it prouoketh vrine, clenseth the matrix,
                           Asaron doth help the Liuer and stomacke. helpeth the liuer from all grie
                           •
                        e, Raynes, Stomack, Belly, and Splene. &c. in the laude thereof, hauing these vertues as I haue sayd from Dioscorides, and Mesue, Marcus Aemilius affirmeth the same, saying:
                           Asaron in Greke, Vulgago in Latin, heate, & dry in the iij. degree, prouoketh Urine, and purgeth termes menstruoli & taketh awaye the paynes of the Liuer.
                        
                           Est Asaron Graecè, vulgago dicta Latinè,
                           Haec calidae & siccae virtutis dicitur esse,
                           Tertius est illi gradus, vt dicunt in vtro
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              .
                           Prouocat vrinam, potata
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               menstrua purgat,
                           Hoc
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               modo iecoris medicatur sumpta dolori:
                        
Here haue three notable learned men, declared the vertue of Asaron. Furthermore, if the iuyce of sixe leaues, bee strayned with a pinte of Whale, specially of Goates milke, and drunke in the morning: This Drinke in Sommer, will cast forth yellowe Choller, and vnnaturall Fleume. For in Sommer vomets ought to be taken, to clense the vpper partes, as the lower mē
                        bers be purged, by electuaries in Winter. Furthermore,20. Leaues do seene in iniust on, but other wayes three, sower, or fiue do suffice, xxx. greene leaues steeped in newe Wine all the night, and strained in the morning, drinke this against all the aboundaunce of humours in the Breast, or precordial partes, in this maner. Powre this wyne into a close pot, with a peece of fat Porke, and seeth the same: then let the Pacient eate of the Porke, and then drinke

the Wyne, or els the Wine may be drunke after the Porke, simply diluted or steeped all the night with the leaues, and neuer to be sodden wyth ye Porke. This will helpe the Iaundice,
                           Asaron good agaynst Dropsie. Fe
                           
                              •
                           ers. and frensie. and if it be drunke of any body, which hath a Tercian beinge first digested: and specially not on the sicke day, it will cleane deliuer from the sayd Tercian: in the beginninges of Hydropsies, Timpani
                              •
                           s, Quotidians, greene Sicknesse, Quartaynes, Wormes, and swellinge in the Stomack, there is no better reamedy, than to drinke this, as in the maner aforesayde: For a weake frantike Brayne, comming of an extreme colde, when Melancholy is placed in the māsion of reason, through whych, the principall Senses be obscured and darkened: shaue the Moulde of the heade, and washe the same with Wyne, wherein Calamintes, Rosemary, Lignum Aloes, and Asaron haue bin sodden, and then anoynt the heade wyth the oyles of Maces, Mintes, and Asaron warme, purgyng the heade wyth Pilles of Hierae simplex, and abstayning from sutch meates, as wyllingender Melancholy, or make exhalation, or Smoake vp into the Brayne. The iuyce of Asaron tempered wyth Nill,
                        The Arabians call that Nill whych wee name Visc
                                 •
                              m or Missiltowe Lib, primo Paradox. Cap. xxvj.
                         called Missiltow, and strayned wyth a little Rosewater, will cleanse the darke sight of the Eyen, and make theym cleare. And thus I ende of herbe Asaron, which hath vertue agaynst Choller: would God it had the like effect, to clense Disdayne, rankor, & malice, so that grace, that most precious herbe, might bee replanted agayne in eche mans breast, which the Deuill hath supplanted through pryde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Asplenon, called Scolopendrion, or Citrache, and Hemionitis, leaued like Dragons, and Phyllitis, called Hartes tongue, good for?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Asplenon good for the Splene.
                        TO this herbe Asplenon, no herbe may be compared, for his singular vertue, to helpe the sicknesse, or griefe of the Splene, the place of Melancholy. It is called Scolopendrion, of a speckled Worme wyth many feete. Thys herbe is a small Ferne, growing among stones, neyther hauing stalke, flower, or seede: the leaues bee yellowe by neath, and greene aboue. There is an other herbe of the same vertue,
                           Hemionitis leaued like Dragons. for the splene called Hemionitis, whose leaues be mutch like Dragons, with many smal rootes: these sayd heroes dye not, & bee hoate in the first, and dry in the second degree. Goodly Sirupes are made of theym for the Splene:
                           Diosco. lib. 3. Capi. 134. they be very good in decoction for ye same: if one do drinke of this herbe sodden in Uineger, by the space of .40. dayes, it hath vertue to consume ye splene: this herbe hath vertue to help the Iaundice, stone, strā
                        gury,
                           Galen. lib. 5. S
                                 ••
                              . medica. Capi. xij.
                         hicket, or winde, and Capper barkes, Tamarice rootes, Scolopendrion, & Scilla sodden by art together, will help the Splene. There is an herb called Phyllitis, or Hartes tongue, growing in darke places, which is partly of the nature of the sayde herbes, which hath singular vertue, both for man and beast, to be drunke agaynst poyson, and bloudy flixes, or flowing of termes immoderat in Women. But many now a dayes, haue sutch passions of the Splene Cancred with melancholy,The spleneticke loue. corrupted with disdayne, and with golden wordes, louinge onely from the Splene, and not from the Heart, that they geue eche other the curtesy of the tongue, without the consent of the

heart: and thus I conclude of heartlesse Tongue, and Hartes tongue, the one of comfort, the other of decay. Lingua fallax non amat veritatem,
                        
                           Prouerb. 27. d▪
                           
                         
                        & os lubricum operatur ruinas.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Wormewodde? that bitter herbe called Absynthium?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Absinthium is a common herbe: it is of diuers kinds, as Ponticum,
                        Wormewood. and Romanum. &c. it is hoate in the first and drye in the seconde, and it is very bitter, and being dryed, kepeth clothes from wormes and mothes, and the Sirupes thereof eaten before wine, preserueth Men from dronkēnesse: if it bee sodden in Uyneger▪ it will helpe the sores that breedes in the Eares: beeinge layde warme vppon it: it is to bee drunke agaynst swellinge of the Stomacke. And Ophthalmia whych is a Syckenesse of the Eyes, is greatly helped wyth Wormewodde▪
                        Sore eares. if it bee stamped and made luke warme wyth Rosewater,For the Eyes and put into a cleane Walnut shell: the Syrupe healeth the blouddy Fluxe bounde to the Belly:Blouddy flux it doth helpe a colde Stomacke, if it bee drunke .x. dayes,Colde Stomackes. euery morninge two spoonefull of the Syrupe: it is also good agaynst the Dropsy. And thus sayth Auicen, Fygges, Cockle. Wormewood, and Niter stamped together,Dropsies. and made in a Playster, is good agaynst the dysease of the Splene,
                           Auicen. lib. 2. and also killeth Wormes in the Belly, vsed in the foresayd maner:
                           Simp. 2, one dragme of the Pouder may bee drunke at once in Wyne:For ye splene. it hath many goodly vertues, as the Wyne thereof beinge drunke, agaynst Dropsyes, coldnes of the Stomacke, Wynde, Swellinges:Wormewood hath many vertues. if a handefull bee sodden in .viij. pounde of cleane Water or Wyne, in a vessell of Syluer, Glasse, or Stone, putting in sweete Calamus, Cynamon, the flowers of Cassia, Squinance, Spikenarde, and Dates of eche. ℥.iiij. beaten all together and sodden, as is aforesayd: or els these thinges put in a vessell of new Wyne wyth a linnen bagge, and so kept close .ij. monethes, and afterwarde dronke of them that haue eyther the yellow Iaundice, paynes in the Raynes, lothesomnesse of the Stomacke, stopping of termes, swelling after meate, continuance of Uomites, colde passions of the heart. &c. this vertue hath Wormewood Wyne sayeth Dioscorides, libro qum. Cap. 40. Furthermore gather a. l i. of Wormewood leaues, and stampe them in a Morter of stone, and then put vnto the same. l i.iiij. of the best whyte Sugar, and so beate them togeather vntill they be come to one substance, keepe this in a close Pot or Glasse. And this is the vertue thereof, sayth that well learned Man Matthiolus,
                        A goodly medicen for Hydropsie. it helpeth the Dropsy, if the Pacient eate euery day of thys halfe an ounce .iij. houres before meate, and with this I haue knowen many holpen, saith hee, and as for the vertue of the syrupe of Wormewoode, it shall come in his place accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Anisseede?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is much lyke vnto Fenell seede, and is called Romayne Fenell,
                           Galen de sim. Openeth the Raynes. it is warme and sweete, and hoate in the second, and dry in the third degree:

the newe Seedes be best, it engendreth vitall Seede, if openeth the stoppyng of the Raynes and Matrix, beynge dronke wyth Ptisanes or cleane temperate Wyne: thys herbe or seede is comfortable in sweete compounded medicines or in pouder for shortnes of breath, & sorenesse of the lunges: and also is good to be sodden in Ptisanes, made of Barly, to be drunke in the Feuer Quotidiane bred of Flegme: it ingendreth Milke in the breasts drunke wyth sweete Wyne or Mylke: it prouoketh vryne, maketh sweete breath, and is good agaynst the Collike or wynde of ye great Guttes, being dronke wyth good whyte Wyne and Sugar, and also stoppeth the whites whych runneth oftentymes from the bodies of Women: the pouder thereof,
                           Tamarix.
                         wyth the pouders of Fenell, Gallingale, Spicknarde, Tamarix, Nutmegges, and Graynes of Paradice, called Cardamomum, tempered with Wheate flower,A good remedy for the rū
                           ninge of the Raynes. water and red Wyne, and so baked in manchets or cakes, is most holsome to be eaten of them which haue the running of the Raines, wasting of Nature, moyst Dropsyes, or of them in whom the humour of flegme doth greatly abounde, through humidity, wynde, or colde, and thys was proued to helpe a Lady whych was sicke of a Timpany, and was syr Thomas the Baron Hiltons wyfe, wythin the Byshopprike of Duresme, whych vsed thys Breade during one halfe yeare, and also once a moneth was purged with holsome Electuaries accordingly, and bloud letting: and thus I conclude of Amsseede the best whereof commeth from Egypt.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of a Mouse eare, whych is lyke the eare of Mouse, and full of hayre, in forme mutch lyke the eare of a Mouse?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        AN herbe commonly knowen, colde and moyst in the fyrst degree as Galen sayth, a decoction of this herbe sodden in water wyth sugar,Falling sicknesse. is good agaynst the Falling sicknesse, being oftentimes drunk and a leafe thereof put into the Nose, it wyll prouoke sternutation or neesing,Neesing, whych wonderfully doeth cleanse the vaynes: and sodden in whyte Wyne, Ptisane or Borage water, wyth Sugar candy, thys is good agaynst paynes in the Throate,Mouse eare helpeth the Throate. called Angina, and Dioscorides writeth but little of thys herbe. And Galen sayth, in the .vij. lib. of Simples, that it is dry in the second degree: and it groweth in May vppon Hylles, Meddowes, and Waysides, sayth Matthiolus vpon Dioscorides. Furthermore if it be stamped wyth Madder, and the great Plantein rootes, & an herbe called Sheperdes purse, and so sodden in red Wyne and strayned out, and so put into a little drynke warme, thys is also good agaynst the blouddy Fluxe, or a broken Uayne wythin the Body of one,Agaynst the blouddy flixe. whych hath fallen into some deepe place, and this was proued by a yonge man dwelling in Newcastel, which fel into a deepe Coale pit, whose outward woundes were healed by an aū
                        cient Practicioner called Michell a Frenchman, who also is cunninge to helpe his owne countrey disease,Michell the Chyrurgian of Newcastle that now is to commonly knowen here in England (the more to be lamented) but yet dayly increased, whereof I entende to speake of in the place of the Poxe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Garlyke?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        GArlyke is very hoat and dry in the fourth degree,Garlike. it troubleth the Stomacke of Cholorike men, it is hurtfull to the Eyes, and Heade, it encreaseth drynesse,
                           Prouoketh vryne.
                           Byting of a Snake.
                           Hemeroydes.
                         but it wyll prouoke Uryne, and is good to be laied vpon the byting of a Snake, or Adder, it is good for the Emeroydes, applyed to the sore place being fyrst stampte: if it bee sodden, the stinke thereof is taken from it,Coughes. but the vertue remayneth to be eaten agaynst coughes and payne in the Lunges, it cutteth, and consumeth corrupt Fleume, and bryngeth sleape, it is not good for hoat Men, and Women with Chyldren,Corrupt Fleume. or Nurses geuing Mylke to Chyldren: but Galen calleth it the common Peoples Treacle. If Sanguyne Men eate mutch of it, it wyll make thē to haue redde Faces, but is a speciall remedy agaynst Poyson,Agaynst poyson. and a hoate Playster applyed to the biting of a mad Dogge, made of Garlyke, helpeth it: if it be drunke it killeth Wormes in the Belly.For Tothach And Garlyke stamped wyth Mastike, and put into the mouth, doth aswage the Dolour of the Teeth. Garlyke dryed or burnt into Pouder,To increase hayre. and tempered with Hony and Beares Grease, is good to anoynt a baulde heade to recouer hayre: and all thys and more reporteth Dioscorides, whych excelled in herbes. Plinius reporteth, if it be stamped and made in a Gargarisme, it healeth the Angina, it helpeth the Throate, wyth Oyle of Quinces and so warme applyed to the Belly it is good agaynst the Collicke, and the blouddy Fluxe. Newe Ale, and Garlyke, killeth Wormes to be drunke:A medicine for the fistulo. it is good to bee eaten agaynst the Falling euill. And Garlike healeth Fistulaes tempered wyth Pitche, Brimstone and Rosen, made hoate in a Tente. These with sutch lyke vertues do Plinius, Aetius, Galen. &c. reporte: but it is a grosse kynde of Medycine, very vnpleasaunt for fayre Ladyes, and tender Lylly Rose colloured Damselles, whych often tymes preferre sweete breathes before gentle Wordes: but both would do very well.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Hony, the Fruictes of Bees labour, and their Sommers trauell?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           AVERHOIS sayth,
                           Auerhois. 5 Simeon Sethi.
                         Hony is hoate and dry in the second degree, and doth clense very mutch, and is a medicinable meate, most chiefly for olde Men, and Women,Ill for chollerike persons. for it doth warme them and conuerteth in theym to good bloud. It is not good for Chollericke persons, because of the heate and drynesse: they do greatly erre that say Hony is hoate, and moyst, but if it bee claryfied from hys Waxe, and drosse, and kept in a close vessel, there is nothynge liquid vpon the earth that remayneth lenger. And thys

precious Iewel Hony hath bin euer more praysed, for it will conserue and keepe any fruit,Hony is an heauenly dewe. herbe or roote, or any other thing that is put into it, an exceeding long tyme. Plinius wryteth of a Monster which was long kept in Hony in Claudius dayes. Merueylous is the worke of God, Hony being an heauenly dewe that falleth vpon flowers and leaues as Auicen sayth,
                           Auicen. Can. 2. cap. 504. and is neither Iuyce of leaues nor fruicts, but only the heauenly dewe, wherevnto the Bees in Sommer in due tyme do resorte and gather the sayd Hony,Bees be an example vnto vs, both for loue and workinge in the cōmō wealth. and lay it vp in store, in theyr curious houses builded, whereas they dwell together in most goodly order. O Bees, Bees, how mutch happier are you than many wretched men, which dwell neuer together in vnity and peace, but in continuall discorde, and vnqui
                           •
                        tnes, as Virgill sayth: En quo discordia ciues perduxit miseros?
                        
                           Virgill.
                         Beholde whither discorde hath broughte wretched Cityzens. But now to speake of the most excellent vertues of Hony,New Hony. it is good in the meates of theym that be Fleumatike. Hony newly taken out of the Combes is partly laxatiue, & clarified Hony doth binde, & dry vp Fleume,Clarified Hony doth binde and kepe the bodies of Fleumatike and olde persons from corruption. The best Hony is gathered in the Spryng tyme, the seconde in Sommer, but that which is gathered in Winter is ill, and hurtfull. One parte of Hony, and some parte of water sodden together vntill the Froth be all scommed of,An healthfull drinke for Sommer. and when it is colde, kept in a close stone Pot, this drinke (sayth Galen) is holsome for Sommer, it clenseth the Lunges, and preserueth the body in health. Oximel simplex, and Compos
                              •
                           tum, be made with Hony,
                           Pandect. cap. 347. and so be many mo thynges, whych be of great vertue. Also the aucthour of the Pandect, sayth yt Hony poured into a new wound yt eftsoones it clenseth and maketh it whole. Hony mingled wyth a little Salte, and poured warme into the eare, killeth Wormes that breede there: The same also killeth Lyce, if Childrens heads be anoynted therewith. Rub young Chyldrens Gummes with cleane Hony euery day and it will easely cause their Teeth to grow. Hony mingled wyth Oyle of Roses, and so drunke incontinently, wyll cause one to vomit whan he hath eaten any venemous thinge, as rotten Moushromes, called Fungi. &c. Also Gargarismes and Suppositories be made of Hony, the one doth cleanse the Throate, and the other doth relaxe the Belly.
                           
                              Serpigo. Cost.
                           To cure Serpigo.
                         There is an infection in the skynne, through the corruption of the Lyuer, whych is called Serpigo, oftentymes in the Paulme of the hand, chiefly in the right hand, specially in Chollerike persons▪ whych is helped with Hony mingled with Coste, and anoynted warme euery day twice.To clense the Face. Also the distilled Water of Hony hath vertue to make cleane the skinne of them whose Faces be vncleane: but most chiefly if it be stilled wyth stronge Uineger, Mylke, and the Urine of a Boy, and so wyth a Spunge washe the Face to bedward, and let it dry in of it selfe. The goodly Oyntment called Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, whych clenseth all corrupt humoures, and wounds being rotten wythin, the chiefe thing in this Oyntment is Hony: it is marueylous that they whych vse to eate Hony dayly, & dayly anoynt their Stomackes wyth Oyle of Wormewood, should either dy sodenly, or lyue paynefully, or be euell colloured in their Faces. The people of Wales doe vse to drynke Mede,Welchmens drynke. and Metheglyne, and vnder

Heauen there is no fayrer people of complexion, nor cleaner of nature,To encrease Hayre. Anoynte the head being new shauen with Beares grease and Hony mingled together, and it preserueth the hayre from falling. Hony of Roses is a goodly Medicine, outwardly in woundes, and inwardly clenseth fleume, mundifieth the Stomacke, and openeth the mouth of the vaynes, and also is good to put in the Eyes to clense them.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        I Did neuer here any thing so greatly commended as thou hast commended Hony: if it be true that thou hast spoken, there be but fewe thinges may be compared to it, for the excellent vertue of it.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        BE not in doubt of the truth thereof, for the best Aucthours haue taught me,
                           Exodus.
                         and dayly experience mooueth mee, thus mutch to report of Hony: I ought to thinke no shame thereof. In asmutch as the God of Heauen, & Earth, maker of all Creatures, did giue hys people of Israel no greater blessing than a lande whych did flow wyth Mylke, and Hony. And often tymes amongest ye Blessinges of GOD, sweete Hony. is rehersed. The Prophet Dauid in the Psalmes, doth often name Hony,
                           Psalmes.
                         and the Hony Combe, makinge a comparison beetweene it and the woorde of God. In some of the holy Sacrifices, Hony was brought in for an Offering, before the Lord GOD into hys holy Temple,
                           Iudic. 14. the strong Nazareth of GOD Iudge of Israell. That mighty Prynce Sampson, loued well Hony, as appeareth after he had slayne the Lyon, he did eate the Hony whych hee founde in hys Carcasse, so did hys Father, and his Mother eate of the same Hony. It was as a deuine Omen of the Wysedome and learning that afterward came vnto Plato, whē in his Cradel, Bees brought Hony vnto his Mouth. Who was greater among men then S. Ihon Baptist? What was his most foode? it was wylde Hony. How many pleasaunt verses hath Virgill wrytten vppon Bees and Hony?
                           Plini. lib. 11. Cap. 9. who euer did excell Plinius secundus, in the nature of Creatures, and as it playnly appearteh in hys .xj. booke, he declareth of a worthy man called Aristomachus, who so wonderfully loued Bees: and in the same booke, sayth he,
                           Xenophon, in his booke of Housholde. the Bees haue many Kynges wyth small Coronets on their heades: about whom the great agmen or swarme doth cluster and fleeth into the fieldes, and commeth home in order, bringing their treasure wyth them: the elder Bees doe builde wythin the Hyues,The propertye of a good huswyfe. hauing therein a Mystresse or Queene to set them to woorke, whych neuer goeth from home, but placeth euery thing in order: the younger do bring their Stuffe to the Hyue: none of them be idle, euery one of them hath a house to dwell in .vj. cornered in fashion: they wil suffer no filthines to be amongst them, nor straungers to dwel within their Citty or cōmonwealth. They also punish them with stynginge, that hurt their

Prynces,Bees mayntayne no strā
                           gers, for they bee not profitable. and they haue fore knowledge of weather whē it is fayre & foule. Also they haue sences of smelling, for if any of them be lost in the fielde, they follow their fellowes by the sweete ayre, they be scant perfit of hearyng▪ but yet as appeereth they heare, when they muster at the soundes of Basens: their greatest delight is in Tyme, and Balme, and therefore about Athens is the best Hony in the Worlde, as Plini sayth, and in the Islande called Calydna,
                        
                           Plin lib. xj Cap. xij.
                         and also in Meleta: would God, sayth he, that we had the Hony in the same nature that it falleth from the heauens. Yea rather would to God that Idle people would take Bees for an example to laboure, and Subiectes to obey▪ &c. What shall I speake more of the properties of Bees, and of their good natures, prouidence and cunning? nothinge els Marcellus, but these simple Uerses following.

                           
                              A Noble Prynce there is, whose wealth and worke excell,
                           More than all other earthly wightes, that in the world do dwell.
                           
                              
                                 The kynge of Bees and his Army.
                              Saturnus blacke and colde, hath taught him for to fly,
                           The hory Frostes and Snowes so white▪ and darknesse of the Sky
                           Sagittarius, and Pysces, Lord Iupiter called by name,
                           Doth cūning geue vnto this Prynce, how he his house shuld frāe.
                           The red and flaming bloudy Mars, the Lord of warre and strife,
                           Doth teach this king his host to trayne, with sharp dartes al their life.
                           O happy Sol with golden beames, whose glory doth excell,
                           Thou arte the candell of this Worlde, and darknesse dost expell.
                           Thou makest glad thys little Kynge, in fieldd when hee doth ryde,
                           No Horse he hath, but wynges to fly, thou onely art hys guide,
                           When hee doth sounde his warlike tune, in Hyue where he doth dwell,
                           Hys Souldiers muster all on heapes, the Starres they do excell
                           In numbre infinite most fayre, cleare Ayre doth them infuse,
                           Dame Flora sweete doth them reioyce, but Boreas them misuse.
                           With grisly stormes and Hayle so harde, he breakes their tender bones,
                           No helmets haue, nor shieldes they beare, to keepe them from harde stones.
                           When Stormes be past and Venus come, the banisher of colde showers,
                           Wyth prety Hornes, and tender winges, they play among the flowers.
                           The Beane flowers make them glad, the Lilly makes them gay,
                           Their chiefe delight is Time, and Balme, most glad they are of May.
                           For Mercury doth gieue them myrth, when Twynnes hee doth embrace,
                           From rysing Sunne to Titans fall, labour is all their grace.
                           In flowred Fieldes and Motley meades, where white doth grow in greene,
                           The heauenly dewes, that nightly fall, is gathered vp of Beene.
                           Ioue doth rayne from virgiliae thys precious heauenly gyfte,
                           Whom Bees doe knowe, and beare to Hyue, with Wynges foorth flying swyfte.
                           And then they make this goodly meate, Manna fallen from Heuen.
                           The signa .xij. wyth Bees do worke, so do the Planets seuen.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Now haue you well declared what Hony is: is there also any vertue in the Combes, or Waxe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        
                           GALEN sayth, in the .vj. booke of Simples, Waxe is good for Plaisters, not only in drying, but also in that per accidens, it moisteth, and is vsed for outward Medicines, but not for inwarde and Dioscorides reporteth that Waxe doth mollify and warme ye body,
                           Dioscorides libr. secundo▪ Cap. lxxvij.
                         and .x. graynes wayght dronken with the syrupe of Plā
                        tein is good for the blouddy fluxe: it also dryeth the Mylke in Womens breastes: and to conclude, there be but few Emplaysters yt can be without the helpe of Waxe. It hath also bin abused in Churches, Chaples, and Tē
                        ples, offered by the ignoraunt, before the blynde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     I doe know Sage by name, because it doth grow in my Garden and is vsed in my Kitchen, but Chryste doth know, the vertue thereof is hidden from mee.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THys noble herbe is called Elclisphacon, Saluia, or Sage,Sage. and as it should appeare by Theophrastus there be two kindes of Sage, the one of the Garden, whych is rough,
                           Lib. vj. Cap. ij. de Plan. Libr. iij. Dioscorides
                         long and broade leaued, whych sayth Matthiolus, I suppose to be the Female herbe: the other Sage whych is shorter, and narrower, wyth two smale eares in the beginning of ye leaues, whych the sayd Theophrastus calleth Sphacelo,
                        
                           Lib. 6. Simp.
                         whom Matthiolus clepeth the Male herbe, and of thys groweth great plenty in Italy in the toppes of Mountaynes, in the noble Countreys both of Apulia, and Calabria: so doth there almost in euery Garden in England. Thys herbe is hoat & dry, sayth Aetius, so sayth Galen, and some notable Practicioners do say, that perfume of Sage doth stoppe the immoderate Fluxe menstruall. Agrippa dyd call thys the hory herbe, because it was so good to Women, not only in expulsing euill matter from the Matrix, but also in retayning the vitall seede of Generation, whereby Conceptione is made perfect.The Iuyce of Sage helpeth Conception. If a Woman drinke the Iuyce thereof wyth a little Salte, and Suger sodden together, foure dayes before, and after the vse with hir husbande, geuing the man the lyke quantity, before the time of procreation, wtout doubt Conception followeth. is sayd, somtyme there was so great a pestilence in a Citty of Aegypt, that through the Poyson thereof few were left a lyue: but when the Plague was ceased, the younge Women were compelled to drynke the Wyne, or Iuyce of Sage, through whose vertue they were conceyued wyth Chyldren, hauinge the helpe of Man: that in the ende, the Citty was replenished agayne, and filled wyth People of theyr owne Generation. Sage, sayth Orpheus. 
                        ʒ.iiij. mingled wyth cleane clarified Hony, and eaten of an empty Stomacke,To stoppe bloud rūning at ye mouth. doth incontinently stop the bloud that commeth from the Breast, Stomacke, or Lunges, breakinge out of the Mouth wyth cruent Uomites. There is a Sycknesse wythin the Body, called Tabes, whych is a great corruption of humoures, throughe foule Matter, and Bloude myngled togeather, whose beginnynge comes from the Heade through a continuall Rheume, and doth Apostumate, and wounde the

Lunges: through whose putrifaction by little, and little, all the Members of the body consume, through drynesse, leannesse, and a continuall coughe, with paynes in the Breast,An excellent Pill agaynst Apostumatiō of ye Lunges, Rheume, or consumption, which helped Bullem the Aucthour of this Booke. and shortnesse of the Wynde: the remedy there of sometime hath bin with Sage in this maner. Take Spicknard, Ginger, of ech. ʒ.ij. seede of Sage. ʒ.viij. dryed, beaten fyne in Pouder, wyth the foresayd Spyces, and. ʒ.xij. of longe Peper in lyke maner, and. ʒ.j. of olde Aster, and the Iuyce of Sage, and so make your Pill in a cleane Morter, and take euery Mornyng fasting. ʒ.j. of thys, & asmuch at night drinkinge after it pure cleane Sage water: and this is the best Pill that euer I did knowe, and helped mee in a great sicknesse in Suffolke, where sometyme I dwelled. Thys herbe also prouoketh vryne, clenseth phlegme, expulseth wynde, dryeth vp the Dropsy, helpeth the Paulsie, strengthneth the Sinewes,To kill Canker and quēch Robin good-fellowes Feuer. and purgeth bloud: If it be sodden in running water, Roch Alum, and Woodbinde leaues, it killeth the Canker in the Mouth, and also quencheth the great heate and burninge, stynke, filthe, and matter that oftentimes commeth through corruption of nature, or meretrix maner, and doth chaunce into the Secret places of Men or Women, whych is helped thys way, puttinge in a little of the Pouder of Aristolochia rotunda: forasmutch as it dryeth, it is put into Pygges, whych be most moyst of nature to dry vp their humidity or moysture wythall, whych els be euill for Flegmatike persons.
                           Auicen. 3. trac. cap, 1. The incomparable vertue of thys herbe is excellent, that the great learned Fathers of Salem, did wryte these wordes to the late famous Prynce Kyng Henry the eyght, in the laude thereof saying. Curmoritur homo, cui saluia crescit in horto? Inquiringe why mortal Men should dye, whych haue Sage in their Gardens? But because no herbe hath power to make Men immortall, they say furthermore, Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. And thus I do conclude of thys vertuous herbe Sage. Whose Wyne beynge dayly drunke, is good agaynst the fallinge sycknesse. And the common Sage Ale, ryghtly brewed wyth Sage, Squinance, Spicknarde, Calamus, Fenell seedes, and Betony, is very holsome for the Flegmaticke, Dropsy, wynde Collike, and rawnesse of the stomack with indigestion.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What be the vertues of Onyons in their kyndes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THey doe make thyn the Bloude, and brynge sleape, they be not good for Cholericke men.Onions prouoketh sleepe. Longe Onyons. The longe Onyon is more vehemente then the rounde, and the Redde more then the Whyte, the Gray more then the Greene, and the rawe more then the sodden, or preserued in Salt, although they cause sleape very paynefull and troublous,
                           Greene sickenesse.
                           To cleanse ye Stomacke.
                         & bee hoat in the thyrd degree, but they warme and cleanse the Stomacke, brynge good Collour to the Face, and then they muste bee good for the neewe Greene Sycknesse, and doe very well prouoke Uryne, and beynge roasted, and warme applyed to the Paynefull harde Emeroydes, eftesoones dooe

open them (if vineger warme be put to them) and being cleane pilled or taken from the ouer rinde and Skin, and cut of both the endes,Onions doe heale the Emeroydes. and cast into water, remayning in it one howre, and slicesed: these do take away the vehement sharpnesse, that else woulde hurt the Eyes, and Head,For byting of a Dogge. and beinge applied with Hony, Rue, and Salt, all incorporated together to the wound bitten of a Dogge, do heale it soone. Leekes purge the bloude in Marche, and payne the head, and be not greatly praysed, for their Iuyce is euill,Leekes. sayth Dioscorides. The heade beinge anoynted with the Iuyce of them, keepeth hayre from fallinge,Hayre from fallinge. there is much variety of this Onion amonge Wryters, sayth Plinius, but this shall suffice, for vs Englishmen. There be great plenty of good Onions that be brought from Flaunders,Where plenty of Onions do growe. called saynct Homars Onions. So there bee very many growing in Holland in Lyncolneshyre, and in the Towne of Duresme in the North countrey.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Fenell?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT hath power to warme in the thirde degree, and dry in the fyrst, and maketh sweete the Breath:
                           
                              Foeniculum. Sweet breathes.
                           For the Eyesight.
                         the Seede eaten oftentimes vppon an empty Stomacke, doth helpe the Eyesyght. The Rootes cleane washed bee very holsome in Potage, and good in Ptisants. The greene or red tufts, growinge vppon the Stalkes, sodden in Wyne, Potage, or Ale,
                           To breake 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Stone.
                           Encreaseth Mylke.
                           To washe Feete.
                         helpe the Bladder, Raynes, and breake the stone, encreaseth Mylke in Womens Breastes, and Seede of Generation. It is good to vse Endyue, or such lyke wyth it, because it is very hoate, and it is very good to washe ones Feete to bedwarde. It is good in Barbars Bathes, and washinge Water, wyth Balme, and Bayes. The syrupe is very good and wholsome,An excellent medicine of Fenel, for the Raynes and Bladder. it helpeth a Flegmatike Stomacke. And Fenell, Parsely, & Watercresses, of ech like quantity stamped together, pouring white Wyne to them, and the crummes of Barly breade, standinge all one night in a stone Morter, the nexte day being strayned, Clarifyed, and drunke, this will cleanse the Raynes from Grauell, Stone, and Choller,For fat folks. and cause one to make much Water that hath the Strangury.Two kindes of Fenell. It is good for fat Men to open the vessels, as Uaynes, and Guttes. There bee two kyndes of Fenell, one Marathrum, whych is best: the other Hippomarathrum whych is Wylde, the Seede hath greater vertue then the roote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Purslan?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius▪
                     
                     COlde in the thirde, & moyst in the second degree.Purslan is an herbe of a singuler vertue to coole, or quenche Choller. If it be stamped with steeped Barly, it maketh a good plaister to coole the Head, Eyes, & Lyuer, in Agues, and hoate inflāmations. To eate of it, stoppeth fluxes, & quencheth burning Choller, extinguisheth venereous lust, & greatly helpeth ye
                        
Raynes, and Bladder, and will kill rounde Wormes in the Belly: and comforteth the matrixe, against hoate choller, and termes abounding. And the iuyce is good to drinke in hoat Feuers: it may be preserued with Salt, and then it is very good with roasted meates. Plini saith, it is supposed to make the sight blunt and weake:An example of Purslan. Further he sayth that in Spayne, a great noble man, whom he did know, did hang this Purslane roote on a Thred, commonly about his neck, which was troubled of a Vuula, and was healed therewith.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Dragons?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe iuyce of Dragons, sayth Dioscorides, dropped into ye eyes, doth clense them,Of Dragons which helpe against the Pestilence. & causeth mutch brightnesse vnto the eyes of them, which haue dark sights. The Water of this herbe, hath vertue against the pestilence, if it be drunk bloud warm with Uenice Triacle, or Mithridatum. The sauour of thys herbe is hurtefull to women newly conceyued with Chylde. Plini sayth, that who so beareth this herbe vpon them, no venemous Serpent will doe them any harme. This herbe is hoate & dry, and being sodden in Wyne, it healeth a kibed heele, called Pernio. And this herbe being brused, and applied with Plantein, healeth a newe wounde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Filipendula?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Filipendula hath rounde roots hanging vppon smal fine thredes in the earth.
                        IT is called Filipendula, bicause it hath small round rootes, hanging vpon it with thredes in the ground, it is an herbe hoate & dry, in the third degree: if it bee sodden in white wyne, & dronk, it drieth vp windy places in the guttes, and clenseth the raines of the backe and bladder. And the pouder drunke in Wyne, is good against the falling euill, and helpeth the yellow Iaundice: the leaues and stalkes sodden in Wyne and drunke, clense the secondes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Violettes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           SIMEON SETHI reporteth, that they do help againste hoate inflammations of the Guttes,Uiolets bee great coolers and to cold for the heart. heade, and stomacke, if the cause be of burninge Choler: either the Water, Sirup, or Conserue of the said Uiolets, being eaten or drunke, after the digestion of any hoate passion: but vndoubtedly it offendeth the hart, bicause of ye great coldnes. The sauoure of the Flowers bee pleasaunt. The Oyle that is made of this herbe, hath vertue to reconcile quiete sleepe to theym, which haue greeuous hoate payne in the heade,Good for Coughes and shortwinde. Uiolet water, and cleane Sallet Oyle, of ech one vnce together drunke, clenseth rotten matter in the Stomacke, and Coughes, or payne in the Lunges.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus
                     What is the vertue of white Lillies, and water Lillies called Nimphea.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           DIoscorides saythe, that the Oyle of Lillies doeth mollifye the Sinewes, and the mouth of the matrix: ye Iuice of Lillies, Uineger, and Hony, sodden in a Brasen vessell, doth make an ointment, to heale both new and old woundes: if the Rootes be rosted, and stamped with Roses, they make an healing plaster agaynst burning of fyre: the same roote Rosted, hath vertue to break a pestilence sore, applied hot vnto the sore place, and is drye in the first degree. The oyle of Water Lillies, is moyste, souereigne agaynst all hote diseases to anoynt the ardent and hote places, and doth reconcile quiet sleepe, if the forehed be anoynted therewith it is holesome for mad men. The seede and roote sodden in wine, stoppeth the immoderate fluxe menstruall, and the bloudy Flixe, as Dioscorides and Galen say Libro viij Simplicium Medicamento
                              •
                           um.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Chickweede?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        ALmost euery ignoraunt woman doth know this herbe, but there be of diuers kindes of it,
                           Anagallis o
                                 •
                               morsus Gallinae, called Chickweede. they be very good to kepe woundes frō apostumations, stamped, and applyed vnto them, and draw corruption out of woundes: and sodden with Uineger, do drawe fleume out of the heade if Chickweede be often warme, put into the mouthe, & spit out agayne, in the same maner it helpeth the teeth, and sodden in wyne, and so drunke, it wil clense the raynes of the back.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Sorel, which in the North is called Sower Dockes.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        EUery one doth right wel know it, and al they that make greensauce, but the description, I leaue to Dioscorides,
                        
                           Rumex, 
                                 •
                              apathus, or acedu is Sorel, an Sor
                              •
                           ll de bois. and Leonardus Fuchsius, not onely in this herbe, but in all other, and to tell the vertue I wil: it is cold and drye, in the seconde degree, it also stoppeth: it is like Endiue in property, because it ouercōmeth Choller, and is much commended. It helpeth the yellow Iaundice, if it be drunke with small wine or ale, and also quencheth burning feuers: to eate of the leaues euerye Morninge in a Pestilence time, is moste holsome, if they be eaten fasting. This herbe doth Dioscorides, Galen and Auicen greately commende, besydes the great learned men of this time.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Planten or VVaybrede?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     THe greatter Planten is the better, it hath seauen great vaynes, it is cold and drye:
                           Plantago called arnoglosia.
                         the seedes drunke with red wine, or the rootes sodden therein, stoppe the bloudy flux, likewise the rootes and leaues being sodden with fayre water, or with Burrage water and Suger, and geuen to him yt hath an Ague, either Tertian or quarten, two howres before his fit, helpeth him. Prooue this, for thus haue I helped manye, it is verye comfortable for children that haue greate fluxes and Agues, and is a frende vnto the Liuer. This herbe is greatly praysed of the learned wryters. Water Planten rootes, leaues and buddes be holsome to be dronk agaynst the falling sickenes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Camomill?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is very hotte, it is drunke agaynst cold windes, and matter beyng in the guttes, the Egiptians did suppose it would help all cold Agues, and did consecrate the same as Galen sayth: also if it bee tempered and strayned into white wyne, and drunke of women hauing the child dead within their bodyes, it wil cause present deliuerance: it doth mightely clense the bladder, and is excellent to be sodden in water to to wash the feete, the Oyle is precious, as is declared hereafter.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Hoppes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THere be Hoppes which do coole, that be called Lupuli: those that we haue be hoate and dry,
                           Lupulꝰ Salictarius, be 
                              •
                           oppes bitter, sower, hot, saith old Herballes, and Fuchsius sayth, they clense Fleume, and Choller, and the Water betweene the skinne and Flesh. The syrup wil clense grosse raw Fleume frō the guttes, and is good agaynst obstructions. If the Iuice bee dropped in the Eare, it taketh away the stinke of Rotten Sores, the rootes wil helpe the Liuer, and Splene, beinge sodden and drunke, the Beere is very good for Flegmatike men.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Horehounde?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is an herbe hoate and drye, if it be sodden with faire water, Suger or Hony, and strayned, this drink doth clense the stomake from stinking fleume. It is an excelent herbe for women to clense their Monthly terms.Stinkinge fleume. The water of this, is good to helpe them wich haue a moist Reume falling from the head vpon the Lunges, being often drunke,To helpe a moist reume. but it is hurtfull to the bladder & raynes, the syrup therof doth clense the kinges euill. And also put into the

eares it doth greatly comforte the hearing, if ye eares be troubled with deafnes: stamped with honny and applyed to the eies, it clenseth the syght.Kinges euill. 
                        To helpe the sight.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus
                     What is the vertue of Ueruen.Ueruen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is called the Holy herbe, it drieth and byndeth: if it be sodden with Uineger, it helpeth a disease called. S. Anthonies fyre,Wild fyre oftentimes washing the payned place. The leaues of Ueruen, and Roses,To kepe wo
                              ••
                           
                           des from corruption. and fresh Swynes grease stamped togeather, wil ceasse payne and greefe in euery wound, and wil keepe woundes from corruptinge. It is good for peopel that haue the Tercian, and Quarten Agues, thus saith Dioscorides.
                        Agaynst Agues. Moreouer he saith the weight of a ʒ, of this herbe wt three halfpeny wayghtes of Olibanū, put into ℥.ix. of olde wyne tempered togeather, and drunke forty dayes in this quantity fasting, it wil helpe the disease called the kinges euil,To helpe the Kinges euil. or payne in the throate.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Rice?Rice.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     There bee manye opinions concerninge Rice,
                           Auicē, in ij. can. Cap▪
                            78. but I shal staye my selfe with the Iudgementes of Auicen. Rice sayth hee, is hotte and drie, & hath vertue to stop the Belly, it doth nourish much, 
                           •
                        it bee sodden with Milke, qut it ought to be stepped in water an whole night before. If Blaunched Almons bee stamped with Rose water, and strayned into theym, and sodden with Cowes milke, it is verye much nourishinge: the Flower or Meale of Arza or Rise, stoppeth the bloudye flyxe, in drynke or Clister.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Pease and Beanes▪
                        Beanes▪
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        BEanes be more grosser and fuller of wynd, then Pease be, and make euill matter, except they be wel sodden and buttered, and so eaten with the whitest Onions that may be gotten, because they be hard of digestion: how be it they do make fatte, and partly clense,To make fat. yet they are not compared with tender white Peason, wel sodden and buttered, or els made in pottage with garden Mintes, and grosse Pepper which haue vertue to clense the raynes of the Backe and bladder, Ther is a place in Suffolke called Orfort, where Pease grow on the stones, neuer sowen. Lintelles be of the same vertue. Barly beinge cleane hulled, and sodden with milke, cleane water and Suger, maketh a very holsome and comfortable potage, for whole Cholerick persons, or young people, and this is much vsed

in the North parts of England and is called Big Keale, and of clean Barly and pure water,Ptisant. is made that excellente water. called Ptisant.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Beates.What is the vertue of Beetes.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Whyte beetesTHere be of two kyndes, and both be prayse worthy. Simeon Sethi writeth, that they be hote and drye in the third degre, the white bee the best,Purging the head. they haue vertue to clense, as Niter hath but are of euill iuice: ye iuice of this herbe with Honny, applyed into the Nose, do purge the head, so doth the leafe, it is an holsom herbe in pottage, if it be wel sodden, or els noisome to the stomacke, if it be parboyled and eaten with Uineger, it is good agaynst the stopping of the liuer,Stoppinge of the Liuer. not withstandinge the iuice of this herbe doth stop the belly beyng symplie taken. It is called Bete of Beta, or Ueta the Greeke. B. because of the forme or shape.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Betony.What is the vertue of Betony?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THey be of diuers kindes Leonardus Fuchsius, doth call the sweete Giloflowers by the names of Betonye, but hee seemeth to talke of that which is commonly knowen of the people,To kill wormes, called the lande Betony, which hath vertue to kil wormes within the belly, & helpeth the Quarten, clenseth the Matrix,For Bruses. and hath vertue to heale the Body within if it be brused: it is of so great effect, if it be sodden with Wormewood in white wine, as to purge Fleume, it is hote in the fyrst degree, and dry in the second.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Sauery.What is the vertue of Sauerie?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is hoate and drye in the thirde degree, if the greene Herbe be sodden in water or white wine,Liuer soft. Cold coughs. Dead childrē. and dronke, these be his vertues: to make the Liuer so it, to clense Dropsies, cold Coughes, to clense womens diseases, and to seperate the dead child from the mother, as Dioscorides and Galen say: also Germander is not much vnlike in vertue to this herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Mustarde.What is the vertue of Mustard or Sinapium.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           PLINIVS doth greatly alow it, saying, that there is nothinge doth pierce more swifter into the brayne then it doth. Honye Uinegar,To Gargarize the heade. and Mustarde tempered together, is an excellent Gargarisme to purge the head, teeth, and throte. Mustarde is good agaynst al the diseases of the stomacke, or Lunges, wynde, fleume and rawnesse of the guttes, and conduceth foode into the body,Fallinge sicknes. Palsie. prouoketh vrine, helpeth the Palsie, wasteth the qua
                           •
                        ten, dryeth. vp moyst reumes, applyed playsterwise vnto the head. Honye and Mustarde helpeth the coughe, and is good for them that haue the Fallyng sycknesse: And tentes of Uinegar and Mustard put into the nose helpe the Palsye.

Notwithstanding the common vse of Mustarde,Euil for the eyes. is a cruel enemye vnto ye eyes: many moe vertues haue I read of Mustarde, but the occasion of time hath vnhappely preuented, not onely my large description in this, but also in many other Simples.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Senetion or Groundesyll?Senetion.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is of a mixt temperature, it cooleth and partly clenseth. If it be stamped and sodden in water, and drunke with youre Pottage,Hot Coller in ye stomake▪ To helpe the eyes. it will purge hoat Choller: this done with Saffron and cold water, stamped and put into the eyes, it wil dry the runninge drops of theym: and prepared 
                           •
                        laster wise, it helpeth manye greeuous woundes. Dioscorides sayeth, that the heades of Senetion with the flowers, and a little wine and Manna,
                           
                              Dioscorides lib iiij. cap. xcij.
                           
                           For woundes
                         tempered togeather, healeth the woundes, that be in the synewes. The flower of this herbe, hath whyte hayre, and when the wynde bloweth it awaye, then it appeareth like a Balde headded Man, therefore it is called Senecio.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Cucummers▪
                        Cucummers?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THey bee (truely) in the second degre very moyst, and colde the Seedes bee very good to be geuen in hoat sicknesses. The pouder of the same Seedes drunke in cleane Wyne, are good agaynst diuers hoate passions of the Harte,
                           To prouoke vryne,
                           Uomit.
                           Good blood.
                         This Fruite will cause one to make water wel. The roote dryed, and the pouder therof drunke in water and Honye, prouoketh vomit. If they be moderatly eaten, they bringe good bloode. Tempered with Honye,
                           Epinictides▪
                           
                         and the Eyes there with anoynted they helpe a disease called Epinictidas, which troubleth men with strange syghtes in the Night: the best of this fruite is yt which beareth ye best seede ye sauour of them is holsom. Melons, citruls, Pompeions,Raw herbes▪
                         & this kind of Pepins, or great Apples, be much vsed in England, and are more common thē profitable, because they vse to eat thē raw, Englishmen being born in a tē
                        perat region, enclyning to cold, may not without hurt eate raw herbes, rootes, and fruits so plentiful, as many men which be borne far in the South partes of the worlde, which be moste hoate of stomacke: therefore eate these fruits boyled, orels baked wt Hony, Peper, and Fenell seedes, or such like: there be an other hoat kynde of bitter Cucummers, which do purge called Colocynthis. The Apple being steeped in Ptisant water, duringe Twelue howres, and so strayned, & drunke in the Morninge halfe a pint, doth purge Melancholy, and Choler adust and vitriall fleume, but it is a verye grosse purgation, but ye Trochiskes of Coloquintida are better to purge with.Coloquitide▪
                         But ʒ.i of the Pouder of Coloquintida sodden with Mirthe and Ote water, &

Honye to a thicknes, maketh a goodly Pil to purge Fleume and choller, it is good in Clisters,
                           Dioscorides. lib. iiij. capit. Clxx.
                         for the same purpose, sodden with vineger, this kept in the mouth, killeth worms in the teeth. The Oyle of this is good to anoint the paynes of the Huckel bone called Sciattica, It also killeth wormes in the Eares: this is moste bitter to the mouth and stomacke, it killeth worms in the Belly,
                           Matthiolus super dioscoridē.
                         both in Emplasters and drinke. The Arabians cal this herbe Chandel, but in Laten it is called Cucurbita Syluestris.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Cabage.What is the vertue of Cabage or Brassica?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        CAbage is of two properties, of byndinge the Bellye, and makinge laxatiue,
                           
                              Ius Brassicae soluit, cuius substantia stringit.
                           
                           To bind laxatiue
                           To clense Leprosy.
                           
                              Aristote .iij. probl. Auicen .ii. cā
                                 Rasisiij. Al.
                           
                         the iuice of Cabages, lightlye boyled in freshe Beefe brothe is laxatiue, but the substance of this herbe is hard of digestion, but if it be sodden twyse, the broth of it wil bynde the Belly, if it be tempered with Allume: This herbe hath vertue to clense a new Red Leprosye, layd vppon the sore place, in the manner of a Plaster, but to conclude of this herbe, ye broth of it hath vertue to keepe a man from drunkennes, as Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen do report, eaten before meate or drinke. And this is good to make Pottage withall, and is a profitable herbe in a common wealth, which the Fleminges sell deere, but we haue it growing in our owne Gardens,
                           Dioscor. li. 4. if we wold preferre our owne commodity, before ydlenes, and not suffer weedes to growe where herbes should be planted. If Fenegrike and this be sodden plaster wise, it helpeth the Gout, The leaues sodden with Honye, heale vlcers and Cankers, and kil wormes in the Bellye, there bee sundrye kindes of wortes, both Garden, Feelde and Sea, mutche like to each other in vertue. There bee greate plenty growing betweene Albrought and Horthforde in Suffolke vpon ye Sea shore.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Rew called Herbe grace.What is the vertue of Rue, or herbe of Grace?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        I Tel thee this herbe▪ is very hotte and bitter, and doth burne, because of his hotenes in the third degree. If a little of this Rue be stamped, and sodden in wyne, and drunke, it is an excellēt medicine against Poyson and Pestilence. Roses, Uineger and Riue stamped together,Poyson Payne in the head. and put into a Forhead cloth or Biggē and applyed to the Tēples of the heade, or Forehead, do ceasse greuous pain in the head. And in like maner it helpeth the bytinge of Serpents, and of Dogs, stamped with vineger, many nice people cannot abyde it, cryinge fye it stinks. The sede of this herbe beatē in pouder & put in fresh clarifyed Butter,Agaynst byting of Dogs and serpēts. and Pitche melted together, is good for them to drink that are brused The seede of this Rue beyng dried and beaten into pouder, with ye pouders of swete Calamus and long Pepper sodden in white Wine, drunke warme helpeth the wynde in the small Guttes.Buleins experience manye tymes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        What is the vertue of LetticeLettice.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT doth mightely encrease Milke in womens brestes,To encrease Milke & therfore it is called Lettice, as Martiall sayth, fyrst shal bee geuen to the vertue and power, to encrease milke in womens breastes euery howre.Comfort agaynst hoate cholic
                              •
                            in the stomacke. Lettice is an herbe cold and moyst and very comfortable for a hotte stomacke, bringeth slepe, mollifyeth the bellye, the dryer it be eaten the better it is. I meane, if it be not muche washed in water, addynge cleane Salet Oyle, Suger and vineger to it, it abateth carnal luste: and much vse of it dulleth the sighte.
                           Ill forsight. To abate the Lust.
                           An encrease of seede.
                           Broke bones Coughe.
                           
                              Dioscor. lib▪ ij▪ Cap. cxxxliij.
                           
                         The seede is precious agaynst hote diseases, drunke with Ptisantes. There is an herbe called Rocket gentle, that partly smelleth like a Foxe, which is very hote, an encreaser of seede, this herbe must alwaies be eaten with Lettice. The roote therof sodden in water will draw forth broken bones, and wil helpe the cough in younge children, the seede doth vehemently expel vryne, drunke in white wyne, and killeth woormes: and tempered with an Oxe gaule, doth clense blacke spottes in the face or skin after strypes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Mintes?Mintes
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        MIntes be of two kinds, garden and wild Mintes,
                           Stoppinge of vomits.
                           Repletion.
                           To kill wormes.
                           Bytinge of a Dogge.
                           To helpe the Collike.
                         they be hotte vnto the third degree, and drye in the second degree Garden Mintes be best: the pouder of this with the iuice of Pomgranets, stoppeth vomits, helpeth sighing, clenseth hot choller. Three branches of this sodden with wine doth helpe repleation, beyng drunke fastinge. This iuice tempered with good Triakle, & eaten of children in morninges, wil kil wormes, and stamped with salt, and applyed to the bytyng of a Dogge, will heale it. It is holsome sodden with wyndy meats & Peason &c. and sodden in posset ale with Fenel, it encreaseth vital seede. It is not best for Chollerike complexions but good for Fleumatike and indifferent for Melancholike, and it wil stop bloode, stamped and applyed to the place: the iuice of Mintes bee best to mingle in a medicine agaynst poysō:To make swete brea
                              •
                           h. ye pouder of Mints are good in pottage to helpe digestiō, and to make swete breath.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Dandelion, or Lyons teeth▪
                        Dandelion.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is temperate, cold, and drye:The heade. Sowthistell 
                              •
                           o loa
                              •
                           e the· belly. with Roses and Uineger tēpered togeather, it helpeth the hed in hotte diseases, the sowthistle called Sonchos hath ye same vertue & so hath Cicory: if they be sodden, the loose the belly & quencheth heat which burneth in the stomacke,
                           Yellow choler
                           Burning Agues.
                         and defendeth the head from hot smoking vapoures, and purgeth yellow choller, and rebateth venerous & fleshly heat, & is good to be sodden & dronk in hote burning Agues: though this herbe be commonly knowen and counted of many as a vile wede, yet it is reported of Dioscorides to be an excellent herbe, & is called Lyons teeth.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Hysop.What is the vertue of Hysope?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        AN herbe commonly knowen, growing in gardens, and hoat in the thirde degrre: it hath vertue to make humoures thin and warme:
                           Dioscor lib. 3. sodden with Figges, Rewe, and Hony, in clean water, and drunke, greatly helpeth the sicknes in the lungs old Coughes,
                           Sicknes in the Lunges. Old coughes, Rotten humours.
                           To helpe the Splene.
                         rotten humours, drippinges vpon the lunges, sodden with Eris, and Graynes of Paradice called Cardamomū, it mightely purgeth and bringeth good colour. Figges, Salt Nitrum, and Hysope stamped togeather, and applyed to the Splene, helpe it muche, and take awoy the water that runneth betweene the skin and the Flesh: sodden with Oximel it clenseth flewme. Howe bee it, Galen wryteth but little of this herbe in his eyght booke of Simples,Fleume. but sayth that it is drye and hoat in the thirde degree. But this herbe was vsed in the olde Testament, in the old time of the bloudy Sacrifice. And the holy prophet in his. li. Psalm, sayeth vnto almighty God? Sprinkle me oh Lorde with Hysope &c. God grāt vs all to haue such blessed plants of that Hysope in our gardens, whiche haue vertue to heale all sicknesses of the Soule, defyled with synne.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Wyne?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        HIPPOCRATES saythe, of a customable thing commeth lesser hurte than of things not vsed,
                           Hip in ij. lib. Apha
                                 •
                              i.
                         wherof I gather that they whiche drynke wyne moderatly with measure, it doth profyt them much, and maketh good digestion, but those people that vse to drink wine seldome times, be distempered.Digestion. White wyne if it be cleare, is holsome to bee drunke before meate,White wyne. Auerhois in .6. colig. Rasis in li. 26. con. ca. 1. for it preserueth the body and perseth quickly to the bladder, but if it be drunke vppon a ful stomacke, it wil rather make opilation, or stopping of the Meseraikes, because it doth swiftly driue foode downe, before nature hath of himselfe digested it: and the nature of white wine is of lesse warmnesse.
                           Claret wine warmeth the Body.
                           
                              Galen lib. de tue. sani ca. 9. Wine is an ennemy to children.
                           Red wine corrupteth blood
                         The second wyne is pure Claret, of a cleare Iacint or yellowe colour: this wyne doth greatly norish and warme the body, and it is an holesome wine with meate, and is good for Flegmatike folke, but verye vnholsome for yong children: for Galen sayth Vinum pueris inimicum, because it heateth aboue nature, and hurteth the heade. Nor for them which haue hoate liuers, or paynes in the head, occasioned of hot vapours, or smokes▪ for it is like vnto fyer, and flaxe. The thirde is blacke or deepe, Red wyne which is thicke a stopper of the belly, a corrupter of the bloude, a breeder of the stone, hurtefull to olde men,
                           
                              Auicen in 3. prim. 2. doc. cap 8.
                           To know good wyne.
                         and profitable to fewe Men, excepte they haue the bloudye fluxe. And for the Election of wyne Auicen sayth, that Wyne is best, which is betweene new and olde, cleare, declyning somwhat to Redde or Amber, of good odour, neither sharpe nor sweete, but equal betwene both, for it hath vertue not onely to make humours temperate, warme and moyst, but also

to expell euell matter, whych corrupteth the stomacke and bloud: In Sommer it ought to be delayed wyth pure cleane water,To knowe good Wyne. as Aristotle sayth in his Problemes: and note this, that in dry yeres, wynes be best and most holsome: but in watry yeares, the Grapes be corrupted, which wine doth bringe to the body many euill diseases, as Dropsies, Timpanies, Fluxes,
                           When Wine is best.
                           
                              Galen. in Regacu.
                           
                         Reumes, windes and sutch lyke, as Galen sayth: And thus to conclude of wyne, almighty God did ordayne it for the great comfort of mankinde, to be taken moderately, but to be drunke with excesse▪ it is vnholsome and is Poyson most venemous: it relaxeth the sinewes, bryngeth Palsy,Wyne moderatlye comforteth. Fallyng sicknesse, in olde persons, hoat Feuers, Fransies, Fighting, Lechery, and a consuming of the Lyuer to the Chollerike: and generally there is no credence to be giuen to drunkardes, although they be mighty men. It maketh men lyke vnto monsters wyth countenaunce lyke to burning coales.A glasse for al excessiue. wine bibbers to looke in. It dishonoreth noble men, and beggereth poore men, and nearehande killeth as many as be slayne in cruell battayles the more it is to be lamented. Plato in secundo de legibus.
                        
                           Plato in 2 legibus.
                         cōmaunded that none vnder .xxij. yeres olde should drinke wine. And this wyse man doth shew a reason saying: Non oportet ignem igni adiscere. One fier ought not to be put to an other or coupled together for they wyll deuoure eche other, because there is no meane betwene them, but extreme in one degree.
                           Prouer. xxxj.
                         And the woordes of king Lamuel bee these agaynst drunken Prynces or Iudges: Noli regibus ò Lamuel, noli regibus dare vinū, quia nullum secretum vbi regnat ebrietas, ne forte bibat & obliuiscantur iu
                              ••
                           ciorum, & mutēt causam filiorum pauperis. &c. Oh Lamuel it is not fit for Kynges, it is not for kynges to drinke wine. For there is no secret▪ where dronkenes raigneth, least they beyng dronke forget the law, and peruert or change the Iudgemente of poore mennes Chyldren.Lethi 
                              •
                            Flud whose water did cause men to forget them selues when thei drūk of it Giue wine to such as be condempned to death, and Wyne to suche as Mourne
                           •
                        , that they maye Drynke it and forgette theire miserye and aduersitye. I conclude that wine is holsome for colde complections and crude stomackes, euel for cholerike, immoderatly taken▪ a prince to princes, and a confounder of Iudges, and finally the floud of Lethe to the afflicted, to make them forget theyr miseries,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of the common water of Ryuers.Waters. springes and fountaynes. &c
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        WAter is one of the foure Elementes,
                           Gal. 3. de vic. acu. lib. ij. fē. 2. more lighter then Earthe, heauier then fyer and aire. But this Water whiche is here amonges vs in Riuers, Pondes, Springes, Fluds, and Seas, is no pure water, for it is mingled with sundrye Ayres, Corruptions, Grossenes and softenes.What kynd of water is best. Notwithstandinge in all once Meates and Drynkes Water is vsed, and amongeste all liuinge Creatures cannot be forborne neyther of Manne, Beaste, Fishe, Foule, nor Herbe. &c. for all haue neede of water. And Auicen sayth, the Clay water is pure, for the clay clenseth the water: ye water is better,
                           Auicē lib. ij▪ fen inde dispositionibus.
                         then ye water yt runneth ouer grauel or stones, so that it be pure Clay, & voyd of corruption.

Also waters running toward the East be pure, comming out of hard stony Rockes, and a pinte of that water is lighter then a pinte of the standing water of Wels or Pooles: the lighter the water, the better it is. Also water that is put in wyne. &c. ought fyrst to be sodden, or it be occupied, and so the fyer doth clense it from corruption. Standing waters, and Waters running neare vnto Cittyes and Townes, or Marrish groundes, wooddes, and fennes, be euer full of corruption, because there is so muche fylthe in them of Carrions, and rotten dunge. &c. The hyer the water doth fall▪ the better it is: Ise and snow waters be very grosse, and be hurtfull to the bodyes of men and Beastes. To drynke cold water is euil, for it wil stoppe the body,Salt water healeth scabs and engender Melancholye. Salt water clenseth a man from scabs, Itch, and moyst humoures, it killeth Lice, and wasteth blood betwene the skinne and the fleshe, but it is most hurtful to the stomacke: but the vapoure and smoke of it is good for them that haue the dropsye. If one that is bitten with a madde Dogge, be sodenly cast into a swifte runninge Riuer, and so plunged vp and downe, thre or foure times, hanging by the wast in a strōg Lynnen cloth, it wil helpe him by the reason of the greate sudden feare, in that Melancholye passion sayth Dioscorides. And Auicen sayth, water wherin steele is quenched, is good to be geuen to him that is bitten with a mad Dogge. Also hee sayth, whosoeuer is bitten of a mad Dogge, and is vehemently afrayd when he seeth his face in a vessel of water and knoweth him selfe, it is a sig
                           •
                        e that he shal not die. Also bathes for the clensyng of the corrupt bodyes of men be made of cleane water:The goodlye vertues of cō
                           mon water. without water Menne are more defyled than beastes, for it is a nutriment of euerye liuinge creature, sensyble, and insensible. There is a Riuer runninge at Rome called Tiber, whose water is of such vertue, that it wil remayne in a vessel of stone by the space of an hundred yeares vncorrupted as sayeth Petrus, Andraeus▪ Matthiolus vppon Dioscorides. There were some tyme neare vnto that aunciente and old Citty called Agrigentum, sacred welles, which wer of such vertue, that the water broughte forth suche precious Oyle, that the bodies which wer anoynted therwith, were clensed of sundry and diuers diseases.
                     
                        Of Nilus that noble flood.Let vs not be forgetfull of that noble Riuer Tagus in Spayne, in whom swimmeth diuers kindes of fyshes, vnder whose streames lyeth plentye of golden sandes: what shal we say vnto the Capital riuer of all this Worlde called Nilus, whiche runneth ouer all Ethiopia and Egipte, in which Egipte there is no Rayne, but onely the swellinge and ouerflowinge of that fludde, which being falne down within his bankes, eftsoones great plentye of spices, Herbes, Plants, and fruites do grow, in so muche that the people of ye Land do liue without any greate trauel, payn, or Labour, the cause of the aboundance, and swellinge of this famous riuer sayethe Galen, is when the Snowes bee melted, throughe the greate heate of the Sunne in the Mountaynes of Ethiopia?The cause why Nilus doth flowe. The Ocean the most Myghty Sea of all the Worlde, the Mother of Fyshes, straunge Monsters, Stones of diuers natures, seperater of landes, enuironer of Ilandes, ye water therof through a longe continual boyling ouer the fyer, is conuerted into salte.

Also in the North partes of Scotland nere and vppon the sayd Ocian Sea, stickes, braunches, and bordes of broken shippes falling into the same Sea,The cause of Barnacles. vppon these thinges be engendred foules or birdes, which wee commonlye cal Brants or Barnacles, a kynd of smale Geese, which wee do see commō
                        ly in this Realme, al of one colour and bignes, their Egges wer neuer seene amongest vs, they haue none other generation than I haue sayd: although to the incredulous and ignorant it seemeth vntrue, whose fantasyes I force not of, but of the truth. There be also waters in the Northe partes of the Ocian Sea, which doo freese for euermore,The cause of Christal. whose Ise is nothing elles but Christall, for Christall is of no other generation. Ther bee waters of an other nature here in Englande called Aquae callidae, or the hotte Bathes, at a place so named called Bathe, whose water doth neuer freese throughe extreame coldenes, but is euer warme, whiche hath vertue to helpe the sore,The effectes of the Bathes at the towne of Bathe. scabbed and mangie, if I may so terme them: many haue come thither lame and haue gone awaye without corruption of the Fleshe▪ contraction of synewes, lamenes of Lims or weaknes of nature, & this is a blessing of God among vs, to haue so precious a Iewel. There is a wel near hād of the like effect at Buckestone, whose water hath done many & sundry good cures,Guiacum is of greatter vertue then bath or Buck
                              •
                           
                           stons wels agaynst the nosegay of Naples. both to the sore, and lame: yet these waters are reported to be so gentle, that they wil not vsurpe or steale from Guiacum, his vertue and good seruice, which it dayly doth to his Neapolitā, French or English frends, you know what I mean. What shall I say more of water or deepe welles, which bee warme in winter, by the reason that heate is in the bowels of the Earth, and cold in Sommer, because heate is aboue the earth: Ther is a noble wel called Alissus in Arcadia, and who so drinketh of this water shal be deliuered of the venome, or bytinge of madde Dogges. There bee diuers welles at Nante wyche. &c. wherof is made greate plenty of good white Salt, very rich and profytable to our common wealth. I wil not forgette the Well of Silo and the Sacred floud of Iordane, which was the first water of Baptisme where as Iesus Christ our Sauioure was Baptised himself, whose beginninge is from the heads of Ior. and Dan. or from a Fountayne called Pancade so named of Caesarea: in this riuer is plenty of good Fishes, it is a sweete noble Floud where Christ Iesus our sauioure, did shewe Myracles. But Asphaltites sayeth Plinie wil suffer nothing to syncke into it, Bull nor Cammell. &c. in this Floud is plenty of Sytumen,The dead se
                              •
                           . wher was Sodome and Gomor, sometyme the dead Sea. And thus I make an end of water & the Earth. Rayne water is bynding and stopping of nature, water is a very good seruaunt, but it is a cruell mayster.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Beere and Ale?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        ALe doth engender grosse humours in the body, but if it bee made of good Barley malte, & of holesome water, and very wel sodden, and stand .v. or vi. dayes, vntil it be cleare, it is holesome,Although Beere & Ale be compounds yet I haue here placed th
                              •
                           m after water, wherof they receiue their greattest substaunce. especially for hotte Cholorike persons, hauinge burning Feuers. But if Ale be very sweete and not wel sodden in the brewing, it bringeth inflation of wind and fleum into the Belly, If it be very sower, it nippeth and freateth the guttes, & is euil for the eies: to them that be very Fleumatike, Ale is verye grosse, but to temperate bodies, it encreaseth blood, it is partlye laxatiue and prouoketh vrine. Cleane brued Beere, if it bee not verye stronge, brewed with good Hoppes doth clense the Bodye from corruption, and is very holsome for the Liuer, it is an vsual or common drink in most places of Englande, which in deede is hurte and made worse with manye rotten Hoppes, or Hoppes dried like dust, which cometh frome beyond sea: but although there come many good Hoppes from thence, yet it is knowen that the goodly fyeldes, and fruitfull groundes of England do bring forth to mans vse, as good Hoppes as groweth in any place of the world, as by proofe I know in many places of the Coūtrey of Suffolke, where they brew theyr Beere with the Hoppes that growe vppon theyr owne groundes, as in a place called Brisiarde, neare to an old famous castle called Framingham and in many other places of the country.A late house of Nunnes Thus to conclude of Ale & Beere, they haue no suche vertue, nor goodnes,Surfets of Ale & Beere Au
                                 •
                              cē ij. tert
                                 •
                              a capi. viij. Auerho in cō. Rasis in .iiij. Almen. cap. v.
                         as wine hath: and the surfets which be taken of theym, throughe dronkennes, be worser then the surfetes of win
                           •
                        . Know this, that to drinke Ale or Beere, of any empty stomack moderatly, hurteth not but doth good But if one be fasting hungry, or empty, and drinke much Wyne, it will hurte the Sinewes, and bringe the Crampe, sharpe Agues, and Palseis, as Auicen, Auerhois, & Rasis, sayth. The rinsepichers had a good medecine prepared for them: for the Maior of London, vppon a polityke consideration, Anno. 1560. made an order against mighty Beere and Ale, aswel for the health of the cōmons of London, as for their profyte. Whereat the Ale knightes, were not little offended, & do continue stil as true Souldiours to ye strong Beere and Ale, which is their Captayne, notwithstanding my lord Maiors decree, as it plainly appeareth in their flushing, red, coppred noses. For strong Ale hath such vertue and worthines, that he cannot bee so persecuted, afflicted, yea and banished, but his disciples most constantly will followe him, to the end of their liues. Therfore they shall haue Bacchus blessing for their labours. But yet the end of Drunkards and Gluttons is miserable: therfore my Marcellus, heare that most prudent and wisest Prince king Salomon, saying. Noli esse in conuiuijs potatorum, nec in comessationibus eorum qui carnes ad vescendum cō
                           ferunt: quia vacantes potibus, & dantes symbola, consumentur & vestietur pannís dormitatio. &c. Keepe no company with Wine bibbers, and ryotous eaters of Fleshe. For such as be drunkardes and ryoters, shal come to pouerty. And hee that is geuen to much sleepe, with ragged clothes. &c Lo, these be the rewardes of such companions and vnthriftes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        
                        I Thanke you for your good counsayle, good Hilarius, you haue spoken indifferently: and you haue alledged good writers, but specially Salomon, whose woordes be well placed, against ryotours and drunkardes, with their rewards, as pouerty, shame, and ragges. &c. for abusyng the good creatures, and blessinges of God: but to vse them in good order, they be our seruauntes, and we may take them for our neede. I pray you say some thynge of Bread, which is the chyefe foode to all liuing men in this Land.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THE beste bread is made of cleane Wheate,The meane baked bread▪ the beste. which groweth in claye grounde, lightly Leuened, meanely Salted, and the Bread to be baken in the ouen, not extremely hote, least it be burned, nor also lesse than meanely hote, least the Breade bee heauie and rawe: the lighter the bread is, and the more fuller of the holes, the holsomer it is, thus Auerhois, and Rasis saye.
                           Aue in v. col. Rasis in .xxx. in almū Cap. 3 What bread is beste. And also Bread must neither bee eaten newe baked, nor very stale, or olde, for the one causeth drinesse, thurst, and smokyng in the hedde, troublyng the braynes and eyes, through the heate thereof. The other dryeth the body, and bringeth melancholy humours, hurting memory. The best bread is that,Bread of a day old, that is of a day old: and the loaues or Manchettes, may neither be great nor litle, but meane, for the fire in small loaues, dryeth vp the moistenes or vertue of the bread, & in great loaues, it leueth rawnes and grosenes, Read Galen,
                        
                           Galen ii. al
                                 •
                              
                              ment. capi. 2 Sodden bread not holsome. in the properties of bread: sodden bread, which is called Simnelles. or Crackenelles, is very vnholsome, and hurteth many one. Rye bread is wyndie, and hurtfull to many, therefore it must be well salted, and baken with Anisedes. And commōly crusts of Bread, be dry and burned: they do engender choler aduste and melancholy humours. Therefore in greate mennes houses, the Bread is chipped so nigh, and so largely pared, that mutch of it is abused, & shamefully made into sosse for Dogges, which would feede a great number of poore people: but many men bee more affectionate to Dogges,Barly bread. than to men. Barly Bread doeth clense, and make the body leane.
                     Yet thus mutch more of Bread. If a Manchette stand al night in Borage water, and in the morning bee giuen to a man, that is new fallen madde, it wyll helpe him, vsyng it xiiii. dayes: being also letten bloud in Cephalica, a veine in the forehead. Also a Cake or Manchette, made in this manner, and daily eaten: ℥.viii. halfe in the morning, and as much at Night, helpeth Gonorrhea passio, or running of the raines. A pound of fine flower, and the fyne dryed pouders of Walnuttes, Chestnuttes, Hasil nuttes, Filberdes,Maister R
                              •
                           
                           ger Strāges Medicine, brought from Uenice, written by a learned Italian Doctour. Nutmegges, Almonds, and Pistacia, of these, vii. kindes of Nuttes. ʒ.iii, tempered with this meale, and red Wine, and so your bread made thereof. There is also a kinde of Bisquit made with Anisedes, holsome for the lunges, or reumatike persons. Calamus, long Peper, Ginger, Spicknard, and Galanga, bee good to put into their bread which haue the Dropsie, or Tympanie.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Peares.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius,
                     
                        THere be of diuers kindes of Peares, heauier then Aples, not good vntill they be very ripe,The operation of Peares. vnlesse they be tenderly rosted, or baken, and eatē after meales. Ther is a kynd of Peares, growing in the City of Norwich, called the Blacke Freres Peare, very delicious and pleasaunt, and no lesse profitable vnto a hoate stomacke, as I heard it reported, by a ryghte worshipful Phisicion of the same City, called Doctour Manfield, who said, he thought that those Peares, without all comparison, were the beste that grewe in any place of England. Dioscorides sayeth Lib. i. Capi. cxxxii. That all Peares doe stoppe and bynde,Blacke Freres Peares. of Norwiche. so do the leaues, and therefore sayeth he, plasters be wholsome made of thē, to stoppe vomites and laxies. There maye Lye bee made of Peare tree braunches, or barkes, which is holsome to seeth wylde Peares in, that be called stranglyng, or choke Peares. For so soddē, it doth take away venome or hurte: the same Ashes dooth helpe Men, beyng drunken in whyte Wyne,Ashes made of wild peare-tree, the vertue thereof. that be almost strangled with Mouseums, or sutch like. Peares haue many names, as Peare Robert, Peare Iohn, Busshops blessyngs, with other prety names. The red Warden is of greate vertue, conserued, rosted, or baken, to quench choller.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Aples.What is the vertue of Aples?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     APles be very cold and wyndye, hard to digest, engenderers of ill bloud, hurtful to the flegmatike persones, good to cholerike stomackes, if they be through ripe,The operation of Aples. Diosco
                                 •
                              ides Lib. i. Cap. 131 For a chole
                           
                              •
                           ike stomack. Costarde. greene Cote. Pipins. but best if they be rosted, or baken and eaten with grose Peper to Bedwarde. They bee of many kyndes, as Costardes, the greene Cotes, the Pippē, the queene Aple, and so forth: the distilled water of Aples, Champhire, Uinegar and Mylke, is a good medicine to anoynt the Faces of chyldren, that haue the smal Pockes, when the sayed Pockes be rype, to kepe them from pittes or erres, prouided, that they haue giuen them in their Milke Saffron, or Mithridatum, to expel the venome, and kepe them from the aire,A medicine for the smal Pockes. during the sayed sicknes. The pappe of an Aple with Rose Water applyed to the Eyes, dooth quenche the burnyng, and taketh away the rednes of theim. Aples bee good in Winter, and prouoke vrine: eate theim with a lyttle Salte. Tartes of Aples wyth Anisedes, make sweete breath: there is a wyndy drynke made of them called Cider: Uergis is not greatly to be
                           •
                         lauded, albeit, custome doth permit it.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Peaches.What is the vertue of Peches,
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        The operacion of Peaches
                        THE leaues be hote, for if they be stamped in plaster wyse, & applyed vnto the belly, they kyl wormes: the fruict is cold, and very good for the stomack:Hot stomack. they be good to bee eaten of them, that haue stinking breathes of hote causes,Against stynking breathes eaten of any empty stomack,
as it is the counsayle of Galen. who sayeth, if they be eatē after meate, they do corrupt, both them selues, and the Meates lately eaten, and they be byn ders of the belly:Quinces holsome. but Quinces bee most comfortable after meate, and

they doe enclose the s
                           ••
                        mack, & let vapours frō ascending into the braine, & stoppe vomites. Folkes that be swolne in theyr bodies, and vse to eate quinces with the grose pouder of Galanga, Spiknard, Calamus,Swellinges. and Ginger, shall receiue comfort: they may be eaten before meate, of the sayd sicke pacyents, as well as after, but mutch vse of them, is not so profitable, as delectable to the eaters of them.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertues of Quinces? Any more than thus.Quinces.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius▪
                     
                     
                        IF thy stomacke bee very hote, or moyste, or thy belly laxatiue,The operacion of quinces. then Quinces be good to be eaten before meate, beyng rosted, or eaten colde: and in this case, the tarter be the better:Pōgarnettes. and Pomgarnettes be of the same vertue, as Isaac sayeth: but eaten after meate, they doe enclose the stomacke, and moyste the belly,
                           Isaack in perti▪ die.
                         they ought not to be vsed in common meates: the custome of them hurteth the sinewes, but in the waye of medecin they bee excellent: and the cores beyng taken out, and preserued in Honye, or kepte in their musslege, they may longe continu
                           •
                        ,Quinces rawe hurte. to the vse of rostyng, or bakyng, for they be perillous to the stomack eaten raw, but preserued, they do mightely preuaile against drunkenes:Against drunkenesse. they be cold in the first degree, and dry in the begynning of the second.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Cheries?Cheries.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THE tarte Cheryes vndoubtedly, be more wholsomer then ye sweete,The operacyon of Cheries. and eaten before meate, they doe mollifye the Belly,
                           Against hote Choler.
                           
                              Galen de alimen. Ra lib. xxiii. Capi Diosc. in libr. i. capi. cxxix
                           
                         prepare digestion, and they bee most excellent against hotte burning choler, they be good also after meate, and be of many kindes, as blacke, red, and pale: the red Cherye partely tarte is beste, Galen and Rasis, greatly commende thys fruicte. This fruicte is cold and moyst in the fyrst degree. And the gumme of a Cherye tree, sodden in Wine and drunke, hath all these properties, saieth Dioscorides, it helpeth old coughes, giueth good colour to the face, sharpeth the syght, maketh perfect digestion, and maketh cleane the raynes from grauell. Plinie sayeth, Libr, xv. Capi xxv. it was a straunge thing to see Cheries at Rome, vntyll sutch tyme as Lucullus the Noble Romaine vanquished Mithridates, the kyng of Pontus. And from thence came Cheries at that tyme to Rome, whych was aboute the incarnacion of our Lorde Chryst .lxxiii. yeres. And then within fewe yeres after, all Italie was full, and thē most part of Fraūce: and so they came in to this our great Britan chiefly in Kēt, whereas great plenty doth growe yerely.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Grapes, Rasines, Prunes, Barberies, Orenges, and Medlers?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        Grapes.
                        
                           HIppocrates sayeth, that the whyte Grapes, bee better than the black, and wholsomer when they are twoo or three dayes gathered frō the Uine, than presently pulled from it: and if they bee sweete, they bee partlye nutratyue, and warme the Bodye, and thys agreeth Galen,
                        
                           Galen de alimen. ii. Rasis in iiii. alimen. xx.
                         and Rasis, who seemeth to commend sweete Grapes, aboue Dates, saying: although they bee not so warme, yet they do not stop the body, or make oppilation as Dates doe. They be wholsome to be eaten before meate, euen as Nuttes bee good after Fysh: towards the South, & South East parts of the world, there be many growyng in diuers Regions, wherof the Wines bee made, the farther from vs, the hotter the Wine: there bee very good Grapes growyng here in England, in many places, as partly I haue seene.Raisons. Raysons of the Sonne be very wholsome, and comfort digestion, but the stones and rindes, would be refused: and then they be good for the splene and lyuer,
                           To comfort digestion Splene and Liuer.
                           Sweete prunes bee laxatiue, but tarte be byndyng Oxiacantha, called the Barbarie Mespila called the Medler.
                         so be Aligantes. Rasis doeth mutch commend them, but vndoubtedly the small Raysons be hurtfull to the splene. Prunes, and Damaseins haue vertue to relaxe the belly, if they be sweete and ripe: they doe nourysh very lyttle, but quench, choller. Grapes Raisons, Prunes Plūmes, and Slowes, if they be sower, be all binders of the belly. And so is the Barbery, called Oxiacantha, and Orenges, except the saied Orenges be condited wyth Sugar, and then they be good coolers agaynst hoate choller, whose rindes be hoate, and dry of nature. The fruict called the Medler, is vsed for a medicine, and not for meate, it prouoketh vrine, and of nature is stipticke.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Capers and Olyues?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Capers and Oliues.
                        FResh Capers be hoate and dry in the second degree, and eaten before meates, doe greatly comfort digestion: and bee the best thynges for the Splene,Good for the Splene. or to clense melācholy, so is the oyle of Capers to anoint the Splene, or left syde, that can be taken. Preserued Oliues in Salte, eaten at the beginning of meates, do greatly fortefy the stomacke, and relaxe the belly, clense the liuer, and are hoate and dry in the second degree. The decoction of Caper barkes helpeth the Splene, beyng drunke.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Aloes.What is the vertue of Aloes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THere bee twoo kindes of Aloes, one is named Succotrina, which is like a liuer,Two kyndes of Aloes. cleare, bryttle, bitter, coloured betwen red and yellow: this is best for medicines, a litle of this tē
                        pered with Rose water,To helpe watry eyes. and being put into the eyes, helpeth the dropping, & watry eyes. Also it is put into many excellēt medicines laxatiue, as Saffrō, Mirrhe, Aloes, mingled together in the forme of pilles, is the most excellent medicine against ye Pestilence,Agaynst the Pestilence. cal
                              •
                           ed pillule Ru
                              ••
                           i as it is writtē in this boke folowing. Hony & Aloes mingled together, doe take away the markes of stripes, and also doe mundyfye sores,

and vlcers, it doeth clense the aboundance of choller and fleume from the stomacke, it is not good to be taken in Winter. For Auicen doeth forbidde it,Markes of stripes of the skin. but in the Sprynge tyme, or Haruest: the pouder thereof, the wayghte of a French croune, mingeled wyth the water of Honye, or Mede, and so drunke in the mornyng, doeth clense both Choller and fleume.To clense choler 
                              •
                           nd fleum▪
                         There is an other grosse Aloes, which is good for horses tempered with Ale, and ministered, and aswell to other great Beastes, as horses, the wayght of halfe an Unce, and thus mutch haue I sayed of Aloes: but if Aloes be cleane washed, it is the holsommer, mutch vnwashed Aloes wyll cause Emeroides.A cause of the Emroides.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Dictamnum,
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     
                        IT is of a singuler vertue, leaued like vnto Peneryal, but greater, and somwhat rough, and tasteth lyke Ginger when it is bittē on: this herbe is incomparable for his singuler goodnes, in spedy deliueraunce of dead chyldren from their Mothers, beyng drunke in Syrupe. Ther be two kindes of them the one called Dictamnum, and the other Pseudo dictamnum, one of the garden, the other of the field, and haue many rootes:Dictamnum is a good sodē
                           ▪ salue for a souldier in the fyelde▪
                         the Leaues bee onely occupyed, and not the stalkes, beyng sodden in wine, it draweth corruption out of depe woundes: if any man be wounded wyth Iron, as Dager, Speare, nayle, pyece of harneis, hayleshot, or mayle, droppe in ye Iuice of this herbe into the sayed wounde, and eftsones it wyll drawe forth the Iron therein fyxed, so that the pacyent drynke of the same herbe in wine.
                           Dioscorides. lib iij. cap. xxxj. A maruailus woorke of Dictamnum. 
                        Dioscorides reporteth, that wylde beastes, and Goates among the Grekes, whē they were wounded with arrowes, dyd feede on thys herbe, whose vertue caste oute the Arrowes, and healed the wounde. It wyll do the like also to mankynde, if he be not smitten witha mortall wound. The smoke of this Dittan, called Dictamnum, doth driue away any liuyng thinge frō man, that is venemous, as Tode, Neute, Skorpion. &c. And the Noble Poete Uirgil doth greatly commend the same precious herbe,
                           Lib. xij. Aeneidos.
                         with these pleasaūt sweete Uerses, saying:

                           Hic Venus indignonati concussa dolore,
                           Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
                           Puberibus caulem folijs, & florae comantem
                           Purpureo: non illa feris incognita capris
                           Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.
                        
                     
                     Which Uerses are Englyshed thus.

                           But Venus mutch apauld at this her Sonnes vnworthy payne:
                           Greene Ditainie from Ida sacred mount in Creeti shee bringes,
                           The stalke with tender leaues, and Purple flowers full fresh that springes
                           An hearbe to Roebuckes wylde, and Beastes not tame right wel be knowen.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     I pray you, what is the nature of Helenium, called Enula campana, which we common plain people call Alacam pane.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        
                           Enula cāpana
                        
                        THis herbe of worthy Memorye, hath thus ben called, as some doe say, from the battayle of Troie: which was before the incarnacion of Gods onely sonne,A fable perhaps. our God and sa,+uiour Iesus Chryst .1189. And then was named Eleniū of the lamentable and pitifull Teares of Helena, Wife, to Menelaus,A bitter diffinition. when she was violently taken away by Paris into Phrigia, hauing this herbe in her hande. Or as other doe say, this noble Helena made a goodly medicine of this herbe, agaynst the deadly Uenome, or poysone of Serpentes. And Plinie reporteth, that Iulius Augustus the Emperour,
                           Auicen secum C
                                 •
                              n. cap. Enula campana.
                         did eate of this daily with his meate. It preuayleth against poyson, it dooth comfort the heart, as it is sayd: Enula campana, reddit praecordia sana. Aicuen. The wine of this herbe, doth clense the lyghtes, breast, and iunges: and swallowed with clean Hony, it causeth to spyt, and breaketh wynde. Balme and thys herbe be great friends to the heart: and if it be sodden wyth Rue, it preuayleth agaynst the colike, and ruptures, whych come of wynde: it is not exactly hote and dry. It is very comfortable in bathes, to washe and clense the body from filth, itch, skabbes, and to keepe the partes of the body warme, and to make them redde that were pale: and is good for Ischias called Sciatica, or paynes in the huccle bones, applyed playster wayes warme. The roote is of great vertue, sayeth Galen Libr. vi. Simplic Medic. If it bee champed, sayeth Plinie, fastyng in the mornyng, it will confyrme & stablysh the teeth: and the oyle is good agaynst the tourments of the guttes, whych be vexed wyth wynde, and helpeth the sinewes. If any wylde beast fall in any net, dyed wyth the same Enula, they shalbe poysoned therewyth, as Galen sayeth in hys booke de Theriaca ad Pisonem, but some wysemen doe thynke rather it bee a fable, than a true history. And thus I do ende of this good herbe, whose chyef vertue is in the roote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is a Tassill good for, besydes the Clothe workers businesse, which is in hys shoppe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Tasell.
                        A Tasell is called Dipsacus in Greeke, by a contrary name, for it receiueth in the concauitie and holonesse, dewe and rayne, to releue the drynesse. It is also called virga pastoris, Sheperdes rod and Fuller Thystell. Ther be two kyndes, one wild & vnprofitable: the other is a good Seruaunt in the common wealth, for trymming of cloth, and cappes, & it is a styffe Tasell. The rootes and leaues wyth the pryckes be dry in the second degree: if thys herbe bee sodden in water to a thicknesse, and drawen through a strayner, and sodden agayne vnto a more thycknes thys layed vpon chappes, or places, opened wt wynde, as in Marche, it healeth theim. The same put into a Fistula, doeth heale it, and taketh away Wartes, so say Dioscorides and Plinie,
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What doe you saye of an herbe, called Hypericon.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius,
                     
                        
                        
                           DIoscorides calleth thys herbe, Libr. tertio Capitulo. Cliiii. Hypericum, Chamaepityn, Androsaemon, or Corion, with suche coppye of names:Hypericon S. Iohns herbe, weeds grasse. or woorte. The seede dooth partly smell lyke Rosen: If this herbe bee chafed and broken in ones hande▪ it sendeth forth a bloudy Iuice, sayeth he, the seedes be blacke, and the flower yellowe, it groweth in the Moneth of Iuly, and August, and is commonly knowen in euery place: and of temperament or nature, is hotte and drye▪ 
                        Galen sayeth, it prouoketh vryne:
                           Galen. Libr. viii. Simpl. medicamen. torum.
                         al the herbe must be put to the medicine, as to salues, then it healeth moyste and stinkyng putrifyed sores. And beyng drunke, eyther the water, the Syrupe, the iuice, or pouder, healeth Ischias, or the Sciatica, of the same mynde is Dioscorides, But they must drynke of the seede, sayeth he, by the space of .xl. dayes. And this Sayncte Ihons worte or herbe, helpeth tartians or quartaynes, drunke with wyne: the iuice healeth any burnte place, and is good for the stone. Acyrum, Androsaemum and Coris, be kynsfolk. But the seedes of Acyrum wyll purge, they differ in forme. But for tyme, sauour, place, and nature, they be much like one vnto the other: And are al named among vs, sainct Iohns worte or herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     OUr fyelds doe grow full of Scabious, euery mere and balke is full of it in Iune: Some dooe vse this Herbe for the Pestilence, commonly called the plague. Wherefore doe the learned men, as Dioscorides and Galen say it is good.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           SCabiosa so named of old tyme, because it is giuen in drynke inwardly, or oyntmentes outwardly, to heale Scabbes, sores, corruption in the stomacke, yea,Scabious for scabbes, it taketh the name of the propertie, the right name is Stobee or Psora-there be two kindes of it. and is most fryend among all other herbes, in ye tyme of the Pestilence, to drink the water with Mithridatum a mornynges. It stoppeth the bloudy flixe, and Hemeroides, and anoyntment made thereof, healeth Antrax, called the Carbuncle, or hotte burnyng Pestilent botch, or fearful sore. Galen sayeth Lib. vii. Simplicium medicam. that it is hot, drie, and bytter, and hath vertue to bynde, dry, and stoppe, it wil ioyne a fresh wound together. The iuice dropped into the eye, healeth it, if it be pricked or bleede. It is good to be dropped into foule rūning moist eares, it should seeme, being both hotte and dry, if it be sodden in wine, and drunk, it dryeth superfluous humors. Dioscorides calleth it Stoebe, the flowers are like a Blew or white thrummed hatte, the stalke rough, the vpper leaues ragged, and the leaues next the grosse rootes be playner. Under whom often times, Frogges wyll shadowe them selues▪ from the heate of the day: hoppyng and playing vnder these leaues, whych to them is a pleasaunt Tent or pauilion, sayeth Aristophanes, who made a playe, wherin Frogges made pastime.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Buglosse?Buglosse.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is an herbe most temperate, betwene hot & cold,To comfort
                              •
                            the hearte. of an excellent vertue, a comforter of the hearte, a purger of Melancholy, a quieter of the Frensye, a purger of the vryne, holsome to be drunke in wyne,Frensye. but most

effectually in Syrupe, Dioscorides, and Galen doe greatly commend thys herbe, and to bee prayse worthy daily experyence proueth.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        BasillWhat is the vertue of Basill.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is warme in the second degree, hauyng the vertue of moistnes:
                           Ozimum or sweete oder, or redolent.
                           Dropsie For the brain and harte.
                         and if it be sodden in wyne, with Spicknard, and drunke, it is good agaynst dropsyes, wyndes, fleumes, coldnes of the heart, hardnes of ye stomacke. The sauour of Basyll doth comfort the brayne and heart, the vse of thys herbe in meates, doth decay the syght,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus
                     
                        Polipodie.What is the vertue of Polipodye.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IF thys Herbe be sodden wyth Beafes, and Mallowes, in the broth of a Henne,Fleume. and drunke, it wyll lose the Belly, and clense Fleume: the roote of this herbe, beyng dry, and beaten in fyne pouder, and drawen into the nosethrylles, helpeth a disease called Polipus. Galen. and Actu
                              •
                           rius. affirmeth that ℈.i. of the rootes of Sene,
                           Actua in li. de compo. med.
                         soddē with Polipodye in Mede, or Honye, and so strayned, doth purge choller and melancholye, without payne. It is of the lyke vertue and effect, sodden in the broth of a Henne, or Ptisane, and is of order temperate, and relaxyng:
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Burnete, whych in Sommer tyme is vsed to bee put in bowles, & glasses of wyne, serued at the table?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Potentilla.
                        IT is very pleasaunt to be putte in cleane Cuppes, Gobblettes, or pieces, wherein is cleane Frenche wyne: it maketh it pleasaunt wyth the Iuice of Lymondes, and good whyte Sugar: it hath golden flowers, greene leaues, purple rootes of the out syde, and whyte wythin, and doeth drye and bynde, and stoppeth the bloudy flyxe very well.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Spinage.What is the vertue of Spinage,
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Mollefying.It is an herbe mutch vsed in meate, colde and moyste in the fyrst degree: it mollifyeth, and maketh softe the belly, it is good for them that be hotte and drye, and ill for flegmatike men,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Uinegar.What is the vertue of Uinegar?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     UInegar is colde and drye, and is hurtfull for them that be melancoly: but when it is drunk, or powred vpon an outward wound, it stoppeth the bloud,The property of Uinegar. it also killeth hotte apostumacions of Erisypilas: it is an enemy to the Sinewes, Uinegar & Brimstone soddē together, are good for

the goute, to wash it wythall. Uinegar tempered with wolle.To helpe the goute. helpeth a disease called Soda, in the head, applyed warme vnto the place. It is good in Sause, for warme and moyste men. Uinegar with cleane clarifyed Hony,Paynes in the throte. 
                        Penidies, and faire water sodden together, doth greatly helpe the paynes of the throte, lunges, and, stoppyng of the winde, and quencheth hoat dyseases, And sharpe Uinegar mingled with Salte,Byting of a Dogge. and put vppon the biting of a Dogge, doth heale it: and agaynst poison it is excellent, chiefly to drink a little thereof agaynst the Pestilence, in a mornyng.Agaynst the Pestilence.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Setwall?Setwall.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     IT is hoate and drye in the seconde degree, and is good: the pouder thereof to be drunke, is moste of effect against the pestilence,Theophr
                              •
                           
                           stus of Setwall. except Mithridatum. It is good agaynst poyson, windie, chollerike, and colde passions of the hearte, and doth restrayne Uomites, the wayght of .viii. G. doeth suffice to bee drunke in Ale or Wine, vpon an emptie stomacke.Uomites strayned.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Mellilote?Mellilote. Sertu
                              •
                           a, or kinges croun
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT hath vertue to ripe, and is more hoater than colde, Mellilote Flaxsede, Rose leaues, Champhire, and womannes Milke, tempered together, doe make a goodly medicine agaynst the hoate inflamacion of the eyes.
                           For the eyes, stomacke and liuer.
                           To helpe the Splene.
                         If this herbe be drunke in wyne, it doeth mollifye the hardnes of the stomacke and liuer: the most excellent plaster agaynst the paines of the Splene, doeth Mesuae describe, which is made of Mellilote. Uinegar, Roses, and Mellilote together, do helpe the headache, it applyed to the forehead in a cloth,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Tyme?Tyme.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is vehement of heate, wyth drynesse in the thyrde degree: Dioscorides sayeth, if it bee dronke with Uinegar and Salte, it purgeth fleume: sodden wyth Honye or Mede, it hath vertue to clense the lunges, and the breast, matrix, raines, and blader, and kylleth wormes. The pouder of Time eaten in Potage, is holsome for the eye sight: Theophrastus sayeth, there be twoo kyndes of Tyme, the one whyte, the other blackysh.
                           Theop lib. ii. Capi. vi.
                         There bee no flowers growing in fields or gardēs, better beloued of Beene, then the flowers of Time: and that yere wherein the greatest plenty of these flowers be seene, that same yere Honie doth abound: & when they be scarce, & not fertyl, thē there is litle, or no good hony yt yeere. Dioscorides sayeth in his .iiii. booke, that Epithymum is the flower of the harder Time. One vnce of Time dryed, & beate in pouder, mingled wt 
                        ʒ.iiii. of Oximel, & drunk of an empty stomack, before diner & supper, helpeth the stomack, guttes, matrix, and blader: and is good for them that haue red

blered eyes, and for those that bee tourmented with the goufe. Galen commendeth Tyme in his .vi. booke of Simples, so doth Aetius with these commendacions aforesayd. The whiter the Tyme is, with white and purple flowers, the better it is, the blacker ye worse. And thus I do conclude of Time desiring God that we may spende the tyme well to his glory,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            cannot 
                              〈◊〉
                            called 
                              〈◊〉
                           . and profite of our neighbour: for tyme cannot be called againe, but by litle and litle slippes away, they which Godly obserue the tyme, in tyme to come, shall receiue the fruictes of theyr owne labours, wyth happy liues, quiet mindes, and blessed endes: whereas the shamefull abusers of time, and mysusers of themselues, although euyll spent tyme, seeme well vnto them, yet theyr liues be wicked, theyr labor fruictlesse, and their ende horrible: as once shall appeare when death doeth come, whych is the end of euery tyme.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Sweete Calamus odoratus.What is the vertue of sweete Calamus odoratus, called Calamus Aromaticus.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius,
                     
                        IT is an excellent sweete roote, and profitable for men, if the Poticaries kepe it not vntill it be rotten: it is hotte and drye in the beginning, & to the middes of the second degree. It hath power to clense, to dry, and to wast all windines within the body, without hurte. Galen doth greatly commend the sauour of it.To waste winde in the bodye. They that drinke of this roote sodden in Wine, shal haue remedy of ye white Morphewe, and recouer good colours in their Faces, and this haue I often proued.A remedy for the white Morphewe. It helpeth to clense, purge, and dry the water that is betwene the skin, and the flesh: beyng drunk with the sedes of Smalage, Parsely, and Fenel, sodden wel together & strained, it helpeth crampes, and syckenes in the sinewes: being dronke with wine, sodden wyth Sage and freshe Cappers, it helpeth the coldnes of the splene, liuer, and raynes. Also it augmenteth seede of generacion,Seede augmented. and purgeth termes menstrual if the pouder be dronke. What is better in Wormewoode, or Sage Ale, then Calamus to be drunke, for them whych haue the dropsie, as Ascites. &c. It wyll expulse and put out sores of the blader, and make the stinkyng vryne to bee sweete: truely it is a noble herbe, but the vertue is in the roote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Ginger.What is the vettue of Gynger.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Auerhoisin v. in coll, Mesue in .iiii. disunt.
                        It is hote in the third degree, and moyst in the end of the fyrst, if it bee vncolloured, white, and not rotten, it is very good, most chiefly if it bee conserued and greene, as Mesue sayeth: it maketh warme a cold stomack▪ and consumeth windes, helpeth euyll digestion and maketh meate goe easely downe into the stomacke.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Oile of Oliues best.What is the vertue of Oyle made of Oliues.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        GReene oile of Oliues, is ye mother of al Oiles which doeth draw into her own nature, the vertues of herbes, leaues,To digeste colde herbes. flowers, fruictes, and rootes: sweete Sallet oile is wholsome to digest colde herbes, and Sallettes, tempered with sharpe Uinegar and Sugar: newe Oyle doeth moyst,
                           Anerhois commēded oyle in quinto de ouis
                           ▪ Oile of roses. and warme the stomacke, but olde oyle corrupteth the stomack and cleaueth to the Lunges, & maketh one hoarse. Oyle of Roses, & sharpe Uinegar tempered together, is good to anoynt the foreheds of them,Againste Frensies. that be troubled with extreme heate, or frensye: so that Buglosse be sodden in theyr Possetale, or els drynke the Syrupes of Endiue, or Buglosse. There be many goodly vertues in compounded oyles, both to make hote, and to coole the body, when it is extreme hotte, as the great learned man Mesue, hath descrybed in his Antidotarie. Of oyles, you shal haue plenty followyng.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Rosemary.Rosemarye.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     
                        ROsemarye is an herbe of great vertue, hotte and dry: sodden in wine, and drunke before meate it doth heale the Kynges euyll, or paynes in the throte, as Dioscorides and Galen saye.Kinges euyll The sauoure of it doth cō
                        fort the brayne and hearte, the flowers of Rosemary is an excellent Cordial, called di Anthos, & is good after Feuers, or for Melācholy men.The brayne comforted. And ye seedes drunke in wine, helpe the fallyng sicknes, and paynes of the breast.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Agrimonye.Agrimonie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        DIoscorides sayeth, that if this herbe with Swines grease, bee stamped together, and layed vpon an olde rotten sore beyng hote,Old sore. it hath Uertue to heale it. The seede of thys herbe drunke with Wyne, it is good agaynst the bytyng of Serpents, stoppyng of the Lyuer, and bloudy flixe.Biting of Serpentes. The Syrup of it is good to open the lyuer,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Mugworte.Mugworte.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        MUgwort, Fetherfew, and Tansy, be very hote and drye in the second degree: Mugwort, Spurge, & Oile of Almōds, tempered plasterwyse, and applyed cold to the sicke payned stomacke, wil bryng health. It is good in bathes,A payned stomacke. sayth Galen, it is wholsome for women: it clenseth, warmeth, cō
                        forteth the matrix, and breaketh the stone. Plinie sayeth,Breakyng the stone. it is good against byting of Serpents, and holsome for trauayling Men, if they carry it, it lyghtneth them from wearines. Tansye doeth kyll and caste Wormes from Chyldren, dronke wyth Wyne:Killing wormes in childrē
                         a colde playster stamped, and layed vppon the Bellye of a Woman, whose Chylde is deade wythin her, it wyll separate the deade Chylde,A presēt helpe of a dead child from the liuyng Mother. Galen sayeth in hys syxt booke of Simples, there bee twoo kyndes of Mugworte, The one is commonly knowen to vs,To neese, the other

groweth nere the sea side: they be both of singuler vertues, theyr waters being stilled, theyr Syrupes prepared, bee very wholsome for the corrupted, or stopped Matrix, and also the herbe is good for bathes, in such purposes for Women. This hearbe was first found of a Noble Queene, named Artemisia, wife to Mausolus Kyng of Caria, who was both learned in herbes and plants, chaste of Life, comely of person: and so loued her husband, that when he was deade, she made a Sepulcher, which was so excellent, costlye, & rich, that it was compted to be one of the wonders, and greatest maruailes of the Worlde, she called this herbe Latifolia, & Tenuifolia, after her owne name, Artemisia.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Parsely, and Saxifrage?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THey haue vertue to breake the stone: Parsely is hote in the second degree, and drye in the middest of the third. The seede drunke with white wine, prouoketh the menstrual tearmes, as Dioscorides saieth: also Smallage hath the like vertue, as further appeareth,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus..
                     Nowe saye on, and shewe to me, my good Maister, I pray you of Elleborus the white, and of Elleborus the blacke.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           ELleborus Candidus. which causeth vomites, very strong and daū
                        gerous for conuulsion, is called Albus, because the roote is whitish, it hath long stalkes, reddish leaues, with ribbes in them, in the forme of Planten leaues, many yellowe flowers growinge vpon stalkes by themselues, and growing in colde Groundes. The rootes muste bee gathered in Haruest: and this herbe is hote and drye, in the third degree. And is perilous to bee giuen, to women with childe, olde folkes and Children, or to tender people, or in Winter, but in sommer onely, and before supper. But one dragme, put in Milke or Furmentie: but fyrst do thus. Cutte a Radish roote in the greate ende, cleaue it ouerthwarte: then put your Elleborus Albus into it one whole night,How to correct Elleborus albus. or twelue houres, then presse it hard, this wil not onely take the venome from this Elleborus, but also giue it vertue, that it shall not hurte nature, or put the body into daunger, when vomites approch. This wil helpe the fallyng syckenes, Vertigo, Melancholy, madnes, white Leprosie, windes in the guttes, Dropsye, Timpany, Goutes Quartens, Coughes, and many such lyke; and prouoke neesynge. &c.
                     
                        Elleborus niger, is called Melampodion, not only for the blacknes, but of the inuenter who was called Melampus,
                        
                           Of Eleborus niger.
                         a keeper of Goates, It is hote and drye in the third degree, & is planted in the Gardē, & is called Beares foote: black, rough, hearie rootes, like the bush vpon the breast of a Foule, whych we call the Cocke of a Turkaye. It hath all the vertues that the white hath, & more: thre peny waight in pouder drunke, casteth forth Wormes, clenseth fleume, melancholye, and dropsye. And it wyll clense the matrix, and expulse, or caste forth the deade Chyld. It is good for Pessaries for Women: the Iuice is good

for to be put into the cares agaynst defnes. In plasters, it killeth wormes: the iuyce thereof helpeth horses of the bottes, and Swine that be infected. Or els if it be put into their eares, it will helpe them, when they be payned in their heades. No beastes dare eate thereof it is so bitter, nor foules, but only Quayles: As Aristotle, Auicen, Galen, & Lucretius affirme. These herbes be wholsome in outward plasters, to clense melancholy, & to dry fleume.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Centaury, or fell terrae?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           PLINIE sayth, that the syrupe of this herbe, drunke with a little Uinegar and Salt, doth clense the body: the Leaues and flowers be of great vertue, to be sodden and drunk agaynst all raw humours of grosse fleumes, watery, or windy. It doth clense cruent or bloudy matter, within the bodies of men or women: the pouder of this herbe, is good in pessaries for women, causing the dead childe, to depart from the mother. And is wholsome agaynst the Pestilence, in the tyme of Winter: and is hoate and dry, and of two kindes, and healeth both olde and newe woundes, as Galen writeth ad Papiam, of the vertue of little Centaury. This herbe was founde with his vertue, by that olde noble clarke Chyron Centaurus, the inuenter of Herbes, Astronomy, and Musike.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Penicialle?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is an herbe of mutch vertue and profite, hoat and dry in ye thirde degree: Dioscorides sayth, if this herbe be sodden with Hony, and Aloes, and drunk, it will clense the Lyuer, and purge the bloud most excellently: it helpeth also the lunges. Simeon Sethj sayth, if a womā drinke it with white Wyne, it will also prouoke, and clense the termes mē
                        struall. And is also a very wholsome Potherbe, and mutch vsed amonge Pudding makers: which was inuented of some Phisicion, because of the warmnes & goodnes agaynst melancholy. The iuice with Uinegar, put into ye nose, is good agaynst the Fransy, or Lunatike sycknes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Lichen called Lyuerworte, that groweth in Welles, darke colde places, and rockes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        WIthout all doubt Lichen doth so grow in darck places, and is called Lyuerwort: for it is good agaynst the sicknesse of the Liuer,
                           Hepatica lichē
                            called Lyuerworte. it is colde and dry. Yet it hath a watery humour, it is vnpleasant in sauour, it stoppeth the bloudy flixe, it healeth a ryngworme, sayth Dioscorides: & stamped wt Hony, it helpeth the yellow Iaūdice,
                           Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48. if the mouth & Tongue be anoynted therewith. The iuyce stoppeth woundes from bleding: Galen & Plinie agree to the same.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then of the herbe, belonging to the Lunges,

called Lungworte?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           LEonardus Fuchsius sayth, Pulmonaria doth grow out of the Oke tree, or stony places,Lungworte because it is lyke ye lunges of man. hauing soft leaues, the vpperside greene, and the neather whitish, with little small bladers vpon ye crumpled leaues, and the whole lumpe of this herbe, sayth he, is like the Lunges of mankinde. It is drying and binding, and not colde and moyst, as some doe affirme: and the reason is, because it groweth from the Oke, which is of ye same nature, and temperament. And this herbe doth close newe woundes togither: most chiefly it helpeth the Lunges, or spitting of bloude, and stoppeth termes immoderate,
                           Super Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48 & the bloudy fluxe. Mary Matthiolus sayth, that Lungwort hath leaues like to Buglosse, sharp, rough, white spottes, purple flowers, very like to the great Dogges tongue. It hath the same vertue yt the other hath, & worketh one effect: therefore it is no errour, to call theym both a like, Lung worte, or Pulmonaria. Specially, because two great learned men, so call them of their elders and vertues. The last Lungwort. dyd Iulianus Marostica,
                        
                           Iulianus Marostica his strupe for ye lunges. a noble Phisicion vse to seeth in water, to the one halfe, putting in Sugar, and made a simple syrupe thereof to giue his pacients, to stop spitting of bloud, and to heale sores of the lunges.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then to Mercury, what is the vertue thereof, and why is it so named?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis auncient inuented herbe, was founde of Mercurius who florished about .164. yeres,Mercury. before Chrystes byrth. He was ye son of Maia, this man was afterward called one of ye Gods, for his wonderous wisedome, and inuention of Musike, and other Artes. He among al other herbes, so loued this, that he for ye singuler goodnes thereof, called it after his owne name Mercury. Whereof there be two kindes, Male and Female: the first hath blackishe leaues,Mercury helpeth conception. the second whitishe: they be hoate and dry in the first degree. Dioscorides sayth, that these doth moue the benefite of the Belly: they be very good for women after their naturall termes be past, to drinke either in syrupe, or decoction, to helpe conception. The male Mercury for men, the female for women. This Mercury is very good in Clisters laxatiue: we cal Rumex Mercury, which hath golden Sandes vpon the backesyde of the leaues, whych is also solutiue, and beneficiall for the belly. Sodden wyth Mallowes, it purgeth the Belly, and expulseth fleume, but it anoyeth the stomacke, as sayth Plinie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     MAllowes so called, ab emollienda aluo nomen traxit, it taketh his name of mollifying the belly:Mallowes. and they be good with Lettice, parboyled and eaten in fyne Sallet Oyle, to mollify the belly.

                           Mallovves for nature be very good,
                           To relaxe the belly, and purge the bloud.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        
                           DIoscorides and Galen say, there be two kindes of them, one of the garden, which is great wyth flowers like Roses,
                           Galen. Li. vij. simplis.
                         called Bismalua, and the lesser kinde of the fielde & wood: this herbe is commonly knowen. The more that Mallowes be watry the lesser they bee of vertue, & the dryer the seedes are, the more they be of strength. And Mallowes be moyst and slimy of nature, relaxing the belly, but hurtfull for the stomacke, sayth Dioscorides: the leaues wyth Salt and hony eaten, heale the paynes of the throate, called Angina. But vsed in woundes or sores, put in no Salt, they heale the stinging of Bees: they be excellent good in Clisters, to purge the belly, raynes, and stone. The roote sodden and drunke, and eftsoones vomited, doth preuayle agaynst poyson: the leaues stamped, and tempered in oyle, do take running vlcers from the head. And sodden in vryne or pisse, do take away skurfe, skabbes. &c. from the Face. The roote sodden soft, and layed warme vpon a Womans breast,A medicine for womens breastes. with blacke woolle, doth heale the same, when it aketh, burneth, swelleth, or is harde. So wyll the leaues, one handfull sodden in Oyle and Wyne, purge Women, sayth Plinie. The leaues sodden in Wyne, warme applyed to the mouth of the matrix, after deliueraunce of the chylde, do stay the falling downe, and maketh softe. They are good agaynst the Feuer, called Sacer ignis, the holy fire, which we call saynct Anthonies fire, sodden in Oyle & Uinegar, and applyed to the member, where as it burneth. The Seedes drunke in Wyne, doe clense the Stomacke from noysomnes, and rotten stinking fleume and melancholy. The Iuyce of Mallowes, often tymes drunke, helpeth the falling euill, and also clenseth ye Lunges, and causeth one to speake cleare, sayth Simeon Sethi.
                     
                     There is also an other Mallowe, called Althaea, Althos doth signify medicine, or remedy: this Mallowe so named, is excellent in vertue.Althos do signifie medicine I thinke it to be that, which we call the French Mallowe: the leaues and the flowers be hoat and dry, in the first degree, and so be the rootes in the beginning of the second degree. Sodden wyth Swines grease, Goose grease, and Terebintin applyed to the belly, do aswage the greeuous swelling, burninge, or inflation thereof. The same medicine doth open things venemous within the members, that be stopped, sayth Dioscorides. Seeth the roote in wine,
                           Dioscori. lib. 3 Cap. 146. and drinke this Wyne, it prouoketh vryne, clenseth the Raynes, easeth the stone, and is good for Ischias, called Sciatica, ruptures, and the bloudy flixe. Galen sayth Lib. vj. Simpli. medicamen. the Seedes be good for the stone and Raynes: the rootes sodden, do stop the bloudy flixe. Theophrastus sayth, to be drunke in sweete Wyne, it helpeth ruptures, and the cough, and wyth Oyle, it healeth vlcers. And sodden wyth fleshe it doth conglutinate, or ioyne together thinges separate within the body: and yet it digesteth, looseth, and concocteth crude matter, sayth Galen▪
                         The leaues sodden in whyte Wyne, quenche the heate, & abate the swellyng of a womans breast. Who is able to giue more cōmendation or prayse to any herb, than to thys herbe, for the singuler medicine called Dialthaea, which is in ye booke of Cōpoundes?

Mallowes bee commended of all good Wryters. Plinius sayth, that the Mallowes in Arabia,
                           Plini. Lib. 19. Cap. 4. within seuen monethes be fertill, & lusty in growing, that they be as bigge as staues forthwith, he calleth them trees. Furder he writeth a marueilous history of a Mallowe, which was monstruous to beholde. There was sayth he, in Mauritania, sometime a garden (where Hysperides which were the .iij. daughters of Atlas, which kept ye garden) wherein grewe Orenges, called the Golden Aples, taken away by Hercules: in this Garden grewe a Mallowe, twenty foote long: and no man was able to fadome the same. Sutch like Mallowes growe in Inde, and thus I ende of Mallowes, good friende Marcellus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     CUrst fellowes, and taunting Marchaunts, will say in derision, skorne, and mockage, when they be angry with others: I care not for theym, no, not a Rushe: is a Rushe of so small an estimacion, and nothinge worth, as it is counted?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        RUshes doe grow in Fennes, and dry groūdes, and be commonly knowen. And I my selfe did know a Rushe growing in a Fenne side, by Oxforde in Suffolke, that might haue spent three hundred Markes by yeare. &c. Was not this Rushe of good estimation?Sir Thomas Rushe. A fewe sutch Rushes be better, than many greate Trees & Bushes. But Marcellus thou doste not know that countrey, where sometyme I did dwel, at a place called Blaxall, neere to that Rushe Bushe: I would all Rushes within this Realme, were as riche in value: it would make a florishing common wealth, and mutch plenty, no Beggers, but riches, and a golden Worlde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THe olde prouerbe is, Wishers and Woulders, be no good householders:Pouerty is better among the common people, than aboundaunce of riches. And if there were sutch plenty▪ face well labour, art, learning, and obedience: But neede is the pricke and whip, that causeth the Plowman to trauell, the Mariner to sayle, the Scholemayster to teache, and to conclude, euery man to labour in his calling, through which labour, and industry, the teaching of youth, the gouernement of age, the building of Cities, the mayntenance of good lawes, the rewarding of vertues, the punishment of vices, the defendynge of enemyes, and rewardinge of freindes, and obedience to Prynces be maynteyned. Whereas through sutch aboundaunce, all were cast away, and euery man would be a mayster. Euery one would disdayne seruice, and so at length, all should be tourned into slauery,If harpstringes were of one degree, vnpleasaunte were that harmony. and the harmony of the Common wealth, should be chaunged into horrour, whereas no order is. Example, if all the Pipes in ye Organes, were of one tune, or one degree, vnpleasaunt were that Musike. But here wyll I stop, and lay a strawe, and fall into my byas agayne. I pray thee aunswere me, what a very Rushe is, which groweth in the fielde?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        COmmonly knowen, and of sundry kindes, as Rushes growing in Riuers, and running streames: as there be great plenty rounde about the Isle of Ely, my natiue countrey, whereof the playne People make Mattes, and Horse collers of the greater Rushes, and of the smaller they make lightes or Candelles for the Winter. Rushes that growe vpon dry groundes, be good to strewe in Halles, Chambers, and Galleries to walke vpō,Olde Rushes and old courtiers, be past pleasure. defending apparell, as traynes of Gownes, and Kertles from dust. Rushes be olde Courtiers, and when they be nothing worth, then they be cast out of the doores, so be many that do treade vpon theim. A Rushe is called Iuncus, that is a Bull Rushe: the Rushe bearing blacke seedes, is called Atrifer, whose seedes drunke in Medicine, do stop flixe, and termes immoderate:
                           Libr. viij. simplici. medica.
                         and the same seedes be good for to cause sleepe. Galen speaking of Iuncus, sayth that some bare seede, which is good in medicine, that is, to bring sleepe. The other that haue no Seedes, be vnprofitable. Dioscorides sayth, the seedes of ye Rushe of Inde do bring sleepe, vsed in pocion.
                     There is also Iuncus odoratus, of two sortes, Plinie doth call the first Triangularis, it smelleth as sweete as the Rose, when it is broken. An other Rotudus, the Apothecaries doe call it Squinantum, and groweth in Africa,
                        
                           Diosc. li. pri. Cap. 16. but yet Dioscorides is of this mynde, that the best grow neere to Babilon: because this Squinantum is an Englishe herbe, vsed onely of the Apothicaries, wee haue it lyke Ote strawe, and is called Iuncus. The flower is Anthos, as all flowers be so named in Greeke: this herbe, flower, or roote, drunke with Peper, do helpe the Dropsy, being vsed: and is good for the lunges, splene, and Raynes. The roote of Squinans herbe, is hoat and dry, and is good against wynde, collike, dropsy, fleume or crude rawe matter in the body, or any member of the same beaten into pouder, and drunke in wyne.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     OH how sweete and pleasaunt is Woodbinde, in Woodes or Arbours, after a tender soft rayne: and how frendly doth this herbe,Woodbynde. if I may so name it, imbrace the bodies, armes and braunches of trees, wyth his long winding stalkes, and tender leaues, opening or spreding forth his sweete Lillies, like ladies fingers, among the thornes or bushes? Is thys Woodbinde so profitable, as pleasaunt? I pray you tell mee.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        WOodbinde is called Siluae mater, Caprifolium, Lilium inter spinas,
                        Sondry names of Woodbinde, as Periclimenon, because it windeth aboute ye next trees and Bushes, that it groweth vnto. 
                        Periclymenon. This herbe is so commonly knowen, that I neede not discribe the forme thereof: for thou hast done wel thereof thy selfe. But to the vertue of this Woodbinde, in temperament or nature, it is vehemently cuttinge and drying, as Galen sayth, Lib. 8. Simplic. medicamentorum, the leaues bee sower. The oyle of this is good to anoynte any parte of the Body, that is numme or very colde: and the water is good to be drunke agaynst pissing of bloude. And also the Syruppe is good for the Lunges, or one dragme drunke in wyne, is very good for the Splene, that is stopped, or

corrupt Lunges. And there is nothing (in oyntmentes for woundes of the head) better than this Woodbinde: and Woodbinde water is holsome for sores in the Throate and mouth. And it is sayd, that women, which vse to drinke plentifully, or mutch of thys water, are by the vse thereof made barren.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THere is a long winding weede, hauing the property of Woodbynde, in spreding, winding, and imbrasing, or lasing, Bushes, braunches, and hedges: the Leaues somewhat lyke Iuie, and Flowers lyke to white Cuppes, or Belles, what call you it?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           The Bell woodbinde Smilax.
                           
                           
                              Dioscorides Lib. 4. Cap. 35
                        
                        THis is called Helxine, Smilax, or Campanella, or the Bell Wodbinde, Antonius Musa sayth, the leaues in likenesse, colour and forme, be betwene Mercury and Plantein. But Dioscorides sayth, they be lyke Iuie, and the Iuyce of the leaues drunke, or sodden in Wyne, doe make the Belly laxatiue: and nothing els can I report, but that it is noysome among herbes and Flaxe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat is the vertue of Senturion, which groweth almost in euery Medow, in May, and Iune? It hath sweete pleasaunt purple Flowers, and of diuers colours, and is soone gone after Iune commeth in.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Testiculi canis Dogs stones
                        THis herb hath sondry names, as testiculus Canis, or Orchis, or in the Greeke Cynosorchim, Serapias, or Dogges stones. In the Byshoprike of Durisme, in a place called Warrell shyre, the people doe call it Crowfoote, although Crowfoote be another herb. This Testiculus, or sauing your reuence Ballocke Flower, hath two stones, and named Orchis, an other three stones, which is called Triorchia, with many spotted leaues, like a Snake. These be of kindes,
                           Libr. iij. in Cap. 124.125 126.127. Male, and Female, great & little, of both sortes. Some will haue Satyrion, which you call Senturion & Dogges stones, both one: but they do erre, and mistake the matter, that make no distinction betwen them. For there is distaunce betwene them, by the iudgement of the Eye: although that in vertue, they be not mutch vnlike, and thus saith Petrus, Andraeas, Matthiòlus, vppon Dioscorides and he doth proue it by this reason: the rootes of Dogges stones be like other beastes stones,Satyrj are beasts hauing a heade lyke a man, & body like Goates and are named Gods of the woodes, and they first foūd this herbe of Venus, to stir vp carnall lust. they be long, two hā
                        ging one higher then the other, that whych hangeth beneath is full, & will sinke in water, the other stone is hollowe, and will swimme. And this cō
                        clusion did one mayster Ihon Sharman, an auncient good Practicioner of Northfolke, shew me long since: but the stones of the Satyre be round without greene, within very white, when the rinde is of, and swelled great, leaued lyke to ye garden Lilly, but smaller, bending to the ground: sone broken, and three leaues in number. Then there is an other of the kinde of testiculi called Palma Christi, whose rootes be like hands, wyth fingers Auicen
                        
calleth them golden fingers▪ and be of nature of the greater testicles. The greater testicles be hoat & moyst, and eaten, eyther in Goates milke, Dia, or Syrupe, they will prouoke abundantly to Venus. But the little kynde, eatē eyther whole or in pouder, do quench, coole, and withstand the sayd Venus: and bringeth to dame nature, colde, trembling Saturne, whych is colde & dry. But Galen sayth, Satyrium or Satires stones, be hoat and moyst, sweete to taste vpon, and doe as the great testicles
                        ▪ and more abounduantly, and be good agaynst running of the raynes, and consumption. &c. Gieuen to the frentike body, or one whose sinewes be weake in hand, in Polsy it helpeth them: The seede. ℈.j. fine in pouder drunke in wyne, morning and euening, or diner and supper, vsed a long time, healeth the falling euill. Nicolaus Florentinus sayth, it helpeth the quartayne, and it stoppeth the bloudy flixe, sodden in red wine, and healeth stinking vlcers, made in a Playster. Diasatirion is made of this, which is of vertue most excellent, as appeereth in the compoundes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Ligusticum, called Louage, with the long blacke seedes, and long white rootes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THe herbe is great, with large braunches,
                           Fuchsius.
                         stalke & leaues smelling mutch like to Smalage, but mutch sweeter: it is called Ligusticum, because it was first found in Liguria,Liguria is a part of Italy from the hill Apeninus, vnto the Tuscum Sea. Dios. li. 3. ca. li
                         and we cal it Louage here in England, ye Italians call it Ligustico: the roote, herbe, and seede, brused and sodden in wyne, or in the decoction of Ptisane, or Barley water, will clense the lunges, open the vesselles of the vryne, prouoke termes, or secret infirmities, heale woundes: being sodden and applied to Phlegmon, or hardnesse in any outward member, the sore is made softer.
                           Eritius Cordus calleth this cō
                           mon Angelica, but Manardus Epist. lib. xij. Epist. iiij doth cal it Alexander. Ruellius calleth it Louage Galen. lib. 7. simplici.
                         And warme applied in the maner of a plaister to the Belly of a Woman whose Chylde is deade, eftsoones it is sent forth from natures most secret Chamber. And the seede finely beaten in pouder, put in to some wholsome thin broth, or wine of a percing nature, doth skower the Raynes, clense the splene▪ and amend the lyuer, expulseth the secondes after the birth of children, and dryueth forth winde. Plinie sayth, that the seedes will stop the belly, and is good agaynst the byting of Serpents. &c. But the Seede eaten alone, prouoke vomites, and sometime therefore, sayth he, it must be giuen with Rewe, and so the seede is good for the dropsy. The rootes soddē and the decoction drunke, is very wholsome for the Femenine kinde, for ye matrixe, belly, precordials, and breast: It warmeth and maketh good concoction. Thus I conclude of this Ligusticum. But Galen sayth, there be two kindes of them, the one he calleth Smirnium: the other doth grow in the mount of Amano, called Hipposellinum, which is called Smalage,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you to Apium, which is called Smalage?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is named Hipposellinum, the great Persiley of Macedon,The vertue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Persiley is to open places, which st
                              •
                           p vrine and winde. whych we name Smalage: other say, it is Olus atrum, which is Alexander. Some call it Smyrnion, Marcellus and Brasauolus doe seeme eyther to

mistake, or els vntruely to reporte of this Hipposellinum. For they saye the leaues bee roughe, and the roote blacke: But Dioscorides Lib. iij. Cap. lxiiij. doth saye, the roote is white and sweete, the leaues bee not rough. But Galen made very little distinction, betwene Hippofellinum, and Smyrnium: but this is one kinde of Persiley, the horse Persiley, or the Mountayne Persiley. Seseli, Smyrnium, Imperatoria, Elaphoboscum, and Alexander,The vertues of Persileis. al these seeme to be Perseleys. Some greater, and of more puissancy than other: some called Wyld, some tame. As garden Persiley, mountayne water, wood, or hedge Perseley▪ &c. and all these haue power both in roote, stalke, leafe, and seede, to open the raynes, bladder, and to bee put in euery Antidotarie, that moueth vryne, breaketh stone, or clenseth grauel. Or against collike, or stopping of the splene, with aboundaunce of melancholy. Sodden in oyle any of these rootes, or Seedes drunke, they cast out strong venome or poyson: but the seede is the strongest part of the herbe. They be good to be put into Clisters for the stone, or torment of the guttes: and in pultases, for swelling of the legges or armes. And all these be good agaynst the stinging of Serpentes, and feuers: swelling in the stomacke, or dropsy, both in plaister, Clister, or drunke with cleane white wine, or Ptisan.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     There is a stinking weede called Dogges tongue, wherefore is the same weede good?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is no weede, but a very good herbe, and is called Lingua Canis: Ruellius and Fuchsius doe erre sayth that famous man Matthiolus vpō 
                        Dioscorides,
                        
                           Cynoglossum. Dogstongue. But Licopsis is a kinde of Dogstongue, and called Anchusis. Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. in calling Dogstongue Lycopsin, for it is not so named, but Dogstongue. And there be ij. kindes of them, as sayth Matthiolus in Dioscoridem, lib. 4. cap. 12
                           •
                        . which about Adryans dayes the Emperour, were found in ye sands, neere vnto Rome. This kinde of Dogstongue, hath neyther stalke, flower, nor seed, but out of one roote, there springeth leaues, lowe by the ground, in the compasse of a little weele, like Beane leaues, somewhat whyte, & wyth tender soft wolle. This herbe, sayth Pet
                              •
                           us Andreas Matthiolus, is like a widdow hauing no children. But there is an other Dogstongue, which hath rough seedes, with prickes in the middes like vnto Targets: which seede sodden and drunke, healeth tertians and quartens, and these smell like eche other, and be colde and dry in the seconde degree. And stamped with olde Swynes grease, do make a plaster for a Dogges byting: It healeth olde and newe cruent bloudy woundes. And mingled wyth Hony, it preserueth the hayre from falling, and will quench burninges, tempered wyth Uynegar, and sodden in red wyne, eyther drunk, or made in a plaster. It stoppeth the bloudy flixe,
                           Fuchsius.
                         and restrayneth Gonorrhaea, or distillation of the Seede, called nature,☞ vlcers, skabbes, poxe, or sutch like. But the first Dogstongue is the best to make Pilles wythall, for the reume and Catarre. Galen maketh no mention of this, but Dioscoris and others doe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        
                           Dios. li. 4. Cap. 127.What is the vertue of Hippoglossum, which is called Laurus, or Horse

tongue, as I haue heard say, by one that read me a peece of Dioscorides?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis herbe, or small stirpe, is called Laurus Alexandrina, or Daphne, the Englyshe people call it the laxatiue Laureola. It dyeth not in Winter, it shyneth like Iuie, or Bayes, but is whitish. It beareth the berry within the leaues, red: it is hoate and dry of nature. If. ℈.4. or .vj. be sodden with Symphytum, called Cumphory, in Wyne, and so strayned and drunke, it will purge the belly. A little pouder of this, is gieuen to children in potage, to take away the abundance of humidity, & kil wormes. It maketh quicke or speedy deliueraunce, in childbirth, secondes, and termes drunken three peny wayght, two or three tymes sayth Plinie: Galen affirmeth that it forceth vryne. The leaues stamped, and bounde to the heade,
                           Lib. 4. Ca. 127 take away the payne, sayth Dioscorides. Wyth this herbe, did that most noble victorious Alexander, sometyme tryumph, and his Captaynes, he wearyng the Diademe. And sometyme the best herbe of thys kynde, did grow vpon the Mountayne Ida, neere to the dolorous Citty of Troy in Phrigia.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you to Sanicula, called Diapensia,
                        
                           Sauicula and quinquifolium
                         or the greate fyue leaued leaues, and other fyue leaued herbes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        AMong the herbes for woundes, this is mutch praysed, and doth heale woundes equally, wyth any other healing flower, roote, or leafe. The Toppes of this herbe, are not mutch vnlike Straburies, somewhat whitishe, and is called Sanicula a sanandis vulneribus, of healing woundes.Sanicle healeth woūdes. It groweth in darke places in May, and is bitter, hoate, and dry in the seconde degree: the syrupe or iuyce of this herbe, is very good to be gieuen to wounded men, Women, and children, in small Wyne, or their other drynke. For it taketh effect both to heale, both within and without the body: if it be applyed hoate, vpon a swelling part or member, it will asswage the same speedely. The iuyce thereof is good also for Oxen, milche Kyene,Sanicle is good for Horses & Kyen. and horses that be brused, or wounded: giuen eyther in their drinkes, or applyed to the hurt member, or place. There is no speedier remedy to help the lunges, than this herbe sodden, and the decoction dronke vpon an empty stomacke. And what soeuer Cumphorie, called Symphyton, can doe in woū
                        des, the same can Sanicle called Sanicula· It stoppeth the bloudy flixe, or helpeth him that hath taken to stronge a purgacion, and stoppeth the immoderate running of the raynes: now besides this Diapensia, wherof we haue spoken, there be hir kinsfolkes, called Pentaphillon, or Quinquefolium, whych hath fiue leaues in number. There be three sortes of them, the greate, the meane, and the little: these be commonly knowen rather by the formes among the common people, than by their singuler goodnesse, which in deede they haue. As Dioscorides sayth. lib 4. Cap. 38. the rootes well sodden, and the same decoction drunken, helpeth the tertian, and the Mouth washed warme wyth the same, and so kept in the mouth, it taketh the paynes from

the teeth, and stinke, filthe, and vlcers from the same, and is wholsome in a gargarisme,A good gargarisme, to washe the throate▪
                         for paynes in the throate. And if the leaues be well sodden, or the iuyce, with Endiue or Planten water and the same drunk eyght daies, helpeth the yellowe Iaūdice: in quotidians & quartens, this herb helpeth sodden in posset Ale. Also for the falling sicknesse, bicause it is hoat and dry, in the third degree: sodden in Uinegar, it killeth a Tetter or ringworme, it healeth the fistula, tempered with Salte and Hony, and stamped together, and put into the place or hole: The syrupe of this, drunke .xij. tymes, healeth Angina, or swelling in the throate, and stoppeth the immoderate fluxe of the Belly, and termes.
                     
                        
                           Fragraria Comaron or the Straubery, of the swee
                              •
                           e odour, so named.Mayster Andrewe Matthiolus, in his commentary vppon Dioscorides, coupleth Fragraria, called Strauberies, with these fiue leaued herbes. Although the sayd Straubery haue but three leaues, cold in the first degree, and dry the second. The leaues and rootes, will heale Woundes and vlcers, and a fluxe of bloud, and termes, it prouoketh vrine, and helpeth the lyuer. If they be sodden in cleane white Wyne, they do clense the raynes and bladder: & will clense the mouth, and strength the teeth, when they be lose. The distilled water of Strauberies, will clense the darke mistes of the eyen: and also quenche heat in the face,To clense the face. and take away red spottes. And the same water is wholsome to delay Wyne at dinner and supper, specially for cholerike persons in Sommer. The berry it selfe being ripe, is partly hoate and dry, so some learned do affirme, but being not ripe, they be colde & dry. These ripe beries strawed into cleane clarifyed Hony, and put in the pouder of whyte Peper,For a short wynde. do helpe them, which haue short winde, and payne or strayghtnes in their breast or do vse mutch sighing, sayth Paulus Aegineta. There bee two kindes of Strauberies, the greater, and the lesser. Also Rubus idaeus, alowe Bramble, called Ribes, or Raspes. a bery like to the Straubery: these beries stop a flixe, sodden in red Wyne, and drunke oftentymes. Nothing may be compared to them in that case, and they quench saynct Antonies fyre. The leaues stamped,For to heale the Hemeroydes. sayth Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 34. do heale the Hemeroydes, to anoynt the place therewith: and also the vertue is to clense and dry. And this fruite or leafe, doth heale the sores in the mouth, and do close woundes new made with any weapon: and this fruicte stamped, and applyed plaster wayes to the stomacke, helpeth presently Cardiaca passio, and hoate paynes in the stomacke,
                           For Cardiaca passio.
                         and the burning paynes of the eyes, when the sayd eyes be almost starte forth, as they terme them, through great vomits, fal, footebaule, leaping. &c. And they also kill these foule vlcers, that crepe through ye skin, growing vpon the head. The flowers of them, with fyne clarified Hony, put into the eye, doe cleare the sight, and quenche heate, and dry vp water contayned in them.For red eyen. And of these Ribes called Raspis, be two kindes, the one wyth sharpe prickes, which be not so effectuall and good, as the other with tender prickes. And thus I ende of these beries, which haue the vertue of the Mulbery.
                           Dioscorides. being an Heathen man, serued his prince in battell, and yet learned ye knowledge of herbes: But many professing the name of Christ, wil neyther serue 
                              〈…〉
                            one, or learn the other, seruauntes to idlenes, & abusers of tyme. And thus doth that olde famous Egyptian Knyghte and most learned man in herbes that euer was, wythout all comparison, called Phacas or Dioscorides wryte, he was subiect to Cleopatra the queene of Egypt, and to Antonius, and learned to know herbes in their kyndes most

truely, and commended these herbes and berries aforesayd, whose workes be greatly aduaunced, and most cunningly handled nowe, by that famous learned Phisicion Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus Senensis. Anno salutis. 1558.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Arum, which we in Englishe cal Cockowepintell? And some call it the burning herbe, or dragons mace?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis herbe is commonly knowen, it groweth in the Springetime,
                           Aron called Cucko pricke. leaued like Dragons, in moyste and dry places, and of natuure is hoat and dry in the first degree, and so it is without doubt in the third degree. The vertue of this Leafe, Seede, or roote, tempered with Cowes dunge, is good to make a plaster agaynst the Gout, sayth Dioscorides. Plinie sayth the seedes thereof fynely beaten in pouder & tempered with clene oyle, helpe the sorenesse of the eare dropped in, the iuyce healeth polipus in the nose: and mingled wyth cleane Hony, it clenseth the darknesse of the eyes: and sodden hoat wyth oyle, it healeth Hemeroydes, as Plinie sayth, as I haue proued the vertue thereof often tymes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Maydenhayre, Called Tricomanes?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is an hearbe betwene hoat and dry, if it be sodden in Wyne,Maidē hayre. it breaketh the stone: it cleanseth the matrixe, bringeth downe the secondes, as Dioscorides and Galen say, the syrupe of this helpeth ye splene and lunges, the best doth growe vpon hard rockes. Great plenty groweth about Chiueat hilles in the North, called Ordo Lucis: so doth Ad
                              •
                           antum, whych is of the same vertue.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THat herbe which you do call Symphytum or Cumphory, you sayd before, Saniculum is equall with it. By this I do gather that this Cumphory is then equall with Saniculum. Wherein is their equality, in sauour, taste, or other vertues, I pray you tell mee?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        NEyther lyke in forme nor taste.
                           Symphytum. Solidago. Cumphory. Consolida. of the healing a comfortable herbe so named. First in forme the leaues bee lyke Buglosse, yea, or rather to Solanum, called the great night shade leaues, the rootes great and blacke without, and white within, flowers yelow. Secondly, the sauour and taste not pleasant, but ye vertues agree in this poynt, to heale woundes, yea broken bones, because they haue power to draw forth, and also to glew the seperated flesh together: it groweth in Rockes, euen so doth it in Gardens, it is of two kinds. &c. and is hoat and dry in the seconde degree. This herbe will draw forth filth from the Lunges, if it be sodden in sweete Water, and so drunke. And will effectually stop the blouddy flixe in men, and menstruall termes, when they do abounde in women immoderatly.To heales broase, or a falle. This herb assuredly doth heale men, when they be fallen from some high place, if the fall be not deadly. The

lyke it doth to al maner of beasts. Chirurgens cānot misse it. Cōsider also, that there is a lesser kinde of Symphytum, of the third sort called Cōnsolida minor, which is of the vertue of healing, both wythin and without the body, and for all broken bones, and doth heale foule sores in the pudent, or secret places of men & Women. These be sufferant medicines in meates for the wounded men. These be herbes of great vertues, and excellent in goodnes for mankinde:
                           Consolido to heale, and may well proceede of the verbe Consolido, of healing ye which was brokē, or ioyning together things separated, to comfort or make them safe, either in Oyle, Salue, Plaster▪ &c. And thus I do ende of thys Symphytum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus
                     What is the nature of an herbe, called Scilla or Squilla, or the Sea Onyon?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THere be two kyndes, whych of nature be hoat and dry, in the second degree: and yet of a merueilous nature. For the outwarde rynde is very hoat and bitter, and the core is very colde: therefore they must be cast both away, after the sayd Scilla is eyther rosted, baken, or sodden. For els it is euill, and hurtfull to nature, and thus it must be prepared. Cut of the leaues, which be like vnto the leaues of Aloes, but not so groase. The fruit is as great as a boyes head, of Scilla whych is the greatest kinde.Goodly medicines be made both of Squilla, and of Pancras, whych is the great and lesser sea Onions. The seconde kinde is lesser, of the bignes of a great Onion or a Peare, and is called Pancras, these both spring or bring forth their yellow flowers three tymes in the yeare: and in the Canicular dayes, roaste it vnder the coales in a Paper, vntill it be soft, or els bake it in Clay, or els seeth it in shift of waters, vntill the water leaue bitternes, then take it forth and let it dry in a shadowie or dark place, couered with a cleane Linnē cloth then you may put to it Oximell, that is cleane Hony clarified, and sharp Uinegar sodden together, whych is called Oximell simplex: and when the Scilla and this hath stand to gether in a close double glasse in the Sunne, all the Canicular dayes, or els to make more speede, all that is contayned wythin this glasse haue bin sodden togither, set it in a vessell with hoat boyling water, then it is called Oximell Scillitici which is of great vertue. This Oximell is good to be eate of them which haue paynes in the head, comming of cold, or for them whych be smitten wyth the fearefull sicknes, called the Falling euill, or Morbus comitialis, wyth opilacion in the head. It also is good for cold rotten Coughes, and stinking breathes, and chiefly for short windes in the spirable partes. It helpeth to aswage the swelling of the Splene, or the dolour therein: and casteth out filth from the guttes, that causeth payne and tormenting wynde in them. But beware if any Byle, or festred sore be in the guttes, then vse it not to mutch. And it killeth smalle Wormes in the breast, and also clenseth the raynes and bladder, moouing vryne, and healeth the yellow Iaundice. The wyne thereof if it be sodden in wyne, after it is prepared, prouoketh vryne, and clenseth the raynes, and is good agaynst Dropsies. The oyle is good agaynst ye Palsey, and coldnes of the ioyntes, or trembling, for the Splene, and coldnesse of the Brayne or feete. The vinegar clenseth the inward partes,To heale ryngwormes and Tetters. and also killeth Tetters, Ryngwormes, and Itche in the Skynne.
                     
                        The seede beaten into pouder, and eaten with Hony, doth clense the Belly. Truly this is an herbe of great vertue,To heale ring wormes and tetters. as sayth Hippocrates. li. ij. Cap. 167. and Galen. li.viij. Simplicium medicamentorum. and is called the Onion of the Sea. And his Roote maketh a mollifying emplastrum, to make warm and softe a harde cold sore, comming of Melancholye, or cold and drye matter.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of the Marigolde, with golden yellow flowers
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe Marigolde, named Caltha or Calendula, because it florisheth al the kalendes of the yere: and is also named Solsequium, because it openeth his Flower,Marigoldes. and turneth round al the day after the Sun, and closeth in his goldē beames at night. This herbe needeth no further discription, it is so commonly knowen, and is hote and drye, the flowers wil change the haire, and make it yellow.To moue Sweate. And this herbe sodden in wyne, drunke warme, moueth sweat, and prouoketh termes mē
                        strua
                           •
                        , specially the flowers of this herbe, or the Syrupe. Perfumes of the same, will doo the lyke: the smoke of them to be made in a close subfumigation, wil do the same. The iuice warme, put into the mouth, helpeth ye teeth if the aking come of colde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What saye you of Nigella Romana?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis is called Melanthium, which you do name Nigella: for Dioscorides doth remember this herb in,
                           Nigella.
                         
                        Libro tertio. Capit. lxxviij calling it Githe, lyke Poppye. It hath blacke seedes, the leaues much lyke Coriander: the knoppes wherein the seede do growe, in the top haue little hornes, and is hoat and drye in the third degree. Brose it, and smell thereunto, put it in a Lynnen cloth, and holde it to the nose in the morning, and it wil stop a colde reuine: temper it with vineger, and it wil take away headache applyed thereunto Euen so it kyleth Woormes in the Bellye, applyed thereunto plaster wayes, mingled with an Oxe gaule: & the iuice dropped into the eye, healeth a disease called Epiphora, whiche is droppynge of theym. It is good for to drynke, to clense the Lunges, purge termes, put away wynde and collike, and kyl wormes. &c. Dronk in wyne, by the reason of the bitternesse, it maketh way and quick passage for the vryne: and skowreth cleane the bladder, except the stone be confyrmed in it.Agaynst poysone. It taketh paynes in the mouth, and teeth awaye. Receiued in warme with vineger, it preuayleth agaynst poyson, as eating of a Spider, or any venim: and drunke in wyne or whay certayne dayes, it wil draw milke into ye Breastes of womē, clense and encrease the same: with many other singuler vertues, as Dioscorides, Galen, Plinie, and Simeon Sethi affirme.Of Opium made of black Poppy. And wyld Cocle that groweth in Corne, is of the same kinde: and the iuice may be pressed foorth,

as Opium, and preserued to medicine to cause sleepe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What vertue hath Poppye, I pray you
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THere is wyld Poppye, leaued like Rocket, & flowred like Rose: it groweth in corne, the seede redde, and is cold nere hande in the fourth degree,Of Poppye wyld and tame. 
                        Dioscorides affyrmeth, if this be sodden in water and applyed to the head, or drunke, it recō
                        sileth sleepe. It also quencheth S. Anthonies fyer. called Sacerignis, or shingles, made in a plaster wt Oyle of Roses & Uineger. Acacia & this soddē togeather in red wine do stop ye bloody flixe and termes, which behard to be stopped. But this herbe maketh the memory very dull, to vse it much: but saffron, Myrth and the Oile of Bitter Almondes, tempered with the iuice therof, warme, put into the deafe eare, bryngeth hearing, if it be not incurable. Rose water, womans milke, and the whyte of an Egge beaten togeather put into the eyes, doth take awaye dimnes,A medecine for sore eyes very excellent burning, rednes, and swellyng from them, and cleareth the syght. Nowe the greate Poppye, called Papauer of the Garden, which in Greeke is named Mecon there be of two kyndes, white & blacke in their seedes and Flowers, the whyte is best for it hath all the vertues, & many more than I haue wrytten of the wylde Poppye.Whyte Poppy is the best. And the seede is good to be tempered with meate, to make breade, to geue to them that can not sleape: to be put into Milke and so eaten, at night, it stoppeth the belly Opiū
                         is made of Blacke Poppy, which is colde, and is vsed in sleaping Medecines: but it causeth deepe deadly sleapes. And thus I do ende of Poppye wyld, and tame.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Coriander of nature?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           CORION called in Greeke, Coriandrum in latten, and beareth a round seede,Coriander. like in forme to a worme called Corus or Crinex: this herbe is commonly knowen, and is cold sayth Dioscorides lib. 3. cap 62. It healeth S. Anthonies fyer, Carbuncles, & suche lyke, burning things, but Galen obseruing more diligently the nature of this herbe, whose iudgement the greatest number of the wysest, & best learned do follow vntil this day, doth affirme in Lib. viij. cap 4. de compositione medicamen,
                        Galen doth dissent in this place, from Dioscorides, in the nature of Coriander. that it is altogeather hoat, & sayth he Si Coriandrum strumas dissoluit, quonam igitur pacto frigidum erit? that is, saith Galen, if Coriander do dissolue or wast the kurnels in the throat, called the kinges Euil, By what meanes then shal it be cold? for it is not possible that such grosse hard things should be wasted of cold things. But this doth both wast and as Simeo Sethi affyrmeth, the seedes eaten with, or after meat▪ do warme the stomake, and retayne the meate vntil it be almost concocted. Therfore the conclusiō must be needes true,
                           Plini. lib. natu. hist. li x
                                 •
                              . c
                                 •
                              p. xx.
                         that it is hot and drye. Plinie wryteth to Marcus Varro Coriander beaten in pouder, & mingled with Uinegar, doth preserue fleshe from corruption in Somer:
                     
                        But the vertue is in the seedes steeped with vinegar & dryed. But to drink much of the iuice of the herbe, doth take away the speeche, or causeth madnes: thus I end of this Coriander.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Foenigraece, commonly called Fenicricke?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis herbe is lyke iii. leaued grasse,
                           Dioscor. lib ij cap. xcv.
                         and the seede groweth in a long Cod. The meale or pouder, of the sede of Foenigreeke called Fenecrike, hath vertu to mollify. Sodden in sweete water, it quencheth both within and withoute any inflamation of the body. The same being sodden in sharp vineger & Niter, applied warme to the left syde, asswageth the dolor and payne of the Spleene. Euen so it doth the like to the liuer, hauing Oyle of Roses mingled therwith:
                           Tenasmus.
                         this seede is vsed in many mollifying plasters. The decoction dronke, and the seede applyed to the belly, doth helpe Tenasmus, which is a desyre to go to the stoole, and cannot, or a stinking flixe.
                           Flegmon.
                         And the oyle doth clense spottes and skars in the fleshe or skinne where as wounds haue beene, and helpeth Flegmon, wich is an impostimation of blood comming of heate aboue nature, gathered into some place of the bodye, and is hoate in the seconde degree, and drye in the fyrste, sayth Galen libro. viij. Simpl. medicament.
                        Maister Luke of London. Of Foenigreke is an excellent Fomentum made for the iyen, that be sore or dim: whiche I haue seene mayster Luke make, which is an excellent man, in the cure or Regiment for the eyes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then of Flaxe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        KNowen of euery bodye, but there be twoo kindes of Flaxe,Flaxe. the wilde Flaxe is not good: the comon sowne Flaxe, is good & profitable for linnen cloth, without which we shalbe like beastes, both at borde and bed. Linnen is comelye both for men & specially for women, and more commendable in the temple thā holly, and is called in Greeke Lynon, and our enlglishe woorde is Linen, ye Latten Linum, much like to each other in name. Galen sayth. lib. 7. simplic. medica. The seede of Flaxe is hoare and moyst in the fyrst degree, yet somewhat drying in the middest: it hath vertue to mollifye rype, and breake Apostumes, if it be made in meale tempered in swynes grease and Mallow tootes, warme applyed, in the manner of a Plaster. It is vsed in many medecins, and Clisters, with oyle of Roses, to clense sharpe costife humours: but it wil make the belly to swel, if it be vsed in the maner of meate, yet it wil stir vp Uenus, if it be eaten with pepper and Hony.The vertue of linte Oile. The decoction thereof is holesome to clense, mollify and rypen the apostimations in the secrete places of women so diseased or payned. The Oyle yt cometh therof hath many vertues: as for Printers to make their Inck of, for Paynters, to temper their coloures with, and for varnishing of boordes: for the Armorer in making cleane Harnisse, and weapons, and Lampes. Flaxe Oyle, washed

in iiii, or .vi. shifts of cleane colde water with a stick, vntil it turn whyte, thē with a Spoone taken foorth, for it wil swim euer aloft, this wil heale burnings, scaldinges, & hoat inflamations. This Oyle mollyfyeth hard sores, and is good for bone setters, for to strength the Sinewes, Iointes, and bones, for conuulsion, Hemerodes. &c. And if it be dronk after poyson, it wil caste it forth by vomittes, and clenseth the stomacke. Flaxe being fyne, is vsed with Repercussiues, as with Bolearmony, and whytes of Egges. Without f
                           •
                        axe, Chirurgians, can not work, nor helpe the eyes excepte fyne flaxe be in it.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THere is an herbe, which light fellowes, merily wil call Gallowgrasse Neckweede, or the Tristrams knot, or Saynt Audres lace, or a basterd brothers badge,Neckweede. with a difference on the left syde. &c. you know my meaning.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        WHat, you speake of Hempe? marye you ferme it with many prety names. I neuer hard the like termes geuen to any symple,Hempe. as you geue to this, you cal it neckweede. A, wel, I pray you would you knowe the propertye of this Neckweede in this kynde beynge chaunged into suche a lace? This is his vertue. Syr if there bee any yonkers troubled with Idlenes & loytring, hauinge neither Learninge nor willinge Handes to laboure: or that haue studied Phisike so longe that he or they can geue his masters purse a Purgation,Many good medecines made of hemp. or his Chist, Shop. and Countinghouse a strong vomit, yea, if he be a very cunninge practicioner in false accomptes, he may so suddenlye, and cashlye minister,Perillous practicioners. be here discribed. that he may smyte his father, his Maister or his frende. &c. into a sudden incurable consumption, that he or they shal neuer recouer it agayn, but be vtterly vndone, and cast eyther into miserable pouerty, prisonment, bankroute. &c. If this come to passe, then the best rewarde for this practicioner, is this Neckweede. If there be any swashbuckler, common theefe, ruffen, or murtherer past grace, the next remedy is this lace or Corde. For them which neuer loued concord,A quicke. medecine. peace, nor honesty, this wil end al the mischiefe, this is a purger not of Melancholy, but a fynal banisher of all thē yt be not fyt to liue in a common wealth, no more then foxes among sheepe, or Thistles amonge good Corne, hurters of true people. This hempe I saye, passeth the new dyet, both in force and antiquity. If yong wantons whose Parentes haue left them fayre howses, goodes, and landes, which bee viciously, idly, vnlearnedly, yea or rather beastly brought vp, after the death of theyr sayd parentes, their fruites wil spring forth which they haue learned in their wicked youth:The misery of vnthri
                              •
                           tes semeth plea
                              •
                           saunt but shame & pain is the ende. then bankets and brotheles wil approache, the harlots wil be at hande with delights and entisements. the Baude will do hir diligence, robbing not only the purses, but also the hartes of suche younge men, which when they be trapped, can neuer skape, one amonge an hundreth vntil Hemp breaketh the band among these loytring louers.

The Dice which be both smal and lyght, in respect of the Coluering or double Cannon shotte or Bollet, yet with small force and noise can myne, break downe, destroy, and cast away their owne maysters, houses, fayre fieldes, pleasaunt woodes, & al their money, yea frendes, and altogeather, this can the Dice do. And moreouer can make of worshipful borne gentlemen miserable Beggers or theeues, yet for the tyme aloft syrs, hoygh chyld & turne thee, what should youth do else? I wis not liue like slaues or pesants, but al golden, glorious, may with dame Uenus, my hartes delyte saye they. What a sweete heauen is this? haue at al, Kockes Woundes, Bloode and nayles, cast the house out of the windowe, and let the Deuil paye the Malt man, a dog hath but a day, a good 
                           •
                        ariage wil recouer al togeather: or els with a Barnardes Blowe, lurki
                           •
                        ge in some Lane, wodde, or hil top, to get that with falshode in an howre, which with truth, laboure, and payne, hath bene gathered and toyled for perhappes xx. yeares to the vtter vndoinge of some honest family. Here thou seest gentle Marcellus, a miserable Tragidy of a wicked shameles lyfe: I neede not bryng forth the example of the Prodigal Chyld. Luke. xvi. Chapter, which at length came to grace: It is, I feare me in vayne, to talke of him, whose end was good,The innocente sometyme dyeth in the eyes of man moste miserablye. but a great number of these, flee from grace, and come to endes most vngracious, finishinge their lyues onely by thys Hempe: Although somtime the innocent man dieth that waye, through periury for his owne propper goodes, as Naboth died for his owne vineyarde, miserable in the eyes of the World, but precious in the syght of God. This is one seruice which hempe doth.
                     Also thys worthy noble herbe Hempe, called Cannabis in Latten,The consideration of Hempe in Phisicke. can not bee wanted in a common wealth: no Shippe can sayle, without Hempe the sayle clothes, the shroudes, stayes tackles, yearde lines, warps, & Cables can not be made without it. No plow nor carte can be without ropes, halters▪ trace. &c. The fysher and Fouler must haue hempe to make their nettes. And no Archer can want his Bowstring: and the Maltman must haue it for his sackes. With it the belle is rong to seruice in the Church, with many moe thynges profytable, whiche are commonlye knowen of euery emanne to be made of hempe. Now furthermore there be two kynds of Hempe, the wyld which is hoat and drye in the second degree, and is called Te
                              •
                           minalis stā
                        ped with Oyle of wormewoord, and warme applyed to the Bellye, it doth asswage swellyng, and with swynes grease, the same doth rype apostumes of sores. This wyld hempe hath leaues lyke to the Garden hempe, but rotes and seedes lyke vnto Mallowes.Hempe wil kil woormes. The Garden sowen hempe is also hoate & dry Plini lib. xx. cap. xxiij. This herbe and seede sodden, & strongly pressed, or the iuice strayned, and powred vppon the earth, doth not onely bryng forth wormes for Fishers▪ but also dropped into the eares, doth kyl wormes that be crept into them. And Galen lib. vij. simplicium medicamentorum sayth: that to eate much of the seede, doth drye vp the seede of Generation, & is an aduersary to the head and bringeth euil humours. Simeon Sethi sayth:Hempe quencheth naturall seede. it dryeth seede as much as doth Camphire, and is hard of digestion, and hurteth as Coriander doth yt is immoderatly eaten, which bryngeth madnesse.

How be it the sede or leaues sodden, and warme applyed to the handes or feete, do helpe agaynst the contraction, or shrinkyng of Sinewes, whiche commeth of colde and is helped through the heate of this herbe And all syngyng byrdes which be plentifull in laying of Egges, they reioyce greatlye in Hempe seede, as in their chiefe delicious foode. And thus I haue no more to say, but to answeare to the next question my deare fellowe and Frende Marcellus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Now I pray you, what is Barly of nature?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        COmmonly knowen 
                           〈◊〉
                         al this Realme, it is the mother of the best Malt,
                           Hordium. Barly. whero
                           •
                         both Bere and Ale is made: there is Barire double, or with fower set, and syngle two set The greattest and whytest is best, and it is colde and dry in the fyrste degree: and doth not noryshe so muche as Wheate. Of this Barlye, being hulled and clensed from the rynde, beaten or broken, is made the noble drynke called Ptisana: apound beyng put into ten poundes of Cleane water, sodden vnto halfe,P
                              •
                           ison made of Barly, wil quench choll
                              •
                           r into a stone pot, or tynned vessel, close in the mouth, standing vntil it be colde, and then let it runne through a strayner, and so drynk simple of this, for it wil quench hoat burninge Choller aboue nature, in vehement feuers. You may put in the feedes of whyte Poppy, and Lettice not onely to coole, but also to reconsyle sleape to the afflicted with the Feuer to clense corruption of the Lunges, and horsenesse, with shortnesse of wynd Put in Figges, Liquoris, Annisseedes, Reysynges of the Sun, and a little Hysope with Suger: seeth al, and let it stand close vntill it bee colde, and strayne it wyth a strayner, and so drynke therof, for the foresayd shortnesse of wynde.To helpe the lunges. Seeth Barly meale, Lint seede, and Fenegreke seede, and the iuice of Rew with Malmesye, warme applyed to the belly, wil put awaye swellyng and paynes in the guttes. The meale therof sodden in vineger, wil asswage the hoate burnyng goute: and this is good agaynst all hoate inflamations of the body. And seeth Barly in Hony, Rosen, and the iuice of Chelidon, and it wil heale an old rotten sore. With Oyle and Fenegreeke, meale,Agaynst inflamacion heate, or swellynges in the body. it wil asswage the swelling of the precordal or stomacke. Melilote, Poppy and Hony tempered togeather, do helpe the swellynge heate of the Priuy members, paynes of the sydes or Flesh, which is gone from ye bone with many other goodly vertues, which Barly hath as affyrmeth Dioscor. lib. ij. Cap. lxxix. & Galen lib. j de aliment. facult. and Theoph. lib viij. Cap. de plant
                              •
                           rum Historia.
                        The bread & drynke of the poore be the lyfe of the needy: and he that taketh it away frō them is a murderer. Barly is the Principal Uine grape of Englande, that oure Malt is made vppon. And mother of our Beare and Ale, whiche Malte in the tyme of our extreame neede, hath beene solde awaye into forreine realmes by certayne old knowen theeues called Humber, and Lin hauen with their branches: from Cambryge, S. Iues, & Milden haule, Thetford and Brādon fery & also Yermouth in Norffolke, I pray god amend ye market, & stay such practices, that for the priuate comodity of a few, a great multitude be not famished. And now what haue you els to say.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        IN the eyght leafe of Simples, you speake but a little of Barly and also of Beanes and Pease, but smallye to the purpurpose, to myne instruction. Therfore shew me a little more of their natures, because I am a rural man of the country▪ and loue Pease and Beanes, and as I heare tell, many good medicines be made of them to helpe in the tyme of Sicknes. I haue good plē
                        ty of them, more than any other Poticary stuffe.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           FABA called Beanes among pulse be very wyndye,
                           A more larger discription of Beanes and Pease.
                           Pythagoras 
                                 •
                              ayed thus: Faba abstineto that is abstain from Beaues. Plinie & Tullie say, be cause of the ingendryng of grose humors he forbade thē 
                              Aristoxenes. and Empedocles affirme yt by abstaining from Beanes he meant Lechery or filthy lustes.
                           
                              Plutarchus sayeth that it was to beware, to be in office. in a cō
                              mon wealth be cause it is soperilious For coddes swelled.
                         and brynge greuous dreames. Pythagoras would not suffer his Schollers to eate them: be lyke terrible infernal dreames did follow, which did hurt the wyt, and the eye syght. They be cold and dry in the fyrste degree, I neede not descrybe them: euery man knoweth theym. Beynge wel sodden with Mintes, they do stop vomittes and the flixe, if the fyrste water wherein they bee sodden, bee cast awaye, and then yee seeth theym in the seconde, so they bee lesse wyndye and hurtful. Beane Meale, called Lomentum, by it self▪ or with Barly Meale and Uineger doth quench inflamations, and mollify hoat hard Apostumations, and the Gout, soddē wich swynes grease. This meale dryeth vp wounds, & milke in the pappes or breastes of women. Temper it with Fenegreeke and Hony, then it wil heale Furunculum, called a Fellon, and it doth the lyke to pushes, in any part of the body. Temper this meale with whyte Frankynsence, the whyte of an Egge, and Rose water: this helpeth sore swelled or droppyng eyene. And this tempered with oyle and vineger, doth asswage the swellynge of the coddes of men and boyes, warme applyed vnto thē. This meale doth clense the face of women, washed therwith, tempered in colde milke at nighte. & strayne it through a cloth .xx. tymes, and let it dry on. And in the morninge with a hard Lynnen cloth softly wet in cold water and Milke, stryke or wype the face therwith, and kepe it from the Sunne, lyke good huswyues spynnyng a threede of smal thrift vntil night for their labour: Marye then if they wil a mornings, rake in ii. or iii. Reisynges, halfe a drame of yellowe Alows then flusshyng wil the sooner depart from the face, by that meanes of opening the Liuer and specially if it be in sommer. I referre the worthye consideration of this Beanes to Galen lib. vij. simplicium medic. Althoughe he therto I haue not only alledged hym, but other as Dioscor. lib. ij. cap. xcviij. whiche by him in Greeke is called Cyamos,
                        Beanes in the old tyme were vsed for lottes in deede they wil partelye moue Venus luste. And in thold tyme the general assent & consent, as in a parliaments, elections or questes, were al declared by Beanes. The whyte beanes did graunt or affirme, and the Blacke beanes did denay or refuse: And thys maner doth stil continue, in many places of Europe. As in that moste worthy riche, and noble citty called Uenice, which began Anno. a partu virginis. 54.When Uenice fyrst began▪
                         Of a fearful nomber of people which fled frō the cruel hands of a famous Tyrant Called Attila, the Kyng of Hūgary, who brake into Italye, & distroied many places, & amōg al ye most aūcient city, & chief mart of Europe, called Aquileia, which is now of no estimation. Of this lost city, be these venecians come, which haue vsed hetherto to nomber with Beanes.

The most worthy, noble, learned, and valiaunt Familie of the Romaynes, wherof tooke they their names,The olde Romaynes were more humble than the newe Romaynes. & late Popes, in keping names of bafeltitles. I pray you? Of any noble old citty, as Thebes Troie. &c. Or of any valiant beast, as a Lyon, Tyger, Panthar. &c. No forsooth. They tooke theyr names onely of pore Beanes: Fabius Portius, and theyr worthy auncestours were sowers and sellers of Beanes, and keepers of swyne, and for their vertues, were aduaunced, and kept stil their names. Although the sacred Uickar of Sathan, called the Pope, kept not his olde name: as example. If he be christened Marke, Laurence, Cornelius. &c. Wel when he is degenerated, or triple mitred, then he is new named, Leo, Clemente, Paulus, Boniface. &c. A very Anabaptiste, or ashamed of his name receyued in Baptisme. Welfare the old Ethnicke Romaynes, which excelled the new counterfecte Christian Romaynes, whiche were not ashamed to haue Base names, as Fabius had of Beanes and Cicero of a Fytche or Tare, tooke his name,The tyme of Cicero. and for eloquence, his lyke was neuer founde: and was before Christes incarnation fourty yeares. Piso that auncient name of a noble family of the Romaynes, tooke their name only of Peson: whose parentes wer plowmen,Of base parentes spring noble children and sellers of Pease.
                     Therfore of Pease, let vs say some thing of their properties, and vertues more than we haue declared in lib. Simplic. And fyrst from whence they came, and why they be called Pease, and in Greeke Pison, in Latin Pisum. The fyrst spryng of them was most plentiful in Greeke in a Country called Peloporensus,
                        Pease came fyrst from Piso in Greece. in which was a noble city named Piso, by the riuer of Alpheus. Aboute which citye euery fyue yeares, the nobles and moste worthy Grecians, did proue al manner of maisteryes, and made tryumphes, pastimes, and playes, in the honour of Iupiter Ouid ij. de arte: Lo, this Pease came frō 
                        Piso, and be now in the most part of Europe, aswell as amonge the Grecians. And of nature they be of a meane temperament, colde and drying, and in al poyntes lyke vnto Beanes, but not so windy: and more better for nourishing the body, and more clensyng the belly, sayth, Galen, and Paulus is also of the same mynde. Let both Pease and beanes be wel watred, hulled and tenderly sodden,the best pease pottage, in shy
                           •
                        t of waters, before you do eate them, & drawen through a Colender or strayner with Onions, Mintes, & Pepper. sodden wt them. then they wil not hurt the stomacke, or moue wynde, but clense the raynes, and make fatnes, increase with seede of generation.
                     Tares do the same, and nourish Milke, clense the Liuer, Gaule, spleene, raynes, & the Mouth of the Bladder: sodden in wyne, or wt diuritike, or opening herbes as Persely. &c. Theophrastus commendeth them. lib. viij. Cap. v de historia. plantarum, the whyte bee the beste. There is thankes be geuen to God, no smale plenty of Beanes, pease, Fytches and Tares, growinge in England: both whyte and graye pease, the lyke of the Beanes, to the gret comforte of men,A practice of Inholders & their horse stealers. horse and swyne: Although many Inkepers with theire hostlers, through a cast of legerdemayne, can make a pecke of Draffe and Beans, buye thre Bushels of clean pease or Beanes, wherby the pore Hackney horse if hee colde speake, as well as Balams Asse did, mighte call his host knaue for his labour, and wysh the Pillory to be hys Ghostlye Father.

For although an horse doe both lacke money in hys purse, and reasonable wit in his head: yet without all doubt, he is the best bond slaue, in the common wealth, and least can be forborn, as it appeareth in his seruice,
                           A horse is a good seruaunt & taketh moste paynes for mā of any liuinge beast.
                           Pease growing on the one accorde, without sowing where no earth but stones was.
                         both in warre and peace. &c. And seynge his drynke is so good cheape, it is villayny to rob him of his meate. For of al creatures, he suffreth most payne in body: but I wil meddle no further in stable matters, but end of that, which I haue taken in hande, that is of Pease Anno salutis. 1555. in a place called Orford in Suffolk, betwene the Hauen and the mayne sea. wheras neuer plow came: nor natural earth was, but stones onely, infinite thousand ships loden in that place, there did pease grow, whose rootes wer more then iii. sadome long, and the coddes, did grow vppon clusters lyke the chats or keys of Ashe trees, bigger then fitches, and lesse then the fyeld peason, very sweet to eate vppon, and serued many pore people dwelling there at hand, which els should haue perished for hōger, the scarcity of bread was so great. In so much that the playn pore people did make very much of Akornes, & a sicnes of a strong feuer did sore molest the commons that yere, the like wherof was neuer hard of there. Now whether thoccasion of these peason & prouidence of god came through some shipwrack with much misery or els by miracle, I am not able to determine therof: but sowen by mannes hand they were not, nor lyke other Pease.Of Otes called Auena. or Bromos. And thus I do ende of Pease Beanes and Tares which be good for man, horse, swyne, geese, & hennes.
                     And now I shall answeare you of Otes whiche in Greeke are named Bromos, & Auena in Latin: they be wild and tame of nature, sowen in March and rype before mid August.Otes do clēse the Lunges. And of Temperament they be colde in medecines, and are of the same vertue that Barly is in cleansynges, and in plassters they haue the same effecte also. They partly warme and dry inwardly: thus sayth Galen lib. vij. simplicium medicamentorum, are of a bynding vertu agaynst the flowing of the Guttes, and are good agaynst Coughes, or foulnes of ye Lunges. And Plinie saith lib. xxij. cap. xxv. Otes sodden in Uineger do take away molles, blains or spottes. And Otes are a good grayne in the common wealth, for men, horse, and foules, as they haue little other breade in many places of Wales, and Darbishyre. In Northumberland, horse haue as great plenty to eate of them,Plenty of O
                              •
                            in Northumberland as men haue in most places of this realme eyther Wheat or Rye, for their owne foode. And in the Northe this grayne is called Hauer, the Southern people cal them Otes, the It alians, Vena, ye French Auoine, the Arabians Cartamum, or Churtal: and thus I haue ended of Beanes, Pease, Otes and Fytches, my frend Marcellus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Wheate wherof our bread is made which is our common foode, and best grayne.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        THe Greekes do cal Wheate Pyro, many yeres before the name of Triticum was found: which is Latin for Wheat. Triticum vero dicitur,
                        
                           Tritticum. Wheate, or our breade. 
                        quod tritum ex spicis sit. It is called wheate, for that it is threshed, or brokē from the Eires wherin it groweth) as saith Marcus Varro. The kyndes be wel knowen both red and white wheate, the tasseld o
                           •
                         long eared wheat, and the naked or polled Wheate. The tyme, maner, and place of Sowing, Reaping, Thressinge, Gryndinge, Baking, and eating, is naturally knowen throughout all this realme. Euen so the ingrossiue keping vntil it corrupt, and sellinge yt in to other forreine realmes, is known to thē, who neither feare god, obay their Prynce, or loue their neighbour. And the natural complexion of Wheate, is hoat in the first degree, vsed in plasters. Wheat meale tempered with the iuice of Henbane, doth stoppe the fluxe of the Sinewes, and the inflamation of the Guttes, as sayth Dioscorides Lib. ij Cap. lxxviij. The Bread that is leauened, is better to make a plaster for the stomacke, than the meale. The iuices of Mintes. Reu, Sage,To feede of Branne, maketh a man leane but flower bryngeth fatnes. wormwood. &c be good to mingle with meale, or crummes of breade in Plasters for payned stomackes, put in vineger. A plaster of ye Bran with vineger, and the iuice of sower Pomegranets, warme applyed to the bellye, doth stoppe the flixe, and swelling in the guttes. Many goodlye vertues belong to Wheat, the Branne nourisheth little, & bread wherein much Bran is lefte,Meale and Waxe haue made great marchauntes at Rome. shal make the common feeder therof leane. And the pure meale norisheth, and maketh fatnesse to increase: of fyne meale, Starch is made. &c. The kyngdome of Antechrist hath not alitle enriched it selfe, by Meale and Waxe: they haue sold them deare. And manye a man hath loste his lyfe, by constantly affyrming,The verye Diuynes & Dūsmen did neuer agree generally. that meale would only be changed into bread, but not into flesh. The determination therof, I leaue to ye learned Diuines, but not to the Dunsmē, whose distinctiōs ma
                           •
                        al, in ye chyefest point in our religiō. &c
                     And yet more of Wheat, this precious grayn and corne Theophrastus. lib. vij. cap iiij. doth name in many places of the diuersity of Wheate: as Aphrica Thrasia, Pontus, Assiria, and, Aegipt. &c. And in all these places, Wheate doth differ in shape, colour, greatnes, he wryteth maruaylously of the kyndes of Wheat. He obserueth the nature of euery soile and land, and of the mantions vnder Heauen, and the climattes, and sayth in Asia beyonde the Countrye of the blacke Trions, the Wheate graines bee as bigge as greene oliues,The sondry kyndes & matures of wheat. which bee as big as Nutmegges. The Sunne and the soyle is of such vertue, and more prodigious wonders wryteth he of Wheate. Plinie. lib xviij. cap vjj. of al Wheat in the World, there is none to be compared in goodnes vnto the Wheate of Italy, for whitnes and wayght. In Spayne there is little Wheat but the Wheat which they haue is very clean, & there breade as whyte as the mean bread of Yorke, Wel, I haue sufficiently wrytten of bread in his place: Wheat wil turne and degenerate out of his kind, and be changed into Darnel. Specially in weate yeres, so sayth Matthiolus in Discordis. lib. ij cap. lxxviij.
                        Wh
                              •
                           at wil degenerate out of kynde▪ that is from Wheat to Darnell. I haue sene the like in a Fe
                           •
                        ld named Helly, in a town called Kelshal in Suffolke. There be Tonges and Irons made accordingly, which beyng made very hoat, do presse forth the Oyle of Wheat, which will heale vicers and woundes, and all chappes, and open places in the handes,

Lyppes and feete, through the sharpenes of the North wynde in March: Plasters of Meale, Leauen. Salt, Uinegar, Butter & Oyle of Roses tempered togeather, warme made in a Plaster vpon Leather, and applyed to the breast, or any place of him, which hath fallen from some high place,A plaster for a brosed body if he be curable, it healeth him, geuinge him Vnguentum potabile to drinke, and roule the pacient with a long roller or towel, and thus I do end of Wheat, the most precious and best grayne, for the foode of mankynd, & is our dayly bread:
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What be the Lupines which the Greekes call Thermos
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THey be lyke Beanes, hauing seauen leaues.
                           Lupines.
                         somwhat like Beares foote, and are commonly knowen: whose Meale mingled with Hony or licked vp, or drunke, doth cast wormes out of the bellye. And made in a plaster, and applied to the belly, it doth ye lyke to children: sodden in Uineger, it helpeth the Kinges euil, beyng made in plaster. And also doth breake a pestilence sore, layed on warme.To kil wormes wi
                              •
                           h Lupines. And seeth Lupines in rayn water vntil they be wasted, strayne this water, and when it is cold wash thy face and it wil clense it from foulenes and spottes. Myrthe, Hony and Lupines incorporate togeather, and rolled in Wolle, make therof a Pessary, and conuey it into the place, and it wil dryng forth the dead childe, & force the menstrual termes. This herbe and seede thereof, wil kil Cancers, and skales in the hedde: tempered with hogges grease, Uineger and Brymstone.
                           Diosco, lib 2. Cap. ciij.
                         Seeth it in Persely water, or whaye, and it wil clense the bladder, and prouoke vrine: and drunke with Uineger, it clenseth the stomacke, helpeth digestion, & expulseth al noysomnesse, or abhorryng of meate. Lupines, sayth Galen, be of an earthly substaunce, and engender euil humours: to be eaten as meate, they bee hurtful, but in medecine good. And they be bitter hoat and dry.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the goodnes of Staphis. Agria?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe Staphis Agria; is called also Pedicularis: for if it be mingled wt Oyle, it wil kil Life, nothing better for Lousy children, & Haukes.
                           Staphis agria Pedicularis. a seede that wil kill life in children, an hauke. &c The leaues be lyke the wyld Uine with blew flowers, and is hoat & drye in the fourth degree. If fourteene seedes stamped, or broken in sweete Water, be Dronke, it will purge grosse, crude, rawe humoures by vomite: but he which drinketh it, ought to walke after it, sayth Dioscorides. lib iiij cap 
                              •
                           j. And furder sayth he, the drinker therof, most prouidentlye geeue attendaunce, to drynke sweete water, vnlesse, els hee be strangled wt the medecine. This seede with Oyle of Tartar. killeth tetters, itchinge, & as they term it, mangines: sodden in Uineger, warme holden in the mouth doth helpe the paynes in the teeth, and stoppe the reume. And with Honye healeth vlcers in the mouth, but it is perilous to bee taken downe, because it burneth. And is good to make an Apophl
                              •
                           gmatum with:A plaster to bryng forth a deade child. it clenseth the matrix of women, made in a plaster. Plenty of this doth grow in the countries of Apulia, & Calabria in Italy: & this I ende of this. What haue you els to stay?
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is that sleaping herbe called Solanum and his fellowes I praye you?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Solatrum, Solanū, or Morel, in English ye great sleping Nightshade, or Dwal. And of this there bee .3 kyndes among vs in England, as the great Morell, ye litle pety morel,
                           Solanum Nightshade▪ the sleping Dwall. or Night shade, & Alkakengi, which is the Uesicke or bladder herbe, to clense the same and open, skower, and purge the vessels of the vryne. The greate Nightshade, with blacke beryes, lyke rounde Plummes, which be venemous when they be eaten, bryngeth vtter madnes or death: the lesser causeth much sleepe. These be colde and drye of complexion, as Galen sayth, lib. v. cap. ix. Dioscorides sayth, that petty Morrell leaues, because of nature they be cold, their iuice wt Barly Meale doth quench Sacer ignis, or that we do call saynt Anthonies fyer: and by them selues stamped, do helpe the burning of the head, or swelling togeather vnder ye toung, applyed to them. This iuice drunke doth helpe the yellowe Iaundice, and burning of Choller:Drinke but a little sodden wyne of this morrell .3. ii. will suffice. but if you be euil at ease after them, then drynk Oximel Simplex, with warme hote water, and put your fynger in your mouth, & vomit. The mad greate Nightshade, is colde in the extreme degree, if one drinke one drame, sayeth Plinie thereof, then they begin to play theire pagiantes, past shame. But if they drynke two dragmes, then they shalbe star
                           •
                         madde: but if they eate or drink three dragmes, then ensueth present death, & this venom is called Doricmō. The Alkakingi or Kengi hath beries like Cheries wrapped in a closse Husk with many synguler vertues to coole, to cause sleepe, moderatly vsed or taken, I mean their iuices in Ptisant. But chiefly it excelleth, for the stone with Parsely, Fenell, Asparagus, the foure lesse cold seedes, ana ℥.ii. and damaske Prunes .xvi. in nomber, stamped wel togeather and put into cleane whaye, or Barly water, standing .xii. howres, putting thereunto ʒ.ii of fyne Reubarbe, Then strayne it, and drawe into the same Potion. ℥.ss. of good Cassiafistula, or Uenice Turpentine, cleane washed. ℥.ss. then drynke the same in the Morninge:A good medecine for the stone & raines this wil breake the stone if any medecine can do it, & clense the raynes, and heale anye sore in the same, annointinge the backe with Oleum Scorpionis. And thus I do end of Solanum Hortense, called petty Morel, whiche is good in medecine, both in wardlye to coole, and also outwardlye to coole the heade, to helpe the eyes from heate, tempered with the whyte of an Egge. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Henbane. I pray you tel me?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        HEnbane is called of the Greekes Hyoscyamus, it is also called Altercum of the Arabians. This herbe doeth kill swine,An herbe of venome thorow colde, called Henbane. except they be driuen incontinently, through a great streame of water, & is called the Swines bane. The nature thereof was fyrst found by Appollo. This Henbane is of three kyndes: the blacke, the yellow, and the white.Three kyndes of Henbane. The white is more better for medicine, than either the yellow, or blacke. The seedes be as plentifully growing within the codde, as the seedes of Poppie, both in forme and bignes: it groweth vpon dungehill sides, or els vpon old ruines, and about broken walles, and is ripe in the moneth of Iuly. The temperament or complexion of the white seede, is cold in the thyrd degree.The white Henbane is▪ vsed in medicine. The other twoo seedes be venemous, and full of poyson. This white seede is good, with the ointment of Roses. to be laied vpon an hoate goute, or swelling of the priuye members, or breastes of a woman, which swelleth or burneth. A halfpenye weight of this seede beaten in pouder, with asmutch white Poppie seede, drunke in sweete water, or the water of Plantain, doeth not onely reconcile sleepe, but stoppeth also spitting of bloud, and helpeth the rednes of the eyes. The leaues of this white Henbane▪ Barly meale, & Uinegar, bee good to make a plaster, to quench the burnyng of the raynes of the backe, or extreame headache which commeth of Choller, and also it helpeth all inflamacions. Dioscorides sayeth, this seede drunke in wine, doeth heale a Feuer called Hepyalas: euen so doth the iuice of the leaues. But if this herbe be vsed, either in sallet, or in potage, then doeth it bring frensie and madnesse: the roote sodden in Uinegar, dooeth helpe the payne in the teeth. Galen also doeth vtterly refuse the blacke and the yellow seede, as poyson: but the whyte hee doeth accept as medicinable. Plinie doeth commend the same whyte, saying: if it bee stamped with Hony, it healeth the bityng of a madde Dogge. And wt Wyne, agaynst ye bityng of Snakes, And against thoughes, & streightnes, through great extreame filth of the lunges. The oile thereof helpeth the deafnes in the eares, dropping in but little. Plinie would that none shoulde vse more than fower leaues of this herbe, or the iuice thereof at once. For who so vseth more, shalbe in daunger to sleepe without waking. And thus I ende of Henban, whych is also called the poison, or bane for Hennes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Humlocke, that stynkyng weede?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     HUmlocke is called Cicuta in Latin: the Greekes call it Koneion,
                        The moste colde herbe and a poyson· that is to say, a tiraunt or killer of men, for it is cold aboue nature, if it be taken within the body. The cruel murtherers of Athenes, did most traiterously, maliciously and falsly, poison their chief patrone, and well sprynge of learnyng, called Socrates, an excellent Philosopher, Sonne to Sophroniscus a Mason, and Phanarista, a midwyfe, which were his Parentes. Thys man when he had best the knowledge of naturall Philosophye, gaue himselfe to morall Philosophye: he was vertuous in lyuing, and disputed against them, that were called Sophistae. This mannes breastes of learnyng: gaue forth the

milke of knowledge, vnto the most famous clarkes: Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates.
                        The death of Socrates was wyth wine, and the iuice of Humlocke. And after he had taught a longe tyme in Athenes, he was by the Malyce of Anytus and Miletus accused, to haue spoken agaynst their Gods: wherfore he was condempned to death, whose death was the iuice of this Humloke, called Cicuta, mingled with wyne. After which drynke, hee dyd expyre the breath of Lyfe, before the yeere of Chrystes incarnacion .367. Dioscorides sayth,To helpe him that hath drunke Humlocke. who so euer drynketh of this venemous iuice, the remedy is onelye to drynke a great draft of clene new wyne alone without any other myxture put thereunto with speede. The iuice of this, saith he, doeth quench that disease, which we call S. Anthonis fire, applyed to the burning place. It doth extinguish or quench the heat, which is aboue nature, either in the breastes of women, or in the priuye members of boyes or men, called the colt euyll among horses, but in men the aboundaunce of nature, with heate gathereth vpon a lumpe.Humlocke is a venemous herbe. And it doth quench and dry milke, in womens breastes. Plini wryting of the nature of this, sayeth it was the publike or common death, vsed among the Athenians. The seede and the leaues, haue power through coldnes, to kyll both inward, and outward partes of the body: the remedy is this, sayeth he before it come to the vitall partes, to drynke hoate wyne, but drunke with wine it is incurable. But the iuice of this, dropped into ye eye doeth quench the heate, and clense the syght, and healeth a dysease called Epiphora sayeth Anaxilaus. And thus I ende of this venemous herbe, which here in England, women vse to bucke their clothes with: and Weauers do make quylles vpon their stalkes, whych bee called Kexes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of the Artichoke, whose heddes bee sodden with Beefe, and vsed among vs for meate.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Scolimus. Cinara. Artichocke.
                        THe Greekes call it Scolimus, it is also called Cinara, bicause this herbe delyghteth to grow in earth, myngled with Ashes: Some suppose it to be named Cinara, of a mayden who as the Poets dyd fayne, was transformed into a great Thistel, or an Artichoke: thys herbe is commonly knowen, and is of two kindes. That whych is full of pryckes, both in the fruicte and leaues is wylde, and of small effecte, and that is taken to bee Scolimus, Cinara the tame or Garden Artichocke, is good. The roote or leaues beyng sodden, or drunke with wine, doe heale the stinkyng and filth in the bladder or yarde of a mannes body: and make the vryne sweete, and clense melancholy or fleume, whych doth abounde. This saith Dioscorides and Galen,
                        A nourishing herbe. in lib. ii. de alimentorum facultatibus. This fruicte doth nourish the body, and increaseth the seede of generation, both in Men & Women, if it bee well sodden, in potage or Wyne, and is a prouydence of Nature, and healeth. Plinie doeth greatly commend this herbe, saying: if the roote be sodden in wine to the thirde parte, it is wholsome to be dronke, either after the bath, or after Meate: and doeth cause vryne to be clensed aboundātly, through which the corruption of the raynes and Bladder, shalbee purged effectually.

And thus I ende of the Artychocke, which is hotte and dry of nature, as appeareth by the taste in the Mouth, whych wyll burne, and is bytter in the mouth.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Trifolium, called the three leaued grasse?
                           Ttiple grasse,
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe beareth a sweete flower, and euery day his nature is, to leese vii. times his sauour or odour in a day, and receiueth it seuen tymes agayn in the same day. But being dried, it kepeth stil his sauour.Two kyndes of Triple grasse. Of this herb there be two kindes, the one of purple colour & sweete, and the other white flowred, and not so sweete. The roots be long & whyte: this herb groweth in euery medow in Iune and Iuly, & is hoat & dry in the thyrd degree. Dioscorides sayeth, the seedes and leaues, sodden in water or wine, and so drunk do not onely helpe the diseases of the sides, but also the fallyng sickenesse,Triple grasse hath many vertues, and celleth against poyson the dropsy, or water crepyng betwene the skinne and the flesh, the strangurye, both in men and women. And also purgeth the humours menstruall: three dragmes of this, stamped with Oximel, and drunke in wine, doth helpe the bityng of all venemous beastes, and wyl not suffre any venime to come wt
                        in the body. Euen so it helpeth both Tercians and Quarteins. Galen is of the same mynd, and Plinie doeth affirme the same: that it preuayleth agaynst poison and venime, drinking .xxv, grain waight, of the leafe, or the seede. And this sayth he, is a goodly Antidotarie, & also there is no Serpent dare come neare the tryple grasse: it is wholsome to make warme, and heale wounds, and cankers. And thus I end thereof.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the blessed goodnes of that worthy herbe,
                           Valerian▪
                           
                         called Ualerian, which some do cal the blessed herbe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is named Phu in Greeke, and Nardus Siluestris in Latine, or Ualeriana & there be of it two kindes, the great and the litle, & this herb of some learned men is called Triacle, bicause it wyl clense venime from the stomack & sydes, and clense the stopping of the matrix, and the vrine, as Plinie affirmeth, beyng drunke in wyne. Dioscorides sayeth, if you dry this herbe & drinke it, it wyl moue vryne, and helpe the dolour in the sides, and force Termes menstrual, and the best of this doth grow in Pontus. We haue good Ualerian also of good vertue, to helpe inwardly for the stone, and outwaedly for Wounds? and a goodly precyous Balme may bee made thereof, to heale wounds with al. The Spanyards do call it Herba benedicta, the blessed herb bicause it giueth sutch health, to purge termes, and help the stomacke.For woūdes. It is not mutch inferiour, to the Narde of Inde: but for the stone, it is better. It is hoat and dry in the second degree: and wyl grow in moist places,Ualerian maketh salues of great goodnesse. of a great height. They do greatly erre, which do take Calamus rootes, in the place of Ualerian: the roote hath many smal rootes, growing vnto it, lyke vnto the Beares foote rootes, or the rootes of Iuncus Odoratus: somwhat yellow & sweete are best, and must be gathered in Sommer, and dryed for pessaries, and clensyng of vrine: this herb is commonly knowen, for his singuler vertue,

among Phisicions and Chirurgians, and also precious for women. And sodden in Wyne, with Fenell seede and Mastick, it is diuretike, and most best for them, whych haue either the collike or stone.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Columbine which beareth pleasant blew flowers, whereof some also beare white?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        A Columbine is called Aquilegia and is commonly knowen, the flower of fiue heades,A columbine. like vnto Egles, meeting together in the neither part of the said flower, the vpper part spredeth out with winges, and feete answering vnto the same, therfore it is called the Egles herb: the Leaues be like vnto the greater Chelidon, but somwhat rounder and softer:For swelling in the throate. it florisheth in the moneth of May, and is somwhat hoat of nature, and doth dry vp Scabbes and Fistulaes if it be stampt and applyed vnto them in the maner of a plaster: it helpeth also to resolue, clense, and scoure Struma or the paynfull swellyng in the throate, called the Kinges Euill, receiued in Milke, sweete wyne or Oximell squilliticum either drunke or vsed in a Gargarisme warme: if the iuice thereof be mingled with wheat meale and made warme this way, it hath in Plaster great vertue to dry vp moyst humours in Biles or sores Many do affirme it to be Aegilops, wherein they do greatly erre, for that is a kynd of Oates or els Iuncus odoratus whereof is mention made before. But this Columbyne may be vsed in his place. It also clenseth young chyldren if it be put in theyr drynke from a filth growyng in theyr body through the aboundaunce of heate,
                           A. h. medicē.
                         called in the south the Redgome: but in the North it is called the Fellon, and thus I end of this herbe,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is then the nature of Chelidon, commonly called Cellenden?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called in Greeke Chelidonion Mega. that is the great Chelidon or if you wil,
                           Chelydonion.
                         ye Swallowes herbe, for a Swallow in Greeke is called Chiledon: and it agreeth well to the reason that Plinie maketh concerning this herbe, which obserued fyrst the Nature of the same, saying, it doth grow when Swallowes do breede, and if through the heate of the swallowes donge, theyr young ones loose theyr syght, eft soones nature hath taught the old ones to gather thys herbe, through whose vertue the sayed younge byrdes receyue agayne theyr syght: this herbe is hoat and dry in the thyrd degree,Swallowes dunge wyll make blynd. example of Tobias. and is commonly knowen of euery reasonable Man or Woman. Dioscorides lib. ij. cap. clxxvj. sayth: if the iuice be strayned into a brasen Uessel, and myngled wyth Hony and so boyled into a thyckenesse vppon a soft fyre, thys hath vertue to claryfye the Eyes, and to lyghten the syght. The leaues, stalke and roote, s
                           •
                        amped and streyned in Sommer, and kept in a close Uessel,For sore eyen and dryed by lyttle and lyttle of it self in a shadow place, this iuice is good to make Trosses wythal, to heale the eyes. The roote thereof sodden in whyte Wyne, wyth Annysseedes, and so strayned, is good to be drunke against the yellow Iaundice & stopping of ye Gall

And also it dryueth away all maner of Choler aduste out of the body: if it be sodden with vineger, Hony, whyte Rose leaues, and Swynes Grease, it clenseth the body from Scabbes, Biles, Soores, and Cankers. Many precious Oyntments, waters, Salues, and balmes, be made of this herbe, as Galen, Plinie, and Ramundus Lullius, saith: it may rather bee called Celidonum yt is a gyft of heauen for the synguler gyft and goodnesse thereof, rather than Chelidonium, or the Swallowes herbe: and thus I ende of thys most precyous herbe called the great Chelydon. There is a nother lesser Herbe of thys name whych is also called Scrofularia minor, hauyng Leaues mutch like vnto Azarabacka or Iuie, hauyng many small rootes whyte, in the forme of Peares, but very smal, and thys herbe hath yellow flowers, varnished with in lyke gylte, whych the common people call Kynge Cuppes. Theophrastus sayth in. lib. vij. cap. xiiij▪
                         thys herbe vanysheth away when Swallowes come in, or begynne to breede:
                           Dioscorides lib. ii. cap. Clxxvij.
                         
                        Galen saieth that thys Herbe is hoatte and drye in the fourth degree. Dioscorides sayeth it wyll exulcerate or blister the skinne, by whych meanes it clenseth, scoureth, and casteth away foule scabbes, and leprouse matter from the skynne. The Iuice beyng tempered wyth Honye drawne vp into the nose, purgeth the head. After this maner vsed in a Gargarisme, it doth clense the throte, and corruption of the stomacke and longes. This Scrofularia or small Cellenden is extreame hoatter in Asia than it is in Spayne, and more hotter of nature in Spayne, than here in England.
                           Scrofularia
                         In Scotland I haue seene the people eate of this small roote parboyled wyth other colde sallet herbes, wyth cleane Oyle, Sugar and Uynegar: for euery herbe flower and roote must be obserued according to the nature of the region aswel as of their owne tēperament. And thus I end of these two herbes
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then of an herbe called Pimpernell?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Pimpynella or Pampinula, whereof be two kyndes, the greater and the smaller,Pimpinella. is good against the Pestilence. These Herbes bee commonly knowen with long rootes, cornered stalkes, agged leaues, white flowers and small seede, and doeth grow in euery place, as Feldes, Woodes, Pastures and Meddowes, and it is hoate and dry in the second degre nerehand to the third: the iuice▪ of this herbe is drunke against the bityng of Serpents. If it be drunk in wine, it clenseth the raines and bladder. Nothyng is better agaynst the Strangury, both in men and Women. The dystilled Water of thys Herbe doeth drye vp moyste humoures in the eye, which we call blered watryng eyes: it clenseth spottes from the face: and drunke with Mithrydatum, there is nothyng better against the Pestilence, and thus I end of thys herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then of an herbe called Sheperdes purse.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is called Pera pastoris,
                        Sheperdes purse. to stop bloud. because it is like a bagge which sheperds do vse to weare. The seede is not vnlike vnto a litle hart of a small bird.

The leaues be like vnto Rocket, it is cold of nature, and stoppeth bloud or flixe, being drunk with small Red wine or Plaintain water A plaster made of this herbe with vineger and fresh swines grease, doth quench all inflamacions, or heate of the body, as the Shingels. &c. The iuice alone doth heale a new wound, and stoppe the bloud. Nothyng is better to restrayne the immoderate flixe menstruall, than to make a fomentum, and moist bath of thys herbe, and to syt ouer it close, and to drynke of the same clarifyed in Redde wyne. Many great learned men do affyrme, that the onely holdyng of thys herbe in a mans hand, doth stoppe the bloud flowing at the nose, or any other part of the body. Many marueiles might be declared of the vertue of this herbe, but to the ignoraunt and incredible, it is but vaine to wryte any farther, and thus I ende of Shepards Purse, or bloud stopping herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Lyons foote, called Pes Leonis
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Lions foote. Pes Leonis.
                        It is in forme lyke vnto a Lions foote, with broade iagged leaues, with viii. indented leaues together in one, smal flowers, yelow in couler, the stalke .vi. handfull longe, with a roote finger bignes, in colour somwhat red, in nature this herbe is dry in the second degree: the iuice thereof doth ioyne new wounds together, and healeth them quickly, the decoction therof is holsome to wash all manner of woundes new and olde,To heale woundes and sores. with warme linnen clothes, washed in the same: and the Decoction healeth womens sore breastes: if this be drunke in wine, it healeth wounds inwardly, in the breast belly, and guttes: and draweth vp the guttes in younge chyldren, that are slypped downe from the body, through occasion of weakenes, coldenesse, or the flixe. This is an excellent herbe for Chirurgens, to heale woundes wyth all, and thus I end of Lyons foote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What haue you els to say of the nature of an herbe called Knotgrasse, or cumber field?
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     
                        Knotgrasse, Kneeherbe, or Poligonon.IT is called in Greeke Polygonon, because it hath so many knottes, lyke knees or ioynctes, there is an herbe that stoppeth bloud better than thys doth, and it beareth an infinyte number of small seedes. The leaues be lyke vnto Rue, somewhat longer, and by euery lease the seede doth growe, and beareth a small white flower. This herbe is taken to be a weede of no estymation, and is cold and dry in the second degree, and in the begynning of the thyrd. Dioscorides sayeth, it hath vertue to restrayne and coole, if the iuice be drunk, either of them which spitte bloud, pysse bloud, or els haue ye blouddy flixe. Notwythstandyng, it doth clense the raynes, and preuent or put away the fit of a feauer, if it be drunk one houre before the accesse of the same. It stoppeth the flixe menstruall, either in a vomit or a bath, or to drinke the same with wyne. It doth the lyke agaynst the distyllyng of the whytes of women. Dropped into the eare, it fortyfyeth the hearyng of them which bee dull or stopped. This herbe stamped with Hony, doth heale soores, infectyng 
                           •
                        o corrupting the priuie or secret members: the leaues thereof do quench the

burnyng Shingles, hoate inflamacions, and ioyne heale and clense newe woundes. There is no better plaster than this agaynst the heate of the stomacke, and thys affyrmeth Galen and Plinie, thys mutch of this herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature or vertue of Stoechados.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis is a noble Herbe, and of great vertue, leaued lyke vnto Tyme,
                           Stoechadus or Stoechas.
                         wt knops in the toppe lyke Hoppes, wherevppon grow purple Flowers, sweete of sauour, bytter of taste, the roote is small and hard, it beareth flowers in Iune, and it is of a restraining temperament, somewhat cooling: the decoction thereof helpeth the lunges euen as Hysop doth, and is put in many medicines of great vertue: it doth extenuate or cleanse the inwarde partes of the body, the Lyuer, the Splene, the Reignes, Guttes,
                           Stichados good for the Splene. &c. and priuye members: prouoketh termes menstruall, and helpeth all the dyseases of the stomacke, and thus affirmeth Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie: this Herbe groweth in Arabia, and is brought from Alexandria,
                           Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. xxvi. Galen lib. 8. sim. medica.
                         euen so there is great pleney growyng vpon the Mount Gargane in Italy. The Arabians do call it Astochodos, the Italians call it Stoechade: and thus I ende of thys worthy straunge Herbe, which groweth not commonly in Englād, but the Poticaries haue it.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Verbascum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is of diuers kyndes. The one is called Mullen, whych is a long herbe like a waxe taper,
                           Verbascum.
                         bearing yellow flowers in ye toppe with small seades, whych is called the whyte male Verbascum: but the white female is in the same forme, and beareth white flowers. Then there is a kynd of blacke Verbascum with great rootes, sondry braunches, and yellow flowers, and these herbes be called Lunge worte, among the common people. The thyrde kinde is called Pagles, or Cowslips.Cowslippes or Pagles. These herbes are cō
                        monly known, and be of a drying nature, & do greatly restrain or stop ye belly, in the tyme of a blouddy flyxe, the decoction of thē beyng drunke warme. The water of them quencheth the inflamacion or burning of the eyes. This herbe stamped with clarifyed Hony in a Leaden morter, puttyng thereunto wyne and Uineger, doth make a medicine to heale Ulcers withall. Thys same medicine is good against the stynging of an Adder, Snake or Waspe. The iuice of theyr leaues tempered with washed Oyle of Lynseede, doeth heale scalding or burning of the skinne or flesh. The pith which is in ye roote, is good to heale Fistulaes. And al the flowers sodden in vineger, doe heale the Kyngs Euil, applied to the place, or in gargarisme: ye roote, seede, or leafe, sodden in Wyne, is good, not onely to be drunke agaynst all dyseases of the lunges, breastes, sydes, and raynes, but also casteth out of the flesh any thyng therein fyxed, as Nayle, Thorne, or prycke. Of this herbe is there a synguler medicine made for beastes, Horse, Cow, or swyne, after this maner. Stampe thys Herbe, puttyng therein Fenicreeke and Madder wyth warme Ale, conuey it into the throte of the sycke Beast, wyth a Horne or tonnell made for the same purpose, and thys wyll heale and clense theyr Lunges. For lacke of thys, and many sutch good lyke medicynes, do many Beastes dye.

Therefore, good Marcellus, take here none occasion to dispyse this my regement for men, although I here shew a litle medicine for beastes, for we without them should liue very beastly. They be the giftes of God, his creatures and our seruaunts: and thus I do ende of this herbe called Verbascum, Mullen, or Cowslip. Primerose also is of the same kynde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Tormentill:
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe is calsed Ceptaphillō, Tormentill, or of some Bistorta: this hath leaues like fyue fyngers, but that it hath .vii. leaues in nomber iagged or tothed lyke a Sawe,Tormentill doth grow & di
                              •
                           minish with the vine. growyng about the stalke wyth yellow golden flowers. wyth a greate roote. Plinie saith lib. xv. cap. ix that this herbe doth begyn to grow, and vanish when the Uyne doth grow and wyther: thys herbe also groweth vpon hilles, and in Heath ground, and in Woddes. The temperament or complexion of thys herbe is colde and dry in the thyrd degree, say the late writers, but others affyrme not the same, but rather that it should be hot in the thyrd degree,1. Fuchsius in hist
                                 •
                               strip.
                         and that appeareth by hys faculty, it wanteth coldnes in the thyrd degree, but rather is of the nature of Quin
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            folium, and the roote is dry in the thyrd degree, and hot. Paulus Aegenita saith, if this herbe be stamped with Oyle, it wyl heale the sorenes of the feete or feabbes, wythin thre dayes,Against the Pestilence The new wryters say, it wyll close & heale new woūds, and cleanse the eyes. The pouder of the roote, wyth the iuice of Planteine, is drunke against the stopping or scaldyng of vryne, it is good against poisō. pestylence, and bloudy flixe, Kynges euyll, fylth in the mouth, and sorenes or swelling of the stomacke or Spleane, Liuer and Belly, and stoppeth bloud, if it be dronke in the decoction, the Water, or pouder. Sheepe which feede therevpon shall not dye on the rotte and that I haue seene prooued in sundry places in Norfolk,Tormentyll kepeth Shepe from the rot. and in a place of Suffolke, called Blaxall, vpon a lytle sheepes walke, in the same Towne, whereas Sheepe lyued many Yeares wythout rottyng, through the vertue of thys herbe: and Shepardes haue obserued the same. And thus I ende of Tormentyll.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Rocket Gentle?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Eruca or Rocket. Dioscor lib. 2. Cap. xxiiij. Galen lib. 2 de aliment.
                        
                        THis herbe is called Eruca for it doth 
                           •
                        rode and burne with heate, an byteth the tongue, it also smelleth lyke a Foxe, the seede groweth in a cod lyke ro Rapes with a whyte roote, yellow flower, and iagged leaues, and is very hoat of nature, and increaseth seede of generation, And the people of Spayne, sayeth Dioscorides, dyd vse this Rocket seede in the place of Mustarde: it hath vertue to prouoke plenty of vryne. Galen saith, eaten alone, it hurteth the head: therefore his councell is to eate it with Lettice, to rebate the heate. The rootes soddē in water, wil draw forth a broken bone, The seede is good against the stinge of Serpents, and poyson of Spiders made in plaster: and drunke, it hath vertue to expulse wormes out of the belly, saith Plinie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Serpentaria?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        OF this herbe, there be two kyndes, the male is called Bistorta,
                        
                           Bistorta hath a crumpled roote, lying wrinkled like a serpent, but ye female roote is black, with out, and red within, and a great knot in the ende. ye female is named Colūbrina, the leaues be fashioned mutch lyke Beetes, a small stalke wyth a bushe in the top, and groweth in darke places, and is colde, restrayning and drying in the thirde degree. The roote hereof doth heale and glewe woundes together in a plaster, & doth chiefly stop the blouddy flixe: the pouder or decoction restrayneth vomits: and it stablisheth the teeth, the decoction warme holden in the mouth. It hath the same vertue which Britanica hath in stopping or restrayning: it doth retayne the newe conceyued seede wythout hurt in the Matrix of the Mother, and thus I end of Serpentary.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Giloflowers are sweete and pleasaunt, but are they good for any medicine?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        YEa forsooth, they are no lesse profitable, than pleasaunt, and greatly commended among the olde Wryters:Gillofloures. Matthiol. in Diosco. lib. 2 Cap. 152. for Dioscorides reporteth of them, that they do not only preserue ye bodies of men from corrupt Ayres, but also keepe the mynde and spyrituall partes, from terrible and fearefull dreames: through their heauenly sauour, and most sweete pleasaunt odour, they do fortifie the brayne: there is no Apothicary can by any naturall Arte, make any confection so pleasaunt as this is, whych nature hath wrought most wonderous in pleasing of the senses, both of seeing and smelling. If Gilloflowers be stamped,Gilloflouers wyll heale woundes. they heale newe woundes of ye head, and drawe forth broken bones. The decoction of them is good to washe the head withall. The Oyle of Gillofloures doth heale the byting of a mad dog, and woundes of the sinewes, and cold goutes. If this flower be sodden in whyte Wyne, it driueth away the terrour of a Tertian, and the horrour of a Quarten, being drunke warme before the fit: and by ye meanes also be Wormes killed in the belly. This herbe of nature is hoat and dry, & of thys there be sundry kyndes, some small and some great, and of sundry collours, as whyte, red, carnation. &c. And is called Garyophyllum, or a domestical flower, and in the olde tyme it was vsed to be put in the Gardens among the Romayne virgines. The roote is good agaynst the Pestilence and Falling sicknesse, and thus I end of Gilloflouers.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the naturall vertue of Houslyke?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Houslike,
                           Sedum. Houslike. and Seengreene in the South partes of England, but in the North it is called Full, in Latten it is called Sedum or Semper viuum, that is euermore lyuing, and neuer dying: therefore the old Wryters do call it Iouis barba, Iupiters Bearde, and holde an Opynion supersticiously that in what house so euer it groweth, no Lyghtning or Tempest

can take place to doe any harme there. The leaues be lyke vnto Tongues, this herbe is commonly knowen, and thereof be three kyndes: the greatethe meane, and the lesse, and of temperament and complexion, they be somewhat drying, and vehemently cold, I meane the two fyrst kyndes, But the thyrde, whych is the least, called Stonecrope, is hoate in the thyrd degree, and will burne the tongue, if it bee bitten vpon, Dioscorides calleth it Telethion.
                        
                           Diosco. lib. 4 Cap. lxxxvii.
                         The great Houslike doeth quench hoate Apostimacions, Biles, paynfull sores, Fellons, Rednes in the eyes, Scaldyngs and burnyngs, and the richmannes euyll,Many goodly medicines made of houslike. called the Goute: eyther stamped by it selfe, or els myngled with Barly meale, oyle of Roses and Uinegar: and this way it doth helpe the head, and reconcile sleepe. The iuice of this herbe drunke in wyne, preuayleth agayn the byting of venemous beastes, bloudy flixes, and womēs termes flowyng immoderatly, and kylleth wormes in the Belly: and thus affirmeth the said Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie. But the thyrde kynde, called Telethion, hath vertue to make hoate, to blister the skinne: and stamped with Hogges grease, it doeth heale the kynges euil, or paynes in the throte, if it be warme anoynted therewith oftentymes. And thus I do end of this Houslike, whych is commonly knowen, growing vpon walles, or house toppes: and of the other .ii. kyndes, growyng vpon ruines, rockes of the sea side, or broken walles.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        I Pray you, bee not Nettelles a noysome kynd of weedes? Me thinke they should be none other: as appeareth by their spyghtfull stinking, for they be fearefull, both to Man, Woman, and Chylde, & sondrye kyndes of beasts.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        A Nettel is called Vrtica ab vrendo, of burning, blistering, or stingyng of the skinne. There be two kindes of Nettelles,
                           Vrtica the▪ Nettle. the common Nettell, and the red Nettel. There is also the thyrde, though not commonly knowen in these parties, called Vrtica Romana, the Romaine Nettel, of the which, there groweth plenty about the walles of Yarmouth. This Nettel beareth great beries vpon it, and the other Nettles but sedes: and of nature they be al very hoat and dry. Dioscorides sayeth the vertue of them, is to heale the bitynge of a madde Dogge, stamped wyth Salt, and so applyed to the wound. It doeth the lyke vnto Cankers and to cold swellyng Apostumacions: ye iuice put into the nose▪
                        Netele sedes will serue in the place of Pepper. stoppeth bleedyng. The iuice tempered with clarifyed Hony, clenseth the lunges, stomacke, and sides: drunke wyth Ptisant, it doeth clense the belly, and matrix of a Woman. The iuice also tempered wyth Mirrhe, wyll moue termes menstruall, if it bee drunke warme. The seede thereof finely beaten in pouder, and drunke in wine or broth, doth augmente and increase the seede of Generation. The seede of redde Nettels, being gathered betwene the sainct Marye dayes, may serue poore Men in steede of Peper, and hath the very taste of Peper, and is good to season Pyes, or what you wyll therewith. And of vertue is accompted, of no lesse Ualue than Peper: the Leaues of Nettelles sodden wyth Oysters, cleanse the Raynes of the Backe, scoure the Bladder, and prouoke Uryne.

And they are good agaynst obstructions, and stoppyng of the Liuer, vppon colde causes, and kyll UUormes: the syrupe thereof is most excellent to bee drunke of women, in theyr paynfull trauayle of chyldren, and causeth spedy delyueraunce. And thus I ende, of the nature of Nettelles.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Paeonia?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius▪
                     
                     
                        THys is an herbe of an excellent vertue,
                           Paeonia is called the chast herbe. and is called ye chast herbe: ye coddes therof are full of graynes, in forme to the Pomgarnet. There bee twoo of them in kinde, the male and female. It is sayd that the noble Clarke Bias was the first inuenter of this herbe: this is commonly knowen amongest vs here in England. The flowers are like vnto a Rose. The seede doth grow in a cod, which seedes be of colour red and blacke, and it florisheth in May:A good medycine for the fallyng sickenes. and the yellow Iaundice, made of Pionie. the roote is somewhat byndyng of nature, neyther bitter nor sweete, but betweene both. And is of a drying heate, in the second degree, and warming in vertue. Galen declareth yt a chyld did not fal, as long as he had this roote hanging about his necke, But we haue oftentimes proued it contrary: but for the fallyng sickenes the pouder thereof tempered with Mugwort water, and giuen vnto ye sicke pacyent: preuayleth greatly agayn the fallyng euyll. The iuice of this herbe or pouder, is good to be drunke agaynst the stoppyng of the gaule, lyuer, or raynes: if it be sodden with olde redde wyne, and drunken, it stoppeth the bloudy flixe. The redde graynes, doe stoppe the redde menstruall humoure: the blacke graynes, sodden in redde wyne, doe fortifye and strengthen the matrix in them in whome the fluxe of bloud doth abound. The roote sodden in wyne and drunke, purgeth the belly, putteth away the collike, maketh cleane the guttes, defendeth against frensies and passions of the brain, strangury, and bityng of Serpentes. But there must no more be taken in medycine at one tyme, but fower drames: and what is better than Pionie agaynst the yellow Iaundice, beyng drunke in whyte wine, with the pouder of Saffron? Thys and many moe vertues hath this worthy herbe, and is beloued of the Spaniardes, and of theim it is called Rosa De monthe. And thus I conclude of this vertuous Pionie, that the redde is better than the blacke.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of a straunge herbe, called Asparagus?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis is an herbe of great vertue, and ful of rootes, long stalkes & ful of braunches.
                           Asparagus hath many goodly vertues, specially to increase seede. The braūches that springe first from ye roote be preuented of them, which grow after them. This is a garden herbe: but of his owne nature it groweth in rockes, chiefly in Italy. Galen sayeth, that this herbe of nature is marueilous: for it is sometyme coolyng, and sometyme warmyng or heatyng. And also clenseth and scoureth: if the tender braunches of this herbe, be sodden in wyne & drunken, they doe not onelye molifye the Bellye, but clense the raynes.

Nothyng is better to open the gall and clense the yellow Iaundice, than this herbe is: there is great vertue in the roote, to bee made in pouder, or sodden in medicine, for the same purpose. The beries be of a singular vertue agaynst the diseases of the teeth: the water of this herbe, wyll clarifye the eyes: the syrupe doeth increase seede of generation, the decoction thereof in Uynegar, preuayleth agaynst the whyte leprosie. There is no herbe soner conuerted into good bloud thā 
                        Asparagus, notwithstandyng the beries therof must be boyled and eaten with sweete Oile, Uinegar, and sugar: and then it preuayleth against barrennes of women. Plinie doth commend this herbe, the .xx. booke, the .x Chapter, that it preuayleth agaynst the paines of ye bone called spina, and all these foresaied diseases. Auicen sayeth in his last Fen. lib. iiij. that this herbe maketh a pleasaunt odour in meate, and bringeth sweetenes to the whole body,To make the vrine sweete. clenseth stinkyng vryne, and causeth the bladder and all the vesselles to bee sweete. Galen doeth not a lyttle commend it, Lib. vij. de Alimen facultatibus. And Dioscorides lib. ij. Cap cxviij. doth first begin the praise. and laude of this herbe, wyth all his vertues. And thus I ende of Asparagus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THys same is an herbe, of incomparable vertues, and doeth excell all other, for his synguler goodnesse to mankynde: I truste to remember it therefore. Now I shall desyre you, to shew me the nature of ye great Burre, which is more commonly knowen, than commended: notwythstandyng, I would bee glad to learne the vertue, for euery manne doth know it, to bee an herbe of great anoiaunce in pastures, and an vnpleasaunt atire, for the maines and tayles of horse.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius,
                     
                        
                           Bardana the great Burre
                        THys greate Burre is called Personata, lappa maior, or Bardana, and is commonly knowen, whose Burres wyll cleaue to the apparaile of menne: the leaues bee verye broad, the roote greate, wythin white, wythout blacke and doeth grow commonly in many places, and is drye. and byndyng of nature. Dioscorides sayeth lib. iiij. if one dragme weight of this be drunk wyth the curnelles of the Pyneaple, it doeth helpe the cough, and spyttyng of bloud, and fylthynesse in the stomacke, and is good agaynst the contraction of the sinewes,Rotten sores helped. and specially of the Arteires. If the leaues bee stamped, and applyed plasterwayes, they do heale old rotten sores, and stinkyng fylthy vlcers: euen so wyll the iuice of this herbe doe, for Galen affirmeth the same. The decoction of the roote thereof, is good to washe woundes withall: the roote stamped wyth Salte, doth heale the byting of a mad Dogge, applyed to the wound. The iuice tempered wyth Hony, and so drunke, prouoketh vryne: and taketh away the paynes of the bladder. The seede beaten in pouder,Scalding and burnynge help
                              ••
                           . and drunke in wyne, by the space of fourty dayes, wyl take away the paynes of the huccle bones, called Sciatica. The leaues stamped with the whyte of an Egge, also heale Burnyng or Scaldyng, thus sayeth Apuleius. The roote preuayleth agaynst the bytynge of Serpents, eyther inwardly,

or outwardly: the same roote sodden in Wyne, doth cleaue deliuer a man from the horrour of the feuer quarten, if he drinke thereof, one hour before the comming of the fit. And tempered with Swynes grease it maketh a goodly Playster, agaynst the swelling of the Throate, called Angina, and thus affirmeth Columella. And here I do end of Burres.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the naturall vertue of an herbe, called Gramen, or Stichworte?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis Gramen is called Sperewort, Stitchwort, or Stitch grasse: It groweth in dark places,
                           Gramen is Stitchworte. and an infynite number of stalkes grow from one roote: the roote creepeth of a great lēgth within the groūd, but not deepe. The flowers be white, growing vpon the top of the braunches, wt a prety round seede in the middes. This herbe is cōmonly known, cattell delite to eate thereof in pastures: they do greatly erre, which take this herbe for Eufragium. It florisheth in Aprill, most sweete, white, & pleasaunt. This herbe is cold and dry, with a little bitternesse, hauing vertue to open: Dioscorides doth say, the roote hath vertue to close a newe wounde together. This herbe sodden in Wyne, doth breake the stone: it is good agaynst ye hardnes of the splene, stopping of the lyuer,Stitchworte will heale the stone, & heal
                              •
                            woundes. and galle. It clenseth the raynes, scoureth the bladder, and conduites of Uryne: Galen doth call this herbe Pernasus, for there groweth great plenty thereof vpon a Mountayne in Greece so named: which had two high toppes,
                           Pernasus. herbe. vnder whom did dwell the .ix. Muses, as Poets fayne. Plinie sayth, the seede doth vehemently purge the vryne, and stoppeth vomites, with many other goodly vertues. And thus I end of Stitchwort.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Sauine, that bitter bushe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis venemous hearbe, is commonly knowne,
                           Sauine. A practice of Harlottes wrought 
                              •
                            Sauine. from whom diuers Diuelishe drabbes, haue gathered venim, to destroy their bastardly children, to couer their filthy whoredome withal. And yet ofttimes it happeneth, that the mother is slayne, and the childe is deliuered, and by Gods prouidence, is helped and saued. Yet this herbe rightly vsed, is of a singuler vertue, & may rather be numbred among trees, than herbes, for no frost can kill it. It groweth very thicke, like vnto a bushe, the leaues do neuer wither nor dry, it groweth in gardens, the beries are gathered in Haruest, and it is hoat and dry in the thride degree. Dioscorides sayth, the fyrst booke .88. Chapi. that there be .ij. kindes of Sauin:Sauine of .
                              ••
                           . kyndes. one hath leaues lyke vnto the Cipers tree, th'other hath leaues lyke vnto the Tamarice tree: They haue vertue being stamped, for to heale all painefull sores, Byles, and pusshes, applied vnto them. This herbe is a good perfume agaynst the mother, to burne when Women do sownde, receyuing the smoake in at ye nose-Tempered with Hony, it breaketh a Pestilent sore, made in plaster wayes: Drunke in Wine, it purgeth them that pisse bloud. And by subfumigation, it doth drawe downe the dead chylde from the Matrix of the Mother. It

is mingled in hoat oyntmentes, against coldnesse of the ioyntes & sinewes. and is good against the Palsie. Plinie doth greatly commend this, in his .42. boke.A new practice for ye pox made of Sauin
                              •
                           . Chap. xi. It is good to put Sinamon to this herb, beyng vsed in medicine .ii. times the weight: It helpeth also the Kynges euill, or paynes in the throte▪ made in the maner of plaster. The fume of this herb doth preuaile against the French pockes: and thus I do conclude of thys Herbe, called Sauin, which the Arabians call Abell.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        DaisiesWhat is the nature of Daisies, double or single, I pray you tell me?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Plinie. lib 21. Capi. viii.
                        
                        NEither did Dioscorides, nor Galen write of these herbes, nor any of the auncient Greekes: but Plinie saith, that one Bellius was inuenter of this herb, called Bellis. And this herb hath .l. little braunches, or white beames growing round about the yellow flower, which is in the myddes▪ and some do call it herba Paralysis. What shall I say any farder I neede no more descripcion thereof, bicause this herbe is so commonly knowen & groweth in euery field and pasture. Notwithstandyng, the double Daisy doth grow in gardens: and these great Daisies do florish in May, and of nature be hoat and dry, as we may gather of Plinie, who saith this herb doth heale swellings of the throte, paines in the necke: therfore it must needes be hoat and dry, for no cold thing can help the swelling in the throte, This Iuice is good for wounded men to drynke, for it doth resolue hard and cold thynges, Goute, and Sciatica, and is very good against the resolucion of the members, which in Greeke is called Paralysis, which we call the Palsie. With thys herbe Bellis,
                        
                           Paralysis.
                         and other good medicines, I Bullein did recouer one Bellises, not onely from a spice of the Palsie, but also frō the quarten▪ And afterward the same Bellises,
                           Bellis. Bellises. Bullein. more vnnaturall than a viper, sought dyuers wayes to haue murthered me, taking part against me, with my mortall enemyes, accompanied with ruffins, for that bloudy purpose, and deadly feede. Sutch was his shamelesse ingratefull nature,
                           Prouerb. 10 Prouerb. 17 Euyll wyl stirreth vp strife, and a sedicious persone, seeketh mischief. This man being worshipfully born, doth bare the name and tytle of a Gentleman, rather than any condicions of one in deede.R. Bellises of Iarowe in the Bisshopricke. And in complexion is more effeminate, than a feble pale woman: a dweller in the place, whereas holy Bede was borne, but yet possessing none of hys Uertues. And thus of Bellis the herb, I make an end: and of Bellises, which would haue ended me.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Sene, my gentle friend Hilarius, I pray you tell me
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THere be two kyndes of it: the one is called Sene, which beareth Cods like Brome.Sene of Alexandria The other is a lesser kynde, bearyng his seede in a grosse Codde. The Codde is mutch lyke an Almond growyng on the tree, but as thynne as Perchemente. The Flowers bee lyke the Flowers of Brome, very yellowe. Thys herbe groweth in Gardens, in the Moneth of Maye and Iune, and of nature is hoate, in the fyrst begynnyng of the second degree, & dry in the begynning of the fyrst degree. A dragme of ye
                        
codde, sayth Actuarius, may be drunke without any hurte: for it hath vertue to purge, both fleume and choler. The leaues and coddes be wholsome, to be sodden in the broth of an Henne, against old paynes in the head, scabbes, fallyng sicknes, and the itche. The iuice in infusion or steeped, is better to bee drunken, than the pouder, for all obstructions in the body: and these bee the wordes, of that great learned man. Doctor Actuarius. This is vsed agaynst the aboundaunce of melancholy: and doth open the instruments of the senses, and the parts both Animall, vitall, and Neutrimentall. There is of this growing in Fraunce, but ye best cōmeth frō Alexandria in Egypt, or els from Siria, whych may be giuen to women with Chyld, and young Chyldren, without any hurte, chyefly in infusyon, it may bee also mingled with Cassia or Manna: or els it may bee beaten into fyne pouder, and so tempered with Syrupe of Roses solityue, and so drunke: and thys way it is a gentle lenitiue purgation. But the deluting, steepyng, or putting these leaues in wine, cold whaie, or distylled water, with a piece of Suger, and some Anisseedes, standyng all the night in a close potte, and in the morning streyne it, I assure you, thys is more better to purge wythall than if it were in decoction, or soddē in broth. Note also, when you do make a decoction with sondry herbs, let all your other herbes be sodden softe, before you put in your Sene, for it is so thinne of substaunce, that els it wyl go away in a smoke.
                     Here wyl I shew you a most excellent decoction,Sir Richard Alye, his lenitiue, Matthiolus vseth the same in Dioscoridem Lib. 3. cap. 70. wherewith I purged sir Richard Alie, a knyght of a synguler connyng: whych knyght hath bene a profytable instrument to our common Wealth, in worthy fortifications and buildyngs, as of the stronge, and famous towne of Barwick, whose walles are inuincible, as presently appereth. Besyde many of his other worthy workes. Thys man beyng sycke, in whome diuers and sondry purgacions and Electuaries tooke smal effect, thys onely dyd hym mutch pleasure: the best Sene leaues, dragmes .vi, whyte Ginger dragme one, the flowers of Buglosse, dragmes two, mingled together, in a new cleane stone Potte, with a narrow mouth, and one pynte of whaie of Goates mylke: this pot was closely couered in the mouth, that no ayre should go forth of ye mouth. Then it was set in a vessell, wyth hoat water, and so did seeth, by the space of two houres, and then was taken from the fyre, and set in a close place til it was cold, and the vapour cleane delayed. Then it was strained, and giuē hym to drynke, in the mornyng folowyng, whych dyd purge choler aduste and melancholy, whych is his complexion. Thys whaye being drunke, preuayleth agaynst all passions of the brayne,Sene helpeth the head with al the senses▪
                         from the head downe to the bottome of the Blader. And helpeth al the senses, both of hearyng, seeyng, and smellyng, and wyll strengthen all the Body: and it doeth exonerate, and vnburden the same of euery humour that doth abound, as cholour, fleume, and melancholy. And thys affyrmeth Mesue: Actuarius, Ruellius, and Matthiolus vppon Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. lxx.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Goose foote, which herbe is lyke

Geese feete,
                           Pes anserinus.
                         wyth iadged leaues?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Gosefoote an euill herbe.IT is called Pes anserinus, leaued like Night shade, but more iagged in the sayd leaues, bearing small little red flowers, with great plenty of seede, lyke vnto Arage: it commonly groweth in eche place whereas plenty of dunge is cast, and is cold in the seconde degree, and it is venomous as Solanum is, and killeth Swyne, if they do eate of it: it maketh men to be mad, or die sleeping, therefore beware of it.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Fellon weede good for, whych is named Saynct Iames weede?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     THe olde Wryters made small mention thereof, it hath leaues lyke Rocket,S Iames wort called Fellon weede many rootes, flowers like Chamomill, growing by water sides, and in sandy places, by path sides: it is hoat & dry of nature, this will heale Furunculi, called Fellons and other sores and woundes, and Fistulaes: and is holsome to make salues wythall to dry, ripe, and heale, and will not suffer any venomous scabbe, or sore to spreade any further, therefore it should bee good, both for Serpigo, the Canker, and Ringwormes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What wyll Spatula Foetida doe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     IT groweth by hedges, the Berries grow in coddes, which cods openeth in three partes like the Paeoni,
                        Spatula wyl kyll Lyse. the leaues be long flagges, this herbe is vehemently hoat, and hath vertue to kill Lyse, as Staphisagria hath, and to heale scabbes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What can Orpin do?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius-
                     THys Orpin will long hange in an house, after it be cut, and grow stil geeene,
                           Telephus. Crassula, or Orpin. we call it Orpin. Telephus was a kyng of the Goathes, and Mysia, son to Hercules, which warred vpon the Greekes before christes byrth. Anno. 1212. This man slew a famous capta
                           •
                        ne of the Greekes, named Thesandius, & his souldiers vanquished Aiax, and Achilles, but yet Achilles wounded him with a Darte, whych wound was healed by this Crassula which hee named Thelephium, and vntill thys day, it is so called: whereof there be two kyndes, the great wyth whyte flowers, and the small wyth yellow,Orpin heleth the morphew▪
                         but these flowers be variable, and wil change their couller, the leafe is like Purssen, but grosser, and this doth grow in moyst places, vnder the droping of houses in Gardens, and flourisheth in Iuly, and August, and is dry in the seconde degree, and in the beginning of the thirde, and is very hoate. The Iuyce therefore is good to anoynt the place of the Morphewe euery hower, so that it bee myngled with stronge whyte Uinegar: But Galen affyrmeth that it dooeth not onelye cleanse the faynte Morphewe,To clense the Morphew. whych he calleth Alphos, but it also cleanseth a foule corrupt

stinkyng vlcer, scoureth and dryeth the same. Plinie sayeth, this iuice wyll heale a fylthy Leprous sore of diuers colours to be anoynted therewith, euery hower, day and night .iii. times in one moneth, and as you do anoynte the same to put vpō the same sore Barly meale. It maketh a plaster for Hernia, and healeth wounds, both old and new, and Fistulaes. And thus I doe end of Orpin, or herb Telephion.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the goodnesse of Paunsis, or three faces in one hodde? Some call it Hartesease.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis herbe is called herba Trinitatis:
                           Herba Trinitatis of iii. colours so named. but I read in an old Monkish written Herball, wherein the aucthour writeth, that this herb did signify the holy Trinitie: and therefore was called the Herbe of the trinity, and thus he made his allegorie. This flower is but one in which said he, are three sondry colours, & yet but one sweete sauour. So God is three distinct persones, in one vndiuided Trinity.An allegory. of 
                              〈◊〉
                            herbe. United together in one eternall glory, and diuine Maiesty. &c. Wel, although the three distinct persones be euen so, whose glory is indiffinable: yet this glory may not bee comprehended of mortall men, nor Angels. The maiesty thereof may not with reuerence, be compared or lykened, by any alligory, to any base, vayne venerous flower: but may rather be called, thre faces in a Monkes hodde:
                           Iohn i.
                         That thys day groweth in the Garden, and to morow withereth as duste. Mutch more the offence and daunger is, for any christian man, to graue or paynt any Image, callyng it the signe or Image of the Trinity: whych can not bee done, of any liuyng creature, for God forbad the same. God hath no man seene, but onely his sonne Chryst, whych is God of his substance, and of the same deitye. Neither any mortall man may see him,
                           Exodus. 20. before he be clensed by death, & transformed into an other life, sayth the holye scripture: thus all glory be to the holy Trinitye.
                           i. Iohn. 4. And now I wyll shew the right diffinicion of this herbe, fitte and apt for the same vaine flower. It is called herba Trinitatis, that is, because it hath three colours: yet the old Pagan writers, did call it Iupiters herbe, because of the beauty of colours: it is like a Uiolette in shape and sauour, and of temperament, is mutch lyke Comphorie▪ hoat and dry, and is good to be drunke, both agaynst the fallyng euyll in chyldren, and also agaynst all maner of rotten fleume, and filth in the stomacke, sydes, and lunges. Thus it doth inwardly help, in syrupe, decoctiō, or ye water inwardly drunk: no lesse it helpeth all wounded men, Women, and Children, and al them whych haue broken bones. Outwardly, it clenseth from the skinne, all itche, skabbes, shyngles, vlcers, and ringwormes: & healeth or closeth greene wounds together, without the daunger of any apostumacion, if it be made in plaster, or els the iuice preserued with oyle. For herbes beynge stamped, strayned, and clensed vppon the Fyre, and made colde, and kepte in a cleane Glasse, powre thereuppon freshe cleane Oyle of Olyues, this wyll conserue it, and keepe it from the corruption of Aire, and so you maye preserue your iuice, as this & many other mo serue for syrupes and Salues,

for the health of mankinde. And thus I do end of the nature of Paunses, or the triple coloured Uiolettes, called herba Trinitatis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What goodnes is I pray you in the Iuy, the Womens Christmas herbe▪ whose leaues be euer greene?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Hedera or the Iuie bush.
                        THe Iuy is like a freshe lusty young pleasaunt body, still florishing and greene, the Greekes do cal it Cissos of Bacchus, for they called him Citton, and this is Bacchus herbe or hys Wynter Crowne, & the Uyne is his Crowne in Summer. This is a very euill neyghbour, for where as it doth growe vpon any tree, the tree decayeth, although the Iuy do florish still greene, whereas it is nourished. There be .iij. kindes of Iuy, the white, which is the male, bringeth forth white beries: the second bareth blacke beris:Iuie hath many goodly vertues in medicine. the iij. is fruitles, or groūd Iuy so named, these be cōmonly known. Iuy is of a contrary compounded faculty, adstringing, binding, or stopping which is cold & earthly: and it is also bitter and hoat, if it be greene, but dry and cold, The beries sodden in Wyne & drunke, do stop the blouddy flixe, drunke two times in the day and as mutch in the night: the tender leaues sodden in sharp Uinegar, tempered with crums of leauen bread, will helpe the lyuer, made in plaster. Stamped with Roses and tempered with oyle of Roses, Uinegar and Womans mylke, it doth make a good frontall, for hys forehead, that is payned in the head. The iuyce, with oyle of bitter Almondes, warme put into th'eares, helpeth the instrument of hearing: the leaues sodden in Wyne, be good to anoynt or wash thē, whych haue spots, or scabbes in the face, skin, and pryuy partes. Nothing preuayleth more agaynst the Cancer, then the iuyce of Iuy, tempered with clarifyed Hony, & Wyne sodden together, & so vse the same drinke .i.ʒ. After the natural purgation of Women▪ if it be drunk, it causeth sterility and barrennesse in them. The iuyce warme, powred into the contrary eare, doth helpe the teeth, on the other syde, if they do ake, but if the beries of Iuy, called Corymbi be often tymes drunke, sayth Dioscorides, they wyll vexe and trouble the mynde. Hony and the beries of Iuy,To kyll lyce. wyll kyll Lyce in chyldrens heads: the iuyce put into the mouth of the matrix, wyll draw forth the dead chylde. The greene leaues, sodden in Wyne, sayth Galen, do knit, heale, and ioyne cuts, and great woundes together, and heale the body: But yet this iuyce oftentimes drunke in Wyne wyll heale the terrour of a Tertian,To heale wounds. or horror, of a quarten, drunke before the fit, and also purgeth the head, put into the nose, and wil shorten the sicknesse. The Gum of Iuy wil blister, and is very hoat, & they which gather it, must cut the barkes from the Iuy: and euery morning,To gather Iuie gum. when the sap doth ascend, they shal find it in the nether cut of the barke. Euen so when it discendeth in ye vpper barke or rinde, renue your cut euery morning, & washe your hands in vinegar, and Rose water, and your face in like case,To draw teeth with out payne. before you gather it. But whipe it not, & then your gum shal not blister, or hurt your skyn: thys gum tempered with Waxe, put to a payned tothe, wil drawe it forth without paine: this gum must be kept close in

a glasse or boxe of cleane mettell: and these foresayd vertues are confirmed by the best learned, as Dioscorides, Galen, Plinie. &c.
                           Dioscor lib. 2. Capi. Clxxv. Plini. Lib. 16. Cap. xxxiiii. Theophrastus lib. iii. cap. 18. Galen libro simp. medic. 7 And thus I do end of this Iuie, whose gum, leaues, and beries, are wholsome for mankynde. Euen so they are for beasts, as horses or Oxen, against the sickenesses of ye Lunges, sodden in Ale or wine, with Anisseedes and 
                           •
                        ayes.
                  
                  
                     
                        M
                              ••
                           cellus.
                     
                     What is the weede, which h
                           •
                        th leaues like Peres, growing in Marris or moist ground?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herbe hath broune spottes, in the midds of the leaues, and knottes in the ioyntes, stalkes red, flowers like Lauender. First whyte,
                           Persicaria or Pereleues. growing in marris groūd called Iasper. then purple, rootes yellow, small seedes, many in number growyng on the braunche. This of nature is cold and dry, the tast doth declare the same: this herbe sodden in Planten water, Ptisant or red wine, doth stop the bloudy fliex. And this same herbe, is good to heale Fistulaes: it clēseth rotten sores, and furthermore healeth new wounds. And thus I leaue of this herbe,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What bee brakes good for.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        COmmonly knowen, to lodge the Deare,Brakes called Filix or Ferne. to shroud and couer the Conie wythall. Dry Brakes be good Fuell, wheras smal plēty of woodis, or cole. There be brakes male, without flower and seede, growyng frō one greate roote many braūches, with spots vpon their leaues: the female Brake is common in Warreins & Parkes, And groweth long: if the roote be cut ouerthwart,To kil broad
                              •
                            wormes in the chest or belly. there wil apeare the similitude of an Egle spleid .iiii.ʒ. waight, of the male Roote, dryed and beaten into pouder, & drunke with sweete water, doth kyll broad wormes in the cheste or belly. But it is bitter, sayth Dioscorides: if fower halfpeny waight of prepared Scammonie, be drunke with the same,
                           Dioscorides.
                         it wyll worke accordingly, or els as mutth pouder of blacke Elleborus. The female Brake rootes. ʒ.iiii▪ drunke, sodden in wyne, do kil round wormes: it is perilous to giue to women, it maketh them barren. And if a woman with chyld drynke it, it maketh an abortiue or dead Chyld come forth: the meale or pouder of Brakes, healeth daungerous sores vpon beasts bodyes, as Swine, Kyne.Brake seedes were neuer seene among christen people, but witches haue vsed practise wt them, as foolish writers affirme. &c. The yong braunches of Brakes, eaten, beyng tenderly sodden, do molyfy very gently the belly. Galen, Theophrastus and Plinie, affirmeth the same. This herbe beareth no seedes at any tyme, although Witches fayne, yt great Secretes may be wrought wyth the same: which must be gathered, say they, vpon Midsomer night: As sure I warrant you, as the sea doth burn, it wil do no lesse. This herbe is hoat and dry, and is called Thelepteris because it hath winges, or leaues like byrds fethers.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of the dead stinkyng Nettle?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        The dead Nettle.
                        IT may be called a dead Nettle, it is lyke in shape vnto the burning Nettle, but stingeth not: it is called Archangell, with a stalke fower square. There be three kindes of Archangell, Whyte, called Lamium, Yellowe, and Purple wyth Blacke seede, hoat and dry of nature: the whyte Flowers do helpe the Shingles, stamped and applyed to the sore places of the skin: this hearbe stamped wyth Salt, maketh a plaster for the gout: swelling in the throate, and Dogges byting. The rootes stamped wyth Salt, do drawe forth thornes, or pryckes from the body. And thus I ende of this dead Nettle.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What be the properties of Cresses?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        CResses be commonly knowne, there be both of the water, and also of the Lande:
                           N
                                 ••
                              turtiu
                                 •
                              . Le
                                 •
                              idion, or Cresses. Garden, and Ryuer Cresses, spring from March, to the ende of May, and are neere hand hoat in the .4. degree, not so mutch drying: the seede is chiefly vsed in medycine.Cresses helpe the Palsy. The herbe is good greene, but nothing worth dry: these seedes sodden in Wyne, in a linen bagge and holden vnder the tongue, or champed in the mouth, do help a speachlesse man, or him whych hath the Palsy,☞ through a long or strong agewe. This wil dry vp moyst humours, it prouoketh vryne, sodden in white Wyne: and stoppeth Gonorrhaea passio, or wasting of nature. And this herb so helped a Gentilman of Suffolke, called Thomas Colby, which long time was troubled with the same, when other medicines▪ did take in him small effect, duryng his seruice in the field or warre, finally he was recouered by this, This herbe, specially sayth Dioscorides, the rootes stamped wyth fresh Hogges grease, do make an excellent plaster, agaynst the paynes of ye ioyntes, layed vpon warme .4. howers: but for women, but .ij. howers. And also the same for the Sciatica
                        ▪ and then quickly to sweate in the bath: then when the pacient hath sweat, to anoint it, wyth the Oyle of Cresses, and warme sodden Wyne. And to drynke of thys Wyne,Cresses doe helpe many infirmities. wherein Cresses be soddē is good against paynes in ye ioynts, Dropsy, Timpany, Gout, swelling, Palsy, Pore, Apostumacions, Reumes, bloudy flixes, broyses, and moystnes of the brayne and eyes▪ &c. Galen commendeth the same. lib. 1. de compos. medica. secundum locos, Cap. vij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue or nature of Horstayle?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Horsetayle. Caudae equin
                                 •
                              .
                        THys is also called Hippurus, that is, Horstayle bicause it busheth lyke hayre about the ioynt: and is of two kyndes, soft & long: and groweth in moyst ground, and watry places: it is called holy Water sprinkle or bushe. It dryeth, and restrayneth, and is bitter: this herb soddē, the Wyne or decoction thereof, is good agaynst the bloudy flixe, stopping of the Bladder. It mundifyeth the Stomacke, and sydes, and clenseth the

Lunges: and if the guts be hurt and wounded, nothinge is better to heale them, than the syrupe or Iuice of Horstayle, sayth Dioscorides.
                        To helpe the flixe. 
                        Galen affirmeth that the same herbe doth heale woundes, and stop bloud in the nose, with all the deseases aforesayd, drunke wyth Wyne. Goodly salues of healynge may be made with the same: Plinie sayth▪ & that I haue proued oftentimes, that it healeth ruptures. And further sayth Plinie,
                        ☜ it stoppeth or defendeth Enteroclea, which is a disease very perilous, called ramex intestinorum, when the guts are fallen into the coddes. Euen so it will heale them,To helpe the guttes. drunke oftentymes. And a plaster of this, with warme Uinegar stamped together, & applyed to the Belly, is good, for the same purpose: the Smoake or fume is good to cause childrens Guts, to go back into the body, when as through flixe or colde, they will hang forth.To stoppe the termes of women. Euen so it will stop the immoderate red termes in Women: and this shall suffice, of the same herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the herbe Botris?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis herb Botris is so named, because the seede is so plentifull, clustring wyth great number on the braunches, it groweth by Ryuers,Sweet
                              •
                            Botris. or Water sides, & is rype in September. This herbe is sweete, and when it is dry, it is good to cast into Chestes, to preserue apparell frō Mothes, & to make both linen, and wollen sweete. This herbe is yellowe, whereof is plenty neere vnto Paris in Fraunce: It is hoat and dry of nature. Drunke in Wyne, it helpeth the lunges, and clenseth them from colde coughes, and sorenesse in the breast: and helpeth against the shortnesse of Wynde, Dioscorides, Paulus, and Plinie affirme the same.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Gentian?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THys was founde by Gentian, a noble Kynge of Illyrica, which beinge wounded in battayle, had health by the same herbe:Gentian a bitter herbe. hauing many vertues. it is leaued lyke Plantan, the rootes be also not vnlike Aristolochia the longe. Thys roote is grosse and bitter, with yellowe Flowers, growinge vppon highe Mountaynes or Alpes, and we haue plenty thereof among our Apotheca
                        
                           •
                        aries, it is hoat and dry, and most bitter. Two dragmes drunk with Peper and Rewe in Wyne, do defend from poyson, and biting of serpentes: & it is good for wounded men to drynke: and casteth dead children from the matrix. This is profitable agaynst all oppilation, and stopping of the Lyuer, gall, and splene, and wil purge choller: but it is perilous for Women with childe to drinke. There is nothing better for Illiaca passio, it strengtheneth the Stomacke. This is not onely profitable to mankinde agaynste Dropsy, stoppyng of the body, venime, poyson, and pestilence, to bee drunke in Wyne or Water: but also it helpeth the dumbe brute beastes, as horse, oxen. &c. for all diseases of the lunges, to be giuen them, as Plinie sayth. The roote sodden, is good agaynst conuulsion, and shrinking of the Synewes. And thus I do end of Gentian.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the property and vertue of Lauender?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        OF thys kynde, there is Lauender Spica, which is the great Lauender:Lauender the sweete vertue therof, wholsome for colde folkes. then there is the single Lauender. Thys hearbe is called the counterfayt, or false Nardus, and is named Lauendula, because it is good in bathes and washing, and giueth a sweete odour. This herbe is commonly knowen and is hoat and dry in the seconde degree: and is good agaynst the coldnesse of the stomacke, hardnesse of the splene, and swelling of the guts, stopping of the Lyuer, & the raynes, it prouoketh vryne. Nothing is better agaynst the diseases of ye Synewes, the coldnesse of the Brayne, Palsy, & Falling euill, eyther to be drunk,
                           Lauender helpeth the Synewes.
                           Oyle of spike doth warme.
                         or els smell of this herb, or also to be anoynted wt the goodly warme oyle made thereof. Whych oyle hath vertue, agaynst all the dyseases of the Synewes: and thus I end of thys herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Mandragora?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        MAny supersticious, and foolishe thynges haue bin deuised of thys herbe: a very inuencion of Wytches, and Hypocrites, through the suggestion & motion of the deuill, to delude the weake hart of mankynde wythall. For they doe affyrme, that this herbe cōmeth of the seede of some conuicted dead men: and also, without the death of some lyuing thinge, it cannot be drawen out of the earth to mans vse.An old supersticion, inuented by wytches, and a practice of Sathan. Therefore, they did tye some Dogge, or other lyuing beast vnto the roote thereof wyth a corde, and digged the earth in compasse rounde about, and in the meane tyme stopped their own cares, for feare of the terreble shriek, and cry of thys Mandrack. In whych cry, it doth not only dye it selfe, but the feare thereof kylleth the Dogge or Beast, whych pulled it out of the earth. And this hearbe is called also Anthropomorphos because it beareth the Image of a man, and that is false. For no herbe hath the shape of a man or Woman, no truely, it is not naturall of his owne growing: but by the crafty inuention of some false man, it is done by arte. As many rootes may be made, in the formes of men, foules, and beastes, and secretly couered in the earth:Mandrack is made lyke a man or Womā by craft, for nature giueth no mās shape to a Beast, mutch lesse to an herbe. which when they are found, by the crafty hyder thereof, the beholders be dryuen into no small admiration and wounder, supposing there by, that some straunge fearefull thing, shall quickly followe the same. My Friend Marcellus, the discription of this Mandracke, as I haue sayd, was nothing, but the imposterous subtilty of wicked people. Perhaps of Fryers, or supersticious Monkes, whych haue wrytten thereof at length: but as for Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie. &c. they haue not wrytten thereof so largely, as for to haue head, armes, fyngers. &c. But there is an herbe called Mandracke, whose leaues be large and long, lyke vnto large Lettice: whose apples be in the forme of Cheries, very colde, properly gyuen to helpe conception, some say, as it appeereth by the Wyues of the holy Patryache Iacob. The one was fruictfull, the other did desire helpe, by the meanes of Mandracke, brought out of the Fyeldes, by the handes

of Ruben Leas sonne. This herb hath a long large roote,
                           Gene. xxx. This place proueth not ye Mandracke will helpe cō
                           ception, but Mandracke wil clense the matrix, or cast forth the dead child from the same, then it wyll kill the liuing seede. Dioscorides
                           ▪ is of that mynde. with two Legges in forme, one wrapped about the other: and fine rootes like hayre, growing vpon it. But no armes, feete, fingers, handes, head, nor stalkes, but ye leaues creepe out of the ground: of whych herbe be two kindes, male, and female, the male greater than the female. This herbe is cold in the thirde degree, & hath vertue, to cause deepe sleepe: the strength is in the Apple, and in the rynde of the roote. The remnant, that is in the leaues, and inward partes of the roote, is but weake sayth Galen: the seedes of the apple, sayth Dioscorides, beyng drunk, wyll purge the Belly. The iuyce of thys herbe pressed forth, and kept in a close earthen vessell, according to arte, bringeth sleepe, and casteth men into a trans on a deepe terrible dreame, vntill he be cut of the stone. &c. This herbe sodden in Wyne vnto the thirde parte, doth purge blacke choller as well as Elleborus niger will do. This herbe stamped, and applied vpon a wound or vlcer, doth heale the same, and so naturally, that it wyll suffer no scar or marke called Stigma to remayne: the leaues be preserued in Salt, for the same purpose. The greene leaues stamped, and applyed wyth the white of an Egge to the eyes, do asswage the swelling, burning, or dropping of them: if the roote be cut in sundry places,The vertue of Mandrack, is to make one to sleepe. there wyll come forth a worthy iuyce to anoynt the forehead, to bring sleepe. Pessaries be made of this, whych wyll draw forth dead children, from the matrix: Therefore rightly to say, it doth rather hinder then furder concepcion: the roote is vnpleasaunt to smell vpon, and pestiferous, sayth Plinie. The iuyce must be gathered, when Grapes be ripe, and clarified in the Sonne, & kept close. The aples must be dryed in ye Sūne, & the roote must be sodden in old dark coloured Wyne, which Wyne must be soddē to ye third part: the aples may be brused & kept in vnripe oyle Olife in ye Sunne. All these be good to coole, to cause sleepe, moderatly vsed. Two halfpeny waight of the pouder of the rynde thereof,Mandrake was called Circaeum and also Anthropomorphos.
                         may be drunke in sweete Water for the Kynges euil, or lacke of sleepe. The iuyce thereof with oyle & Hony, healeth woūdes: and thus I end of Mandrack, whych in old tyme, it was called Circaeum, of Wytches, whych had vertue (sayd they) or craft to transforme, both man beast, and herbe out of kynde. Among all other, they wrought Wonders by this herbe, to prouoke, bewitch, or cast men into mad blynd fantasies, or frē
                        ses, called Loue, whych rather may be termed, noysome beastly Lust, and when it is wrought by herbes, foolishnesse.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is to be sayd of Crowfoote, wherefore is it good?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THys herbe is called Ranunculus, or Frogwort:Of sundry kyndes of Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogges grasse. of this Crowfoote Dioscorides founde fower kindes, lib. 2. Capit. 171. But since his dayes, three kindes more be founde: these be herbes both of the water, whereas Frogges do cast their Sperma or seede, in whych herbe, they do greatly reioyce. And also of ye lande, as Garden, Medowe, and Wood Crowfoote: thys herbe is commonly knowne. Some haue whyte Flowers, some yelowe, some Purple: some haue Leaues like Coriander, some haue Leaues lyke

Beares foote, growing vpon the top of the stalke, hauing long rootes. Another hath broade iagged leaues, growing neere the grounde, but vpward smaller leaues lyke Crowfoote, do grow vpon the braūches. These herbes be vehemētly hoat and dry,
                           Dioscorides lib. 2. Cap. 171 and do vlcerate and blister the skin, wherewith valiaunt beggers, doe blister their legges and faces, whych maketh theym to seeme Leprous, and whosoeuer doth eate of these herbes, shall be smitten into madnesse. Their sinewes shalbe shronke, and they shall laugh them selues to death, if they do eate of the kinde of Crowfoote, called Apium risus as Plinie doth testifie: the roote thereof dried, prouoketh neesing, and is good to be put in an hollow toth, to breake it, and drawe it forth without payne. The iuyce of this herbe, tempered with Beares grease, will brynge hayre to the balde head. Also this iuyce taketh away skabbes, and crusty scurfes from the legges and armes, of sore people. And tempered wt swines grease, it helpeth the swelling of ye throate. And thus I end of Crowfoote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Aconitum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     THis herbe is venemous, whereof be two kindes: the one is called Pardalianches,
                        
                           A conitum Libardes. bane. or Liberdes bane. The other is called Licoctonon, or Wolfes poyson. The first hath three or fower leaues, growing in the top, wyth a rounde bery in the middes, and no leaues vpon the braunche, hauing a long roote lyke a Serpent, very rugged. The seconde hath many leaues vpon the braunche or stalke, like vnto Crowfoote, with yellow flowers in the top like Brome, with long deuided blacke rootes. This herbe groweth in May, and is acorosiue burning, poysoning, and killinge. The pouder of this roote, put into peeces or baytes of fleshe, poysoneth Wylde beastes: as Wolfes, Foxes, Grayes, Polcattes. &c. and is venemous for mankinde:To poyson Wolues and Foxes. and there is no remedy, but to drinke oyle, and to prouoke vomit, to expulse the poyson.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Geranium, called Sheepherdes needell?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THys herbe is called the Storkes bille, or Cranes beake, for there grow out of the flower,Sheepherdes Needle. Geranium.
                         seedes like Bodkins or Needels, whereof there bee sixe kyndes. Some of their leaues be like Crowefoote: and some like vnto Mugwort. Some haue purple Flowers, and they be the first kynde: and some white, wyth red rootes, but some of them haue whyte rootes. And they be all of nature stopping and drying, the rootes be sweete of the fyrste kynde,
                           Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. 114. and red also. Dioscorides sayth, that if a dragme of the fyrst kynde of the herbe, be drunke in wyne, it doth aswage the swelling of the matrix, and Belly, and healeth the cough of the lunges: Paulus Aegineta is of the same mynde. But you must take the fyrst kynde, whose leaues be in forme, betwene the leaues of Rocket and Mugwort: with the long red roote, called Geranium primum. This roote wyll breake ye stone, and clense ye raynes and bladder. This herbe & the third kind, with blew flowers, do heale woū
                        des

and sores: and the same thirde is called Douesfoote, which if it be sodden, and applied on sores, it will heale them. The first kinde with Mirrhe,Doues foote· and Peper, sodden in Wyne, is good agaynst the Dropsy, collike, winde, and woundes within the body, and cricke in the necke. There is also a kynde of this Geranium, whych is good for woundes, called hearbe Robert: but rather I take it to be called Ruberta, a rubro colore, an herbe of a red colour.Herb Robert And thus I do conclude of Geranium, called Storkes bill, or Sheepherdes needle: Whereof the firste kynde, is the best for the stone, and raynes, & outward woundes. The Doues foote is good for sores & festers, so is herbe Robert: all the other be euill and venemous inwardly taken, but yet for drying mayst sores outwardly, they be tolerable. And thus I make an end of Geranium, called Crowe foote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What vertue is there in Angelica, that sweete roote?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THys hearbe Angelica is very longe leaued, indented,
                           
                              Angelica, or Angels blome,
                           Some call it Radix sancti Spiritus, the roote of the holy Ghost.
                         or hath small teeth like Eldren, a great stalke, and hollowe, a bigge sweete roote, blacke without, and whyte within, Purple flowers wyth white spottes, and great broade seedes. Thys is called the Angels herbe, whych is of .ij. kyndes, of the garden and of the field: this herbe excelleth al other, agaynst poyson, and is hoat and dry. It doth open, warme, dissolue, & is good agaynst the fearefull daungerous plague, called the pestilence, if it be but bitten vpon, mutch more it is effectual being drunke in the morning. The pouder drunke wyth Wyne .x. grane waight, or the water drunke .xx. droppes in the morning in Wyne, is a goodly armour agaynst poyson, foule ayre or plague: this clenseth the Lunges, Breast, Guttes, Raynes,
                           Angelica. defendeth the pestilence. & Bladder. This herbe soden in Wyne, & Water, doth heale inward woundes: & this doth strengthen the heart, and dryeth superfluous moysture as ye dropsy, and Timpany. And they which can not kepe their meate, for weaknes, through vomits, let them drynke this. It deliuereth from byting of Serpentes, as Snakes, or els any pricke or wound, if it be sodden with Rewe, Hony, and Wyne. It hath one vertue, excellent for young lusty,
                           Angelica preserueth chastity. single People, to quench carnall rage, or youthfull lust: if one do byte or swallow ʒ.ss. of this, it will extinguishe the same▪ wyth many more vertues, for ye whych few herbes, are to be compared to it.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Lagopus, wyth three leaues growing vpon the stalke, and a rough flower, like an Haresfoote, it groweth in Corne, in Haruest tyme?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THys is called Lagopus, or Hares foote, it hath growing neere the flowers, three Leaues together, in sundry places,Hares foote Lagopus.
                         and is also called the triple Hares foote. And is of a drying vertue, sayth Galen, and sodden in Wyne and drunke, it doth stop the Belly in a Flixe: and thys also affirme Dioscorides and Plinie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Lunaria, that increaseth & deminisheth in one moneth?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Lunaria or the herbe of the Moone.THis herbe springeth in the end of May, sending from the stalke .xiiij. leaues, growing seuen agaynst seuen, in the forme of little heartes, but greene in colour, in the top it beareth seedes, like Beate seede, and is colde and dry of nature. Oh how this herbe preuayleth, or excelleth in healing of woundes, knitting them vp, making no scarre▪ Goodly salues bee made thereof so there be Balmes also: this herbe in red Wyne drunk, doth stop the Whytes and Fluxe which passeth from Women vnnaturally.
                           Lunaria healeth woūdes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What sayest thou of Lysimachus, which is a long herbe, bearing a leafe lyke Sallowes, and is called Woodwaxen?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           Lysimachus stoppeth blod Lysimachus a king of Macedon, founde this herbe, he was scholer to Calist henes, and one of Alexanders most worthy Captaynes.
                        THis herbe groweth also among Salowes, of two kindes: one beareth red flowers, and the other yellowe or golden flowers, and was found by Lysimachus, it florisheth in Iune, and is of vertue drying, and bynding: it gleweth woundes together, stoppeth bloud at the nose, applyed to the same: it stoppeth bloudy Flixe, and termes menstruall, drunke in Wyne or Planten water. And the smoake thereof, kill Gnats and Flies, this affirmeth Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie: it is so bitter, that no beaste will feede thereof. And it is in Englishe called Woodwaxen, it dyeth greene.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is that herbe, called Hartes horne?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Harts horne or the starres he. 
                              •
                           .THis herbe called Cornu Cerui, Hartes Horne, some call it Pes Cornicis, Crowes foote. Some herba Stellae, because it spreadeth abroade with iagged leaues, or beames like a Starre, growing flat, neere ye groūd, with flowers growing mutch like small Lauender, but yellow. Plinie writeth of this herbe. lib 24. Cap. 19. This herbe helpeth the flixe, and is good in Sallets. The rootes sodden & eaten, sayth Dioscorides, and Galen, do help the Ilias, and stop bloud in newe woundes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Safron?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        OVID that pleasaunt Poet fayneth, that a younge man called Crocus, was transformed into Safron,
                           Crocus Safron. for the lout of a Uirgin named Smilax as it is written: Crocus wyth Smilax was turned into small flowers:

                           
                              
                                 Ouid.
                              Et Crocum in paruos versum cum Smilace flores.
                        
                     
                     This Safron is commonly known here in England, both in Norffolke, Cambridge shyre, and Essex. &c. wyth purple flowers, wyth yellowe small Chiues, and heades growing in the grounde, wherein be cloues of yerely

increase. The best Safron in al this world, doth grow say sundry Writers,The best Safron of this World, where i
                              •
                            is. vpon a Mountayne called Coricos in Sycill, ye next in Lyca in Asia the lesse. &c. But let vs go no furder than this our naturall realme, in which assuredly there groweth sutch Safron as there is no better in Europe. The flower doth spring of this before the leafe, it is hoat in the first degree,Against drū
                           kennesse, Safron helpeth. and dry in the second: it doth warme, make, soft, digest, prouoke vrine, & make good colour in the face. It comforteth the heart, and defendeth drunkennesse, moueth Venus: and. ʒ.ij. is good agaynst poyson, and it will reconcile sleape: tempered wyth Rose water and Womans Mylke, & dropped into the eye,A singular medicine for the pestilence. it will take away dropping and dimnesse. Oyle of bitter Almondes, and the pouder of Safron, warme powred into the deafe eare, doth help the organ of hearing. The pouder of Safron .x. graynes, Walnuts, twenty graynes Figges. ʒ.ij. & sixe Sage leaues stamped together, with. ʒ.j. of Pimpernel water, and three graynes of Mithridatum: kepe this in a close glasse, and eate thereof in the morning twelue graynes, and this will defende the receyuer thereof, from the Pestilence. Many godly Medicines bee made of Safron, as Diacurcuma agaynst the Iaundice: and it is put in many Antidotaries, and also plasters, as Oxicroceum. &c. and with oyntmentes agaynst Palsy and Gout. Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie affirme the same. Simeon Sethi sayth, Safron, Mylke, Rose water▪ & Opium tempered together: do make a goodly medicine agaynst the paynes of the feete.Safron hath many vertues Safron stamped wyth Beate leaues, do reconcile sleepe, applied to the forehead. Safron is good agaynst all maner of swelling in the breast, wynde in the Belly and Guts: & stopping of the mouth of the matrix, eyther in oyntment, or drynke. It is a good cordiall, to be vsed in the meates, of melancholy persons, to reioyce, & make glad a weake heart. And thus I do ende of this our Englishe spyce, my deare Marcellus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat say you of a Thistell, growing neere ye Sea side, called Eryngium, or Carduus Marinus: I haue seene mutch thereof growing betwene Lestoffe rode, & Orforde nesse, by the Shore side in Suffolke.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THis in deed is called Eryngium,
                        The sea Thistle, called Eringus, whych is so called, be cause if the roote be soddē and conserued with Hony 
                              〈◊〉
                            Cloues it wil preserue nature, or lyft him vp, which is decayed, it may come of Erigo, gis, ere
                                 •
                              i to lift vp, o
                              •
                            repayre. Diosco. lib. 3. Capi. lxxj.
                         but the true name is Centum capita, because of the number of the heads: which is lyke a Thistell with thicke pricking leaues, and long rootes, whose leaues being yet tender, if they be boyled, they may wt Salt, and Oyse, be trimly preserued for Sallets. This herbe with the rootes, as Plinie sayth, must be gathered, when the Sun is in Cancer, in the midds of Sommer. They be blacke without, and white within: but some rootes of them, be white both within and without, very Aromatik and sweete like spice. This roote or herbe, being made in pouder, infusion or decoction, & drunke, doth clense the raynes, bladder, and matrix, and cause the stopped termes to passe. And it greatly preuaileth against the Collike. and torment of the Guts, drunke, in, or wyth Hydromel. It is good against ye falling sicknes, drunke a dragme at a time: the rootes must

be tenderly sodden, and preserued in Succate, to the vse of m
                           ••
                        te or medycine in Winter,
                           Galenus lib. 7. Simp medi.
                         as to restore nature, or helpe the conception of nature: Plinje sayth, of this roote. ʒ, i. drunke in wyne, healeth the prycke of any venemous beast, or worme or feuer. The iuice or oyle of thys, doth cleane recouer any venome of the body, infected with a Spider. Heraclydes the Phisition did affyrme,Against poyson. that this herbe, the leafe or roote, being sodden and drunke, dyd preuayle and ouercome the poyson of any venemous herb, which any haue eaten ignorauntly. As Aconitum called Leopardes bane. &c. Aetius affyrmeth, to drynke this xvi. Euenyngs to bedward, and as many mornings, doth heale all infections of the raynes,
                           Eringium helpeth them which can not make water, or which haue eaten any venemous herbe sayerh Ateius and Heraclyde
                                 •
                              .
                         stopping of the vrine, or stone. This Eryngium is of nature somwhat warme, and very dry.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     There is a Thistell called Chamaelion, wherefore is it good, and why is it so called?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        FIrst, to the vertue of this Thistel, it is ripe in August: and the roote is hoat in the second degree,The Bore or carle Thistel
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           Chamaelion.
                         and dry in the thyrd. This roote sodden in Ale or Wyne, and drunk, doth kyl the wormes in the chest and belly One dragme of the pouder therof, drunk in sharp old wine, wherein Organ hath ben sodden, wil helpe the Dropsy, and also the same wil prouoke vrine, and breake the stone.The Thistell healeth the Pestilence. It is drunke in wyne in place of Triacle, sayth Dioscorides, lib. iij. Cap. ix. when Charles the great, his armie began to be diminished, through an horrible Pestylence, he was warned to vse none other medicine, but only that euery souldiour should drinke.Note that the black Thistel roote with swines grease and Bri
                              •
                           stōe wil heale scabbes and itch. 
                        ʒ.i. of it in wyne: which beyng done, the sayd Pestilence dyd cease presently▪ This roote sodden, the decoction thereof holden in the mouth, wyll lose rotten teeth, so that with litle help, they may be drawen. Theophrastus lib. ix. Cap. xiij. de plantarum historia saith, that there is distaunce, betwene the vertues of these two rootes. The one is black, the other whyte, which white is best, to do as is aforesayd. Further, the Iuice of these rootes, wyl kyl dogges & swyne: if it be put into their meates, Plinie affirmeth ye same. Now to ye name, which is called Chamaelion not only bicause it is diuers of colour as hauing blew flowers, speckled leaues, which is ye black kynd. &c. The white hath a long roote, no stalkes, Leaues lyke wylde Artychokes, great head, many sharp pryckes, with plumes shaken, or blowen away with wynd. And to conclude, looke vpon what soyle or Earth so euer these thistles▪ grow vpon they wyl chaunge their colours like the same. As a litle beast, which is in Inde, called Chamaelion, spotted like a Libard, which chaungeth into diuers colours,Of the littie. beast called Chamaelion.
                         accordyng vnto the thing, which it seeth. This beast doth neuer eate nor drynke▪ nor winke, but liueth by the ayre only: which litle beasts, be yerely brought from Barbarie, by the ships of London, into this Realme.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     UUhat is to be spoken of Diars flowers, called flos Tinctorum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THys is along herb, wyth yellow flowers, hauing small black Cods, in whych the seede is lyke Lentelles, the leaues be lyke Hysope,
                           Flos tinctoris
                         but mutch larger and longer. This is hoat and dry, in the second degree, and is of the nature of Brome:To vomitte. and this herb is good for a man. ʒ.j.ss. eyther the herbe or seede to drynk to prouoke vomit, to clense the stomacke, & purge the raynes. Drunke two sundry times, it will prouoke vrine, when it is stopped.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of rubia Tinctorum, called Madder?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THere be of them two kyndes, the garden Madder,Madder with red rootes. with quadrangle stalkes, and sharpe, and at euery ioynte, the leaues grow round about the stalke: the berries be round and greene, when they are yong, being ripe, then are they blacke: the rootes long, small, & red of colour. The wylde Madder is lesse, wyth stalkes fower square, leaues compassing them lyke Starres: flowers white, but rootes not so rough.
                           Dioscorides lib. 
                           
                              •
                            
                           cap. 143 This herb is called of the Greekes Erythrodanon, wyth thys, Diars colour their Wooll wythall: it is hoat in the second degree, and dry in the thyrde. This will clense the bladder, breake the stone, and force vryne, sayth Auerhois, and is good to be drunke agaynst bruses, and the Pestilence:Against the Pestilence. drunk in sweete water, it helpeth the kynges euill. The rootes or berries sodden, saieth Galen lib. vj. simplic. medicamen. will clense the Lyuer, Splene, Gall, Urine, Matrix, Brusinges, and the paynes in the Ioyntes, chiefly the huckle bones, called Ischias or Sciatica.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Paritorie of vertue?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        PArtriges do delight to feede vpon this herbe, Galen sayth,
                           Parietaria that g
                              •
                           o
                              •
                            vpon stone. walles. it hath vertue to clense, stop, and coole: therefore it hath vertue to helpe flegmon. From the beginning, augmenting, vnto the state of the sayd flegmon, the hoatter any Apostumacion is the better this herbe will helpe the same: if you make a plaster of this Parietaria, it is good to clense the lunges▪ when they are stopped, for it hath vertue to scower or clense. No herbe is better to make cleane glasse, then this herbe as Galen affirmeth, if it be incorporate wyth Salte: it will help the Hemeroydes, & a Fistula. The iuyce of this being drunke, clenseth the raynes, and by little & little, doth breake the stone: and anoynt Shingles, or saynct Anthonies fyre therewith, and health will follow the same wyth speede.For the goute The same iuyce wyth Waxe, and Goates tallow melted together is a good plaster, for to take the payne of the gout away sayth Plinie: this Iuyce also wyth Oyle of Roses, powred warme into the eare, will take away the payne.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then to Cartamus?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        IT is called wylde Safron of the garden, with indented Leaues,
                           Cartamus or wyld sa
                              •
                           rō
                         sharpe ends, the flowers yelow, and knoppes as bigge as Oliues. The Seedes white and redde, longe and cornered: the Seede is hoate in the thirde degree: the iuice of this seede pressed forth, drunke with the Broth of a chicken, wyll purge the belly, and to the stomacke it is noysome: the iuice tempered with Niter,
                           Cartamus clenseth humours. Almondes, Honie, and Anisseedes, beaten together, is very beneficyall to clense the guttes. To eate thereof the thyrd part of a Walnutte, before supper, it is very good for to conueigh excrements, & superfluous humours, and it fortifyeth digestion.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Spurge, or Purge of Nature?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THere is one kinde▪ called Ricinus or palma Christi: wherof there is Oyle made for Lampes,Great spurge called Ricinus in Dioscorides dayes xxx. Seedes, but now .viij. wil suffise bicause nature is weaker, Dioscorides lib. 4. cap. 158. and plasters called oleum Ricinium. Dioscorides sayth if .xxx seedes thereof, be cleane blaunched from the rind, and stamped, then drynke this sayth hee, & it wyll purge fleume and choller, and Water downward. This seede will trouble the stomacke, and cause stronge vomites: the iuice thereof wyll clense the face from pimples and spottes, and make smoth the skynne from wartes, broken with Oyle of Tartar, and anoynt the place withall: this is hoat in ye third degree, and skowreth, warmeth, and clenseth: the leaues be like figge leaues. Then there be seuen kindes of the Tithimal
                              •
                           ,
                        
                           Larhyris, or Cataputia minor, or the leue Spurge. sayeth Dioscorides lib. iiij. Capi. Clix. and other old writers: which herbes bee called Goates Lettice, or the Milke herbe, for if you break of a piece thereof, droppes of bitter Milke will follow▪ But to our common Catapucia or Spurge, thys is hotte in the third degree, and dry in the second and is vsed to clense the body from fleume,To purge choller. choller, and melancholy, sodden in the broth of a chicken with Polopodie, Damaske Prunes, & Mirobolans, and also the herbe called Mercurie. I do here by occasion put to Mercurie, this woord (herbe) because through the absence of a Cooke,Note. in the time whē he should haue made his Lordes broth in the Kitchen, an ignoraunt fellow, dyd put into his pot Mercuri Sublimated,
                        
                           Quid pro quo was giuen to the Lord Wharton in his potage of ignoraunce to his great perill of life. that is Chalcantum, Quicksiluer, Uyneger, and Salt Armoniack together, which he sent for quickly to the Apothicaries shoppe: thynkyng it had ben a pleasaunt, or els a very wholsome confection, or at the least the same Mercury, whych the forsaid Cooke, dyd put daily into the pot, for the health of his Lord and mayster. But eftsones, contrary to hys purpose, or intente, thys broth in whome the lurkyng, sleepyng, venome was spred, was receiued into the body, of the good LORD Wharton, in whom if wythall speede, medycine had not gotten the happye victory by vomits, &c. thys Noble Gentleman had there lost his life, whose death had bene no small want vnto the publyke wealth of hys country. Nor yet no little comfort vnto the forrain enemy: sutth a violence I say, woulde dedly poyson haue done in one hower by death vpon him, whom Fortune, Wysedome, and honour had aduaunced, and nourished many yeres wyth happy life. And now again to the matter, Marcellus, I neither doe abuse the tyme, nor yet vse to mutch copy of words, when I speake of Mercurye, to

put this woord (herbe) thereunto. Unlesse some should, or would, mistake ye matter▪ as this good fellow dyd. And further note,
                           Tithimalus Characias. or Lathyris is good in medicine to purge melancholy. Choller and fleume. that the pouder of thys Spurge, supped vp wt a little Cinamon▪ in ye broth of a Chiken, or els a reare Egge in the morning, wyll purge grosse fleume very gently, Euen so it wyll doe, if it bee taken with Hony of Roses. Seuen seedes eaten, sayth Dioscorides, in a Figge, will purge melancholy and Water. The sayd Seedes seeme sweete, but they purge by vomitte vehemently. Plinie affirmeth, that if one which hath the dropsie,Sondry kindes of spurge, but yet very perillous, the great spurge and the second excepted, for they be good. do drynke twenty graynes of them in pure sweete water, he shalbe deliuered from the dropsye. Al the other Spurges as Mirsenites, hauing leaues like Mirte, are perilous that grow by the sea side. Ciparistus lyke a Cipresse tree. Helioscopius that tourneth with the Sonne, from mornyng vntill night. And the rest of them, be all hoat in the fourth degree, and venemous, burning, as Galen saith, and what part of the Body so euer they take, forthwith they do blister the same, therefore it can not be taken without daunger. Howbeit, Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie affirme, that it will helpe the toth ach, tempered with waxe: and a dragme of the roote, drunken with Hydromell, will purge fleume downewarde. &c. Thus I doe ende of Spurge.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the yellow wall Gilloflower, and the whyte and yellow Gilloflower, called sweete William, or hearts ease?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius,
                     
                        THis sweete herb is called viola alba, or Cheiri, the white Uiolet that is one kinde: there is also a purple, the thyrd is yellow,
                           Viola Lutea the yellow, Uiolet, the wall Gillowflower. these be all sweete, and very pleasaunt. They florish in Maye and grow a cubitte long: and when their flowers do fade, the seede doth growe in coddes, they be garden flowers, and of nature be hoat and clensing. The yellow, sayeth Dioscorides, is best in medicine, the flowers may bee kept drye to bee drunke, to purge the stopped termes. And of the seede. li. ℥. sodden in wyne, and drunke, doe quickly conueigh, or bryng forth the dead chyld, and the secondes. The rootes sodden in Uineger, be good to anoynte flegmon, and the goute: and the same roote sodden softly with Uineger, and Oyle of Roses, wyll help the liuer and splene, to anoint them, when they be swelled, or hardened. This wyll the yellow Gilloflowers do, besides there is a precyous Oyle made thereof: which wyll helpe the raynes and bladder,Flegmon is a certain apostimacion of corrupted bloud, gathered into one place. or paines in the ioyntes, or sinewes, As appereth in the compounds, and it is there called Olium de violata alba. Now to conclude of this herbe, the iuice thereof tempered with Hony, healeth sores in the mouth and head: And with waxe, the broken skinne fretted wyth wynde in March, called chappes, be made whole. And thus I end of this herbe, which is commonly called Sweete William, or Harts ease: God send thee hartes ease, deare Marcellus. For it is mutch better with pouerty to haue the same, than to be a kyng,The greatest treasor of this world, is a quiet minde. with a myserable mynde. For, from thence spryngeth eyther felycity, or aduersity: an Image of heauen wyth ioy, or els hel with inward horrour of mynde, and vexation.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        
                        I Dooe hartely thanke you, for wishing to me so precious a Iewell, so rich a treasure,Hartes ease, or quietnesse of the mynde. and so heauenly a comfort. For what is more to be desired, than hartes ease? Nothyng. For when aduersity cometh in at the one doore, eftsones, hartes ease dooth run out at the other. For they can not dwell together in one place. Why so? They be, ii. extreame contraries, and merueilous affections of the mynde felt, and not seene, although oftentimes thynges, whych are seene, may be a meanes to brynge quietnes to the minde, and ease to the heart for a time. But rather my deare Hilarius, there be which affirme that harts ease or rest, commeth by the eare, For say they, there is no rest in the heart of the Infidell, but in the beleeuing man:Perfite hartes, rest and true quietnes of minde. and there can be no faith, without hearing. and not the sight of things worldly bryngeth faith, which faith giueth the true hartes ease, passing all other iewels. And albeit Hilarius, thou art not wythout wordly hartes ease, which I graunt, doth please sometyme thy vaine delight. Yet I pray God giue thee, but one handfull of heauenly hearts ease, which passeth al the pleasaunt flowers, that grow in this Worlde. Now what be the vertues of Hermodactilj, I pray you tell mee.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Hermodactili. of .ii. kyndes. Colchicum & Ephemerum, called the fyngers of Hermis▪ or els of Mercurius, one is like
                        
                           HERMODACTILI, be of two kyndes, the first is Colchicum wyld Bulbus, or great wilde Safron, hauyng greate round heades within the ground like Onions, and wt black rindes, and Flowers like Saffron, red seede, but shinyng white and red chiues, but very greate, and a span longe: sweete iuice, and it florisheth in the Spryng. The second is lyke a Lillie, with tēder leaues, white flowers, bitter seede, one long roote, of the bignes of a fynger.Safron, the other like lyllies. And both these Hermodactilj be called Mercuryes fyngers. Colchicum is of nature hoat and dry, in the second degree. Paulus Aeginetae. lib vij. sayeth the roote of Colchis, sodden by it selfe, do purge the belly, and helpeth morbus articularis, which is the sickenes of the ioyntes: as the Goute, the Sciatica, and the paynes in the ioyntes of the handes, called Chyragra. The rootes be perillous to be eaten, as other wholsome rootes are in meate, as a Sallette: for they wyl put one in daunger of choking, or stranglyng.
                           Cholchis rootes wyll strangle one take heede thereof, although they seeme sw
                              •
                           ete But they wil purge the superfluous humours, and bloud downward and bee venemous, sayth Dioscorides lib. iiij. cap. lxxix, Yet sayth he, they be sweete, and somtime the ignoraunt do eate them for Bulbi, a kynde of sweet rootes: but the remedy is, onely to drinke a great draught of mylke. Theyr rootes and flowers stamped, wyll kyll Lice, anoint chyldrens heads therewith. The second kynd of Hermodactilj is called wylde Iris, or Flowerdeluce of the fyeld,
                           Hermodactilus will kyll Lice. or Lillium conuallium, the rootes sodden, the decoction of them, dooth clense the fylthy teeth that stynketh: the leaues sodden in Wine, doe dissolue humours, gathered into apostumacion, if it be warme washed often tymes therewyth, specyally hoat apostumes, or swellynges gathered of Choller. Galen dooeth remember these Hermodactili, callyng them Ephemerum colchicum, or Iris, describing the same, as is aforesayd, with the same Uertues, lib. vij. simplicium medicamentorum.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat vertue is in the herbe Rumex, called the great Docke,Of Rumex▪ the Docke. Monkes Rubarbe, or bastard Mercurie. I meane not the Sorel, called Acedula, wherof you answered mee before in this booke.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        I Knowe your meaning very well, of that wilde herbe, whych groweth commonly by pathes, hedges, and waters sides.Monkes Rubarbe. And of this kynd, ther is one called Monkes Rubarbe, which groweth in gardens, the other is wilde and with lesser leaues. Marcellus, the blynd ignoraunt people, haue of long tyme not a little erred, in one kynd of Lappa or Rumex. I meane neither Sorell, nor the common wyld Docke, or the bastard Rubarbe:They which call Rumex with the golden Sande, Mercurie, do greatly erre. but that which is commonly called Mercurie, with golden sandes, vppon the back sydes of the leaues, great rootes, clusters of seedes, leaues like a brode speare head, not purfled about with iagges, or smal teeth like a saw, which in deede the very Mercurie hath, with one onely roote. Whereupon many small fine rootes do grow, like a bush: and thys Mercurie is mutch like vnto wylde Hempe. But this bastard Mercurie, whereof I haue now spoken called Rumex, is none other but a kynd of Dockes, which being sodden, or vsed in Clyster, wil moue the belly to bee laxatiue. And is good to be sodden in brothes for them which haue the yellow Iaundice. And the roote of this Docke, which is yellow, is also good for the same purpose, & for the Timpanie of water:Of the great Docke, how it purgeth. a dragme of the pouder, of the Munkes Rubarbe, called the garden Docke, drunke in wyne, wyll purge fleume, water, and choller downeward. The herbes well sodden in Wyne, and applyed to the swelling of the throte, will speedyly helpe the same. And thus I do end of Rumex, called the Docke, and also of the bastard Mercurie, which maister Leonard Fuchsius, doth affyrme to be Rumex, in his bookes of Plantes. Chapit. Clxxiiii And some there be,Of the herbe called Atriplex or Arage whych affirme this bastard Mercurie, to be one kinde of Atriplex, but red Atriplex is Arage, a garden herbe, which wyl quickly spryng forth, to doe pleasure to mankynd. And is called the golden herb, because of his yellow flowers: and of nature is moyst in the second▪ and cold in the fyrst degree,The kynges euyll. And this herbe raw or sodden, wyl moue the belly to be laxatyue, and is good in Clysters: the seedes thereof drunk with sweete water, wyl very quickly help the kings euill, sayth Dioscorides, & Galen affyrmeth the same. And furthermore, that it wyl open the Gal, and purge choller: Plinie would that the Water,Shift water. often tymes▪ when Atriplex is sodden wherein Atriplex is sodden should be often times shyfted or els it wyl hurt ye stomack and infect the face with little spottes or pimples. With Beates, sayth Hyppocrates, it is good to wash, or clense the mouth of the matrix: with Honye and Uinegar tempered, it healeth the Shyngles. This Garden Atriplex is good for medycine: but the wyld Atriplex,
                        To die the hayre. or golden Arage is onely good to chaūge the colour, and make the hayre yellow, with Barbery barkes, and the Flowers of Calendula, called ye Marigold. And thus I end of Atriplex, called Arage or Chrysolochanon, or the golden herbe.
                           Chrysolochanon.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        What then of Germander, called Quercula minor, the little Oxe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Quercula minor the little Oke, or Germander.
                        IT is called Quercula minor, bicause the leaues thereof be like vnto Oken leaues, although very small: It is euen so named Chamaedris, of a very lowe Oke of the grounde, it is named Serrata, for it was first founde by this Germander is cōmonly known, and dyeth not in Winter, the flowers be Purple. And this wyll grow in rocky places of his owne nature, although plenty growe in Gardens: it flowrisheth in Iuly, it is hoat & dry, sayth Galen, in the third degree. But my frende Marcellus, vnderstand this, that although Galen sayth so, yet for all that, the herbes here in England, be not so hoat of nature, as they be in the hoat coūtrey of Greece,A good note of the nature of herbes. where as Galen was borne, therefore, obserue the Climate and Region, and then you shall do very well. Nowe to thys herbe, which is scant so hoate and dry, Dioscorides affirmeth that this herbe greene or dry, sodden in Wyne or Water, and so drunke, hath all these vertues. It helpeth conuulsions, coughes, hardnes of the splene, stopping of vrine, Dropses, and forceth the termes to passe. And in the tyme of perill, ye Midwyfe may giue it to the Woman, whose childe is dead, to come forth. Drunke with Uineger, it doth rebate the swelling of the Lyuer, and preuayleth agaynst poyson. And drunke wyth good Wyne, and pilles of thys herbe, wyth Hony, and then swallowed it will purge sores and vlcers. It openeth the stopping of the ioyntes, and dryeth grosse humours, thus sayth Galen,
                        Many good ve
                              •
                           tues of Germander. 
                        Theophrastus affirmeth that the leaues stamped with Oyle, will heale woundes: and the seedes drawe forth yellowe choller, being drunke, and be good for the eyes. The Iuyce of the leaues, tempered with cleane oyle Olife, wyll clense the dimnes of th
                           •
                         sore eyen, sayeth Plinie: and these be goodly vertues, which God hath giuen to this herbe, my friend Marcellus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Psyllium.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     
                        
                           Psyllium called Flewort.
                        
                           PSyllium is called Fleawort, bicause the seede is like to Flees, black & hard, which Flees in the North countrey, be called Loppes: or els as some do say, whereas this herbe is cast greene into any house, no Fleas will remayne there. It groweth in dry places vnsowen, the seede is colde in the seconde degree: wyth Oyle of Roses, Uinegar and this seede stamped together, is good to anoynt the ioyntes, swelling, & hoat burning paynes in the forehead.For paines in the head comming of heate. or burning. This herbe or seede, broken in a Leadden morter, with hogges grease, is good to to heale a foule, burning, rotten vlcer or sore. The Iuyce thereof wyth Hony, dropped into the eare, will kyll Wormes, or any Flea cropen therein: and thus mutch affyrme Dioscorides, and Plinie, of this hearbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat say you of Foxe Gloues, commōly ye Finger flowers: the flowers of some be yellow,
                           Digitales.
                         & there be of them Carnation in colour? Thus I know them by name and colour: but no furder, I can say of them.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     THou sayest well, I neede no further description of them:
                           Yellowe and Purple Fingers.
                           Bitter herbes be hoat & dry.
                         it groweth in mountaines, shadow, or rocky places. It is bitter, and therefore it must needes be hoat and dry, for Galen lib. iiii. de simplic. medi. facul. cap. xvij. those herbes sayth he, which be bitter of tast, do clense and purge and do cut away grosse matter in ye vaines. Therfore with bitter things ye termes menstrual, and the fylth from the breast, and lunges be clensed, what more?To clense the stomache. This herbe wyl do all, or asmutch as Gencian wyll do: in whose place, this herbe called yellow or Purple fyngers, is vsed: these be Galen his words of this herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     ALthough you haue shewed me the nature of common Gardein Mints I had almost forgotten Calamyntes, Organ, and Mariarum I pray you shew me some thyngs of them.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Calaminte, the profytable Minte,
                           Calamintha Montana Nepeta. Pulegium. Siluestre.
                         the vertue thereof causeth Serpents to flye from it: mutch of thys Calamynte doth grow vppon Mountaynes, and is called Calamintha Montana. An other kynd is called Nepeta, or Neppe of the garden: an other is Pulegium Siluestre, the wyld Pulyall roiall of the Wood, with great leaues than Peneroial, called Pulyall, growyng in Woodes, or moyst places. And Calaminte, is of essence,
                           Diosco. lib. 3
                              •
                            
                           Capi. 36. or beyng hoat & dry in the third degree: the rootes bee of none effect: or profit, but the leaues be very hoate, and eger to tast vpon. The vertues of Calaminte be many, as against poysō and stingyng of Serpents, either drunke, or anoynted: agaynst the strangurie, or the stoppyng of vryne. or stone, conuulcions, paynes in the stomack Orthopnaea, whych is a disease,
                           
                              Orthopnaea difficulty of wynde.
                           
                              Tormina fretting of the Gutts.
                         that a man can not take his breath but holding his necke vpryght: Tormina, or paines of the guts, stopping of ye termes in women: tercians, and the kyngs euyll. All these be clensed, opened, and healed, by, and through Calamintes. drunke in wine: the pouder and sirupe haue the like vertues, the water therof is but weake, except to stop vomits What more of this herb, it wyll kyll great wormes, drunk with Salte and Hony: euen so it wil Ascarides, whych be lyttle round wormes, breedynge in the long guttes of chyldren. Who so hath Elephanticus morbus, which is a Leprie, bred of melancholy with swelled flesh, and black spottes, and vse to eate Calamintes sodden, or raw, and then drynke the iuice in Wha
                           •
                        e, shalbe healed of the same leprosie. This sodden in wine, doth take away blew, or black spottes from the skin, made by a stripe of hand, wand, or rod, or stumblyng against ones fyst in the darke, applyed to the same stripe: a playster made thereof, or hoate layed vppon the huckle Bones, wyll asswage the payne of Sciatica, and it wyll draw downe humours. The iuice wyll kyl wormes that be in the eare. Galen doth wryte very mutch of Calaminte.The oyle of Calamintes doth warme the body, & is good against the Sciatica.
                         
                        lib. vij. simplicium medicamen. agreeyng with Dioscorides, and doth mutch commend the Oyle of the same, to anoynt the body, saying: it wyll enter quickly, and that it is a present remedy for the Sciatica. And through the bytternes of the same,

it wyll skoure, and clense the yellow Iaundice. and open the Galle. And to conclude, the Mountayne Minte with the Purple flowers, hauing leaues like to Ocimum,
                        Organ. called Basill, Nipotellae, called Neppe, is one of the Calamintes. So is an other called S. Marie Mint, with flowers like to Chamom
                           •
                        ll.
                           Dioscor. lib. 3 C
                                 •
                              p. xxviii.xxix.xxx.viii.
                         Some there be, that do take Organ, to be a kynde of Calamyntes: but it is not so, for Organ is a proper herbe of it selfe, in name and nature. And is distinguished in fower bye names. Heracleoticum, Onitis, Syluestre, and Tragoriganum, these bee sweete herbes: Goates and other beasts loue to feede of them. Some of them haue leaues like Hisope, but broader: Some lyke Sauerye, called Satureia, of increasyng of seede, whych Sauorye is neare kin in nature to Organ,
                        Sauerie. Maioram so is Amaracus, called Maioram, or Sampsuchum. These all be herbes very sweete, wholsome, and pleasaunt, good to mankynde, and enemies to venome, & poyson of corrupted wormes or Serpents: and of nature be hoat and dry in the thyrd degree. These herbes wyll warme all the body, eyther in bath, or to be anoynted wyth the Oyle, agaynst all cold syckenesses, or rigours of tremblyng. These herbes sodden greene in broth, or the pouder simply of them put into the same, or els drunke in Wyne, or the Sirupe thereof, wyl do thus, as followeth. Help the dulnesse of syght: prouoke neesyng,Against euill sight▪ Sauerie preuaileth. eyther in oyle or pouder: open ye raynes: prouoke vryne: force termes menstruall: kyll wormes in the belly: Cleanse grosse fleume from the Stomacke: make good digestion: helpe the greene sycknesse, nothyng better for melancholy, and paynes in the left syde. Good for the collike, palsye, stinkyng breath, shortnesse of wynd, or vomytes, or swellyng with dropsy: There is a forgetful sycknes, called Lethargus or Veternus, which is placed in the head, in whych the power of reason is contayned, through a sicknes of fleume. as a quotidian not purged, or els of Peripneumonia, which is a sicknes of ye lungs. When through heat,
                           Lethargus helped with herbes, hoate and dry in the third degree. flegme is melted, or made thin eftsones, drawen to the head: the best remedy is then, to purge the head, wyth Hierae simplicis. ℥i.ss. & to weare a garland, or cloth full of these herbs, of Organum Maiorum, or Sauerie. and health will folow: and thus I do end of them.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Ormyn, Which we do call Clarie, Gallitricum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hillarius.
                     
                        ORmin hath stalkes fower square, leaues grosser than Horhound. flowers in forme like the Archangel: but purple coloured, growyng aboute the stalke,
                           Orminum Ormyn. Or Clarie. with black seedes in the Cods. This herbe is hoat and dry: Dioscorides sayth, the seede drunke with wyne, wyl moue Venus, with Honye it will cleanse the bloudy spottes in the eye, this affirme also Paulus and Plinie: and it is good for to clense the whites in women, sodden wyth Planten in red wine and drunke:Clarie good for women. stamped and put to a prick, it wyl draw it forth of the flesh.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat is the vertue of wyld Basil, called Ocimastrum, hauing stalkes fower square: flowers Purple, seedes blacke, and leaues lyke vnto the kyng of herbes,
                           Ocimastrum wyld Basill for sweetenes called Basill.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     THis groweth in sondry places, and florisheth in October: bearinge the Seedes and Cods, is hot and drye of nature wyth Bytternes. The seede sodden in Wyne and drunke warme, helpeth the byting of Serpentes, and drunke in wyne, with Mirrhe and Pepper, it healeth the Sciatica, saith Dioscorides.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of wyld water Peper, an herbe so named
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Hidropiper, because it groweth in water,
                           Hydropiper water pepe
                              •
                           
                         & the tast therof burneth in the mouth, as the spice Peper doth. It hath a very tough stalke, leaues lyke Myntes but broader, thynner, and whyter, the Seedes growe by the Leaues vppon slender Braunches, it florisheth in August. It is hoat and drye,
                           Dioscorides lib. 2. cap. 155. Gal. lib. 7 Simp. medic.
                         not so muche as Peper Dioscorides sayth, this herbe with the seede stamped, annoynt the blacke spot, or hard knot through a strype therewyth, and it shall be healed. If this seede bee dryed and beaten vnto pouder mingled with Salt, it is good to eate with meate, or to season flesh.
                           Hydropipe one hath leaues like Mintes: the other is Persicario with leaues lyke Peches. and wil serue in the place of Peper. The roote therof is good for nothing: of this herbe be two kyndes, the one hauyng leaues like mintes: of the seconde speaketh Matthiolus saying he taketh it to be Persicaria. which hath Leaues lyke Peaches, with coloure spotted, somewhat lyke Puke, of which Persicaria. I haue spoken of before.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What be the vertues of Aristolochia rotunda, and Longa
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THis Herbe is good to quicken the tyme of Child byrth,
                           Aristolochia Rotunda Longa Clematis. Dioscot. lib. 3. Cap. 155.. and expulse the secondes, whereof there bee three kyndes: one round wt leaues like Iuie, but rounder, wt round rotes: frō which herbe commeth a pleasaunte sharpe sauor whyte flowers vpon pretty redde knoppes, this is Rotunda, or roūd, ye Female: an other is called Longa, or long with long rootes and leaues, smal braūches, purple flowers, and stinking, whē it doth grow: and is of the fashion of a Peare. Both of theym haue berryes lyke Capers very bitter, of colour lyke Boxe, and do stinke.
                           Galen. lib. vij Simplic. medic.
                         Now to the thirde whiche is sweete hauing smale rootes and flowers like Rue or herbe grace. The roūd roote is the best in medecine, as salue, pouder, & Oyle. The fume or smoke therof put vnder beddes, or the cradels of young children, is very wholesom & putteth away ayre of infection: this herbe is most bitter & somwhat sharp hoat and drye in the second degre. This herbe hath vertues to incarnat vlcers and woundes, with clensyng and mundifyinge theym: and will extenuate and make thin Grosse humour, and knitteth. The roote or curnelles therof, dryed and beaten into pouder with Peper and Myre mingled togeather,

is wholesome to rubbe the gummes and teeth, when they be foule & cankred. The pouder is good to takeaway ded flesh, to be put into a fistula, to clense it: euen so it wil helpe the conduite of the vryne, conueyghed in wyth a syrynge or instrumente when it is corrupted with burninge heate, or vlcered: a foment Oyle and wyne, and this roote wil bring forth a yong chylde. Gentian Aristolochia, and Hony, make a holsome confectiō, for a stinkyng breath.
                           
                              Aristolochia helpeth Cankers and burninges.
                           Many good vertues of Aristolochia.
                           
                         The second ii. kyndes sayth Plinie, drunke with wyne, or water, be good to be geuen them, which haue the cramp, or haue fallen down from some high place, beyng sore brused. The seede drunke, is good agaynst the plurisy and wormes, wt rosen and waxe, this roote, or rootes, in pouder, withdraw cornes from the feete, and also draw pryckes, needles, & arrowe heads from the Fleshe. With vineger, this pouder wil, heale a greene, woūd: it is drunke agaynst the fallyng sicknes, and shortnes of wynde. And this roote must be gathered in April.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     VUhat is the vertue of that wylde clyminge Uine, with the greate whyght roote, stinkyng berries, red of Colour, and leaues lyke vnto Hoppes, or wild Fyges?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THis is a hedge weede in euery place commonly growing, and creepeth about busshes,
                           Brionia vitis alba, or the wyld tunning Uine. braunches, boughes and trees it florisheth vntil Haruest the braunches be somewhat bitter and sharpe, & stopping of nature. The roote doth drye with moderate warmes, in the second degre, it hath vertue to clense skoure with maturation or rypenes.To heale sores with Brionia.
                         The roote of this Brion, or the pouder of ye rotes, with Smalage. Mallowes, cleane Hony. Flaxeseede in pouder, and Barly meale cleane Terebinthin, and a little whyte wyne sodden softlye together, maketh a medecine to heale Fellons and vncomes withal. or pushes. This herbe beyng yonge and tender, may be eaten as Asparagus may bee, sayth Dioscorides, for it moueth or prouoketh the belly and vryne, the leaues, fruite and rootes be sharpe, and wil byte the toung, if you tast of them. Therfore they wil stampe them with Salt, to heale Cankers, fylthe in handes or feete, or Legges, &c. as sores, foule pushes. &c. This roote wil clense all the fylth from the body,To clense the face with Brionia.
                         and blacke spottes, blaynes, blisters, shingles, pimpels called good Ale pearles, tempered with the Pouder of Fenegreeke and the Oyle of Tartar. Or els Bryona sodden in whyte wyne, from a quarte to a pynt, then strayne the same, puttyng some Champhere▪ and washe the infected face euery Nighte with a Sponge,
                           Briomia defendeth poyson. and lette it dry in. The rootes pressed in the Sprynge, and the Iuice Dronke wyth sweete water doth purge fleum: dronke dayly in the morning with wyne or Ale, wel sodden, they helpe the fallyng euil, and vertigo Two vnces dronke are good agaynst the poyson of Serpents, or venomous drynk. But yet it wil kil a yong child, in the mothers wombe. Mary, if the child be dead, by anye casualty in ye belly, thē it wil bryng it forth by the way of a foment, or aplication,

by iniection into the mouth of the Matrixe. The berryes of this broken, do helpe to clense scurfe, and fylthy Leprosy from the skinne. If nurces do kneede their Wheat meale,
                           Brionia. encreaseth Milke with the iuice of the Bryon beryes and bake it in breade, if they eate the same breade, it wil increase milke in their brest. But to vse it much, excepte cause of infyrmity moue the pacient, it is hurtful for memory: it helpeth the lunges, Liuer, and splene to be dronke, and draweth forth pryckes, & healeth woūds.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Pellitory of Spayne good for?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe flower thereof, put into the nose,
                           
                              Sternumentaria
                           
                           
                              Pyre
                                    •
                                 hrum▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Ptermic
                           
                           Pellitorie
                         wil prouoke much nesyng: and therfore it is called Ptermica, it hath Flowers lyke Chamomel, braunches much like Sothernwood, It wil grow in hard stony places, the roote must be digged in the ende of Haruest: it is hote and drye in the thyrde degre and in the beginning of the fourth, specially if it be dryed. The leaues with the flowers stamped togeather,
                           Dioscoridesi lib. 3. cap. 71 wil make a good oyntmente to take awaye Markes made with strypes, causynge blewe or blacke spottes in the face or any part of the body. The rootes haue vertue to draw fylth and cold humour from the corrupt payned teeth, sayth Galen lib vij. simplicium medic. But if the sayd rootes be fyrst steeped in strong Uineger and beaten in a morter, and small round pilles made of them,Pellitorie hath vertu to help the teeth. putting them into the mouth, they wil draw much fylth from the paller of the mouth and gummes, and fynally ease the tooth ache. Or the sayd rootes or iuice of thē sodden in Oyle, wil put away a cold Feuer,Pellitorie wil take away a colde Feuer. if the body be well annoynted therwith agaynst a Feuer before the fyt do come, eyther in tertian or quarten. And it is a good oyle for a cold stomacke, that is swelled: and thus I do ende of Pellitory.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     VHat vertue is in a wede which we cal Goosegrasse, some people calit Hare weede? It groweth it hedges, in hath rough leaues, and berries whych berryes hang by couples, and wil cleaue to men or womens clothes, and therfore some do cal it cleuer grasse, with white flowers, whyte round seedes, lyke nauelles.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        YOu haue rightly described this herbe,
                           Philanthropos A perine commonly called goosegrasse, & hareweede. Dioscor. lib. 3. cap. lxxxviij
                         which in deede beareth al those names amōg the people: it is called Philanthropos, for it loueth to hang or garment, and goe with menne. This is a name of propertie, ye very true name is Aparine, it is drye and clensyng: and this herbe and seede dronke in wyne, preuayleth agaynst stinginge of venemous things: and the iuice distilled in the eare, helpeth them, that cannot wel heare, This herbe tempered wyth fresh Swynes grease, healeth Struma, or paynes in the throte, applyed to the same place: the iuice therof sayth Plinie stoppeth blood in a fresh wounde, and healeth the same.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                            sondry 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈…〉
                            this viscum.
                        
                        WHat is the vertue of Mislen, growing vpon Thornes, Peretrees, & Okes, wherof I haue seene great plenty growing in the countrye of Suffolke, with many goodly herbes and flowers:
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         as in these most auncient Parkes of Framingham Kelshal, Nettlestede, Lethringham, Parham, Somet, Heningham▪ Westwood, Huntingfeeld, Henham, little Glenham, and Benhal &c. These Parkes be old neighbors, God send them continual frendship with eche other in vnity, for where as vnity is broken, the Parke pale wil not hold, but fal into sodayn ruine and decay, and the Dere wil scatter.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        I Know the places which you haue named right well. Furthermore, I commend your good zeale that you beare to that worthy country: wishing their continual vnity and concord. I desire the same. For they be people of no lesse ciuility then of most aū
                        cient good fame and worship:Uery gentle men spring not by extortion▪ but by tru seruing theire Princes, and liuing of thei
                              •
                            own, hurtinge not their poor neighbor, preferring the fauoure of the c
                              •
                           untry before lucre. which is their chiefe treasure descended from houses of fame, worthy of memory, I meane no parkes, but people, nor theym which haue crept vnder a goose wyng, drawing forth a bastarde sworde no longer thē a wryting pen, fyghtyng their combate vppon the backsyde of a shete of paper, to the hurte of many perhaps, and profyte of none, but to theimselues onely. But of them speake I▪ whose blood hath bene shed in the iust quarel of their Prynces: whose houses be builded vppon hard rockes, of true gotten goodes: whose dores be open, keping hospitality according to their callyng, who with the loue of the country gard themselues, and with iustice defendeth causes of the pore. These be they which be worthy of laud, that thus feareth god: these be the right gentlemen, otherwyse not. Nowe to our matter, from which we a little haue digressed. For this Mislen, whiche is called in Latine Viscum,
                        
                           Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. lxxx.vij Mislen healeth many pertilous sores. which is hoat & tart, hauing ye cōplexion of ayre & water. This herbe with Rosen and Waxe boyled together, wil make a medecine to mollifye, dissolue, draw forth swellyng cur
                           •
                        els, distilled of foule humours, gatheryng behynd the eares: or any foule push, fester, or fellon, in any other place of the body: tempered wt Rosen, it healeth an old vlcer. Take the berries of this Mislen,
                           Misteltow or Mislen wil make a good ryping plaster and heale cornes
                           
                              Galen. lib. 6. Simplic. medic.
                           
                         put thereunto the pouder of Ieat, make it warm apply it to the left syde vppon Leather when ye spleene swelleth, and it will helpe it. Temper it with Auripigmentum. or vnsleaked Lime, and it wil draw foorth cornes. This Mislen sayth Galen is one of them, which after the first puttinge to in any medecine wil not be hot but requireth a tyme, by little & litle, as Thapsia doth: & this mislen groweth of no seede, nor wil grow vppon the earth, but vpon the tree through the dounge of byrdes that syttte vppon them by night, which by little and little, breaketh through the barks of the tree, into the sappe: frō whence at length this Viscum doth spryng and groweth greene in Wynter, when the poore naked tree seemeth withred and ded Virgil obseruing the nature thereof. in the Aenedos. liber. vj. sayeth thus of it.

                           
                           Quale solet syluis brumali frigore Viscum
                           Fronde virere noua, quod non sua seminat arbos.Virgil
                           
                        
                        
                           The Misteldine by kynde, in stormes of Wynter cold,
                           Is neuer sowen yet greene doth grow on trees bouth bare and olde
                        
                     
                     
                        Plinie the xvi. booke the last chapter, sayth there be certayne plantes,Misteltow is not natural in kinde but 
                              •
                            basterd braūch growing vppon some other tree. which cannot be engendred, or bred vppon the earth: for whom nature hath prepared, to take their begynnyng and nutriment of trees. For when they haue no places of their owne, then they lyue vppon other, as this Viscum or Misteltow is wont. But now by the way of protestation. What benefyt hath that tree, vpon whom this Misteltow doth grow? No more than anye member of the body, vpon whom a Canker is placed: it will at length desstroy altogeather, except it be pulled frō the tree, vnles it be a mighty tree, stronge and full of humour, with plentiful increment, Euen so, into what realme or cōmon wealth, Country, Borough, or Cittye, that vnnaturall straungers, or forriners, be planted, placed, or as they say, made naylfaste:Misteltow is like a stranger that waxeth 
                              •
                           ych and florisheth by the hurt and losse of a freeborne man of his natural country or citty. forthwith they waxe hygh, I meane welthy, lusty, and greene in Winter: they lack nothing in the tyme of dearth and miserye. When as the naturall people, vppon whom they haue their gayne profyte, tast of sore laboure, lacke, losse, honger, and pouerty. And thus I doo conclude, bothe of miserye, and Mistleden, remembryng Plinies woordes in the foresayd Chapiter: Namque cum suam sedem non habeant, in aliena viuunt, sicut Viscum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     VUhat vertue is in Ebulus, called walwort, whiche in Suffolke they call Danes weede: it groweth like Eldren, which leaues be like Walnut leaues, and berryes in the top?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THis herbe is of the nature of Eldren, called Sambucus,
                        
                           
                              Sambucus Ebulus.
                           
                           Eld
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              e and walewoorte.
                         of one Sambix, which fyrst found out the vertue of this Eldren: and of nature is hoat and dry, resolueth, and dryeth moyst sores & vlcers, but is very hurtful to the stomacke.
                           Dioscor. lib. 4. Cap. Clxviij.
                         Notwithstandyng the tender leaues sodden, and eaten lyke a sallet, purge fleume and choller. And it is good to heale the dropsye,Walewort maketh medecine for the gout, & paynes in the ioyntes and doth mollify the mouth of the matrixe, to make a fomente therwt. The iuice of this Ebulus or the berryes stamped with fresh Grease, and Barly meale, wil clense deepe rotten sores, and coole the burning of a Goute, and paines in the ioyntes. Paulus Aegineta sayth, these ii. kynds of Elders, do glew and heale: and either eaten or drunke do cast forth water by the belly, and nether partes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Epithimum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis Herbe doth wrappe and fold about Tyme,
                           Eythymum. Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 172. Galen. lib. 6 Sim. medica.
                         and is therfore so called: the flower is vsed much in medecine, and is hoat and drye in the third degre, And purgeth Melancholy, Fleum, and grosse humours from the head, and doth comfort the harte. Cassutha is hoat in the fyrst, and

dry in the second degree, and is of greate vertue to open the Gall, clense the raynes, deminish the Spleene. It purgeth, skowreth, fleume and Choller, and healeth ye Iaundice: drunke in decoctions, potions, Syruppes. &c. And this Cassutha groweth grosser,
                           Epithymum. & Cas
                                 •
                              utha helpeth the Liuer Gal & spleene. and larger than Epithimum with white flowers, and no rootes: but groweth vppon other herbes, as Paritorye, young Flaxe, and other Plantes, as Plinie lib. xvj▪ Cap vltimo
                        ▪ wryteth.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Vngula Caballina or Tussilago?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Vngula Caballina, yt is horshoue, because no herbe is liker: but the Greekes call it Bechion, which is Tussilago, yt is, to help ye cough. It is cōmonly known, some cal it clot leaues: whyte on the one syde,
                           
                              Vngula Cab
                                    •
                                 llina.
                           
                           Horsehoue.
                         and greene on the othersyde. And groweth nere waters, and in fallow landes: the flowers florishe in Maye onlye, but the leaues al the Somer, and of nature be colde and moyst. These leaues stamped and strayned, the iuice wil heale shingles, skaldinges, burninges, and hote inflamations. Dioscorides, Galen and Plinie affyrme,
                           Diosco. lib. 3. cap. 10
                              •
                           . Galer. lib. vi. Sim. medica.
                         that these leaues and rootes, beeing dryed and cast vppon the coales and so to receiue the smoke therof through a reede or Trunk into ye mouth▪ wil clense the Lunges, and helpe them, and quickly deliuer them from olde rot
                           •
                        es, and cold coughes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        
                           Apiastrum.
                        What is Apiastrum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           APiastrum or Melissa which we name Balme: be of two kinds, garden, and feelde. Bees loue this herbe aboue al other, and it is called the Bees, or Hony herbe: and is drye in the fyrst, and warme in the second degree.
                           Melissa Balme. Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. 
                           
                              •
                           01. Auecennae in libro medicin.
                         The iuice of this herbe, healeth stinging of Bees, Serpents, mad dogges, and woūds, dronke in wyne, and clenseth also the terms menstrual. Nothing doth more comfort the harte, then this herbe in decoction, or the water thereof: Burrage water, and syne Muske sodden in a cleane vessell and dronke when the hart is weake, or in a great Hicker, thys herbe wil clense the Lunges, and stop the bloody flixe, and paynes of the throat called Angina made in a warme plaster.
                           Galen lib. 7. Simpli medicamen.
                         It kepeth vomits, and helpeth collike dronk in wyne: Balme & Nuttes, stamped with Hony, helpe to lighten the Dull blemished darke iyen, and the sight. It is like Horhounde sayth Galen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Carui, which we do cal Careawayes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis fyne smal seede cōmeth from the country of Cari in Asia which is ye place,
                           Caros.
                         where as they grow very plentifully: this Cary seede, is hoat and drye in the third degre.
                           Dioscor. lib. 3 Cap. 57. Galen. lib. 7. Sim. medica.
                         
                        Dioscorides sayth, this is the vertue of the seede, pleasaunt to the mouth, and profitable to the stomacke, it prouoketh vryne, & helpeth digestion, it is good in medecines, and of the nature of Anisseedes:

the rootes be yellow and to eate vppon be better than the Past nippe. The seede doth not only extinguishe hote swelling and moue vryne: but the plante also, sayeth Galen: the decoction of Cary wyne, is beste to bee dronke to clense the raynes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Cartafilago
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           CArtafilago hath red stalkes two cubites long, and hollow long leaues like Sallow, with small teeth lyke a sawe, about them yellow flowers, many Rootes, and red without: it florisheth in August,
                           Cartafilago 
                                 •
                              ulnararia. Herba.
                         it is dry, stoppyng, and byndynge. This herbe is equall to the best healinge wounde herbe: and it wil incarnate and heale the sayd wound, and clense ye same stamped and put into it. You may drye this herbe and make pouder therof, and cast it into a fresh wounde, and it wil heale speedelye.A goodly. wound herbe. What is better for a fystula? Proue it I pray you.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Grummel seede?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           GRana solis, Millium solis, is comonlye knowen, these seedes be good to be fynely beaten in pouder, and drunke,
                           Grana Solis.
                         to clense the raynes and cause vryne to passe, that is stopped: Fenel, Parselye, and this seede broken in whyte wyne, and let it stand all one night, puttyng some Sene leaues to the same, and in the morning seeth this in a stone vessel, put in Sugar then strayne it, and drynk the same:To c
                              •
                           use vryne to passe plentifully. it wil purge fleume, choller, and open ye raynes and bladder, and force forth vryne most plentifully.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Cichory?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis Herbe is called in Greeke Serin, in Latine Intybum, whereo
                           •
                         are twoo kyndes, the wyld and tame,
                           Sponsa Soli
                                 •
                              . Intybus. Endiuia. Cichory.
                         these be the names of Endiue and Cichory, that with broader leaues, somwhat lyke Beates, is Endiue. The Seconde wyth Iagged Leaues, lyke vnto Dandelyon, is Cichorye: these haue harde stalkes with trim blewe flowers lyke hats, some haue whyte flowers.
                           Dioscr. lib. 3. Cap. Cxxv.
                         These be cold and drye in the second degree: the Endiue is more cold then the Cichorye, & be both of a restringing, or stopping, bynding nature. These herbes greene, both rootes and leaues, hath vertue to coole the hoat burning of the liuer, the stoppyng of the gall, the yellow Iaundice, the heat of the harte, the lack of sleepe, the stoppyng of vryne, hoat burning feuers, beyng fyrst digested. The syrupe therof is excellent good agaynst the sayd sicknesses: the Water cannot be missed in all potions & coolynges, or purgyng drynkes, to purge mankynd withal. The waters of Endiue, Planten, Roses, and stylled Mylke, with fyne Bole Armoniake, or seefe without Opium, is good to be cast with a Syryng into the fylthy, burnt swelled, or corrupted yardes, or Conduictes, of vncleane persones.
                     
                        For the heate of the liuer. R. Endiue or Cichory, whytes of Egges, Barly
                           •
                         flower,A very good medecine for the vlcer in the yarde. Sanders, cleane young fresh swynes grease, the oyle of Roses, Uiolets, and water Lillies, wrought togeather in a Leaden morter, and applyed to the syde, spread vppon leather. This plaster is very good, agaynst the hoat burning gout in the feete,A plaster for the liuer and goute. or shingles, or burninge in any parte of the body. Dandelion is of the same vertue.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is that roote Napus called the Naue?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is called Napus Bunias, because of his own nature, it groweth great and round, wherof bee two kyndes: one beareth leaues lyke Rapes, The other lyke Rocket, but greatter, and hath yellow flowers, the Seedes growe in coddes, and of Nature be hoat in the second degre. The rootes of Napee increase wynd, and lesse norishe then Rapes, the sedes be good in many medecines, and preuayle against poyson. The rootes sodden and preserued in salt, be wholesom to eate vppon: in Egypt the people make much of this herbe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Rapes.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THis Rape is a rural common roote, and no lesse knowen than common, of two kyndes: the tame hath leaues lyke Radix, and yellow flowers. The other hath blew flowers and smale sharpe leaues,
                           Napus. Bunias.
                         in the length of a fynger, with smal teeth lyke a Saw, roūd about the said leafe. The garden greate Rape doth noryshe, inflate, ingender, loose or weake flesh, and moueth carnall lust. The roote sodden, & warme applyed, helpeth a kibed heele, and easeth the gout, make this Roote hollow, put therin oyle of Roses and Waxe, then rost it in hoat Ashes, & this wil heale kybes, which be deepely rotten or festered within the heele. Seeth Asparagus in the decoction of Rapes and drink the same to purge the blader,Goodly vertues of rapes. clense the raynes, and force vryne. The seede of Rapes is good in manye medecines,
                           Plini. lib. 17. cap. xiij.
                         and in Triacle, and expulceth poyson: wilde Rapes bee putte in medecines, to clense the face, as with Lupines, beene m
                           •
                        ale. &c. Plinie saith, the seede beyng sowen, within thre moneths following, it wil bee a greate roote: but it is very hard in decoction it encreaseth wynde and seede, sayeth Gal. lib. vi. Simplicium Medicamentorum. There is great plenty of the oyle therof made in England, as in Marsland nere to Lin. &c, Uery profitable to our common wealth.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the roote called Rhoyda?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           ROyda is a goodly roote, wherof is great plenty in Macedonia, & now in many places of Germanye, growyng in gardens, and is hote & drye in the second degree: it smelleth much lyke a Rose and these rootes stamped, & made warme with oyle of Roses applyed to ye forhead, wil asswage

the griefe, burning heat, lack of sleepe, & frensye, that mankynd doth through weaknes fal in to. This herbe wil grow in England also,Roid
                              •
                            helpeth the dead. if idlenes were not the let.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the roote called Doronike
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        IT is a precious roote, growyng in Egipt, and is called Doronicus. Actuarius calleth it Carnabadium: it hath many knottes,
                           Doronicu
                                 •
                              . Alexandrie Doronicus do helpe dig
                              •
                           
                           stion. & is no bygger than a mans fynger, and is put into confection, for lacke of perfect digestion, and agaynst poyson, there is no berter Roote than this. Ruellius supposeth it to bee that, whiche the Greekes cal Arnabo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the good of Liquorice rootes
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        LIquoryce called Glycerrhiza of the sweetnes,Liquorice. groweth greate plenty in hoate Countryes. Euen so there is much here in England, the yellower and moyster, the better: it is sweete, warme and moyst of nature. Liquorice is wholesome agaynste the exasperation,
                           Dioscorides. Liquorice helpeth the lunges. & woundes. or sharpnes in Arteries, to byte vppon this roote, or keepe it in the mouth, for that purpose. For the burninge heat In the stomacke, and sycknes of the Lunges, spleene, and olde rotten cough, Scabbes in the bladder, and sorenes in the raynes, drunke in pocions or broken: Liquorice healeth woundes, if it be annoynted therewith. The pouder therof put into the eye, wil helpe Pterygius, which is a little skynne growing from the corner, coueryng the syght. Liquorice, Wyne & Honye, healeth both woundes, without and within also
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     I would as gladly learne the vertue of Radish rootes for medecine as I haue bene desyrous to feede of them with meate.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Fyrst I shal declare vnto you the name thereof, it is properlye called Raphanus because it Spryngeth soddaynelye, and Radix is a name common to all Rootes,
                           Rapha
                                 •
                              u
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ Radix. Radishe. But this Radish beareth the chiefename among other rootes: and therfore it is called Radix. Plinie maketh mention of Radish rootes lib. xix. cap 5. that were as hyg as yong infante children. Of Radish rootes there be no smale store growing about the famous citty of London: they be more plentifull then profytable, and more noysome, then nourishinge to mannes nature, ingenderyng of wynde, enemy to the stomacke, saith Dioscorides. These be nombred rather amōg rootes vsed for meat, thā accōpted of perfit wholsom nutriment: good to be eaten before meate,
                           Diosco. lib. 2. cap. 106. to vomit and clense the stomacke. But wholesome in the end of meales, for cholericke stomackes, a little at once, to help digestion▪ and to distribute the meate: but Galen affyrmeth, that tender yong Radish with Uineger, is good sauce in the begynnynge of Meales, to loose the bellye.
                     
                        For the playne people do eate these rootes with bread, taught by nature, & not by arte:
                           Gal. lib. 2. de ali
                                 •
                              n ento
                                 ••
                              m faculratibus.
                         And so is Organ beyng greene, Cresses, Tyme, Sauery, Peneroyall, Germander, Mintes, Calamintes, Paritory, and Rocket. These herbes and this roote, be rather eaten of necessitye, then of will and fantasy. But sodden and then prepared with sharpe vineger, Suger, and sweet cleare oyle,How to vse Radi 
                              •
                            rootes are more profitable than crude, raw herbes or rootes. Manye learned and vnlearned, do maruayle, sayth Galen, why men vse to eate them raw after supper, to helpe digestion: who aunswereth, long custom hath so taught them. Notwithstanding, the example of such is not to bee followed without peril or hurt. Plinie affyrmeth, that Raddyshe, sodden in wine, drink that wyne in the morning, and it wil deminishe, and cast forth the stone, open the gall, deminish the splene, moue Uenus, clense spottes and bruses made in the skyn by some strype. Hyppocrates saith that if women chafe their heddes,
                           Radix helpeth the belly. with Raddysh rootes, the hayre wil fal, and applied to the Nauel of women, it wil quickly asswage the torment of the belly and Matrix. The iuice wil h
                           •
                        lpe any payne within the eare, dropped in warme: with manye mo vertues vsed in medecine, although abused in meates, throughe ignorance, in eating them so raw, and out of tyme. Of nature, Garden radishe is drye in the second and hoat in the thyrd degree. The wild Radish is hotter and dryer of nature: the seede is good in medecine to clense vryne, and Radix loueth to growe in fatte groundes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What of Pastnippe▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Pastnips their rootes.
                        THey be called Pastinacae a Pascendo, that is of Fedyng, or noryshing, or warming nature: they be pleasante in tast, and moue Venus, wherof be wild growing in stony places▪ but the best are sowen in Gardens, and of nature be hoat and clensyng, The seedes of wild Pastnips dronke will prouoke termes menstruall and vryne. heale dropsye and Pluritici, and are good agaynst venome, and stinginge of Serpentes, and helpe conception. But this Herbe applyed into the Matrix, by the hande of the mydwyfe. Draweth forth the dead Childe, stamped with Honye put vppon a spreading vlcer,
                           Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. lii. Gal. lib vij. Sim. medica.
                         it is healed thereby. Those of the Garden are more apt in meate then the wyld: and the sayd wyld are more affectuall in medecine: one of these parsenips is called yellow Caret, the other a Rape.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the Sicer, or sweete white Carret good for?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Dioscor. lib. 2. cap. 107, Gal. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
                        THis roote is commonlye knowen, it is no lesse pleasaunte to the Mouthe, than profitable in meate for the Stomacke: it prouoketh vryne, and helpeth appetite, and is hot in the second degree,

And is sōwhat bytter, and is called whyte Pastnip, with yellow flowers, leaued lyke Pimpernel. The seede sodden in wyne and dronke, helpeth the collike, and wynd in the stomack, or hicket, which followeth after vomits or weaknes of the harte.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Rubarbe?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           RHeum Barbaricum, or Rhabarbe, is a noble roote of greate vertue,
                           Rhabarbe and Rhapontike.
                         and doth differ from Rhaponticum, is better in purgynge, in sauor, in substaunce, compact and heauy, golden colowred with gray Turkey coloured vaynes. drye and in tast bytter, whereas Rhaponticum is lyghte not heauy, not harde with drynes, but soft with moystnes, not bytter but tart, not compacte, but slender. And therefore Rhabarbe and Rhapontike,
                        The difference betweene Rubarbe and Rhapontike.
                         bee not both one, as many haue most foolishly affyrmed, then with good argumentes truely prooued. And the best Rabarbarium commeth from Troglotide which is a hoat country, in the fardest part of Aphrica beyond Ethiopia, wher as ye people to auoyde the extreame heate of the Sunne,From whence Rhabarbe. doth come co
                              ••
                           
                         are constrayned to inhabite in Caues, vnder the earth, and feede on Dragons Fleshe, which were called Barbarous people, from whence many precious gummes and spices be brought, as Galen. sayth. lib. vj. Simplicium medidicament. and lib. 4. cap. vj. de tuenda sanitate. Ginger is brought sayth hee, from Barbarye, which Plinie in lib. xij. cap xxj. calleth Trogleditis which was Barbarie. And in his xix. booke sayth he. the cause why Cinamon is so scarse and of no plenty: the Ireful Barbarians, do burne the Spice trees. For Myrrhe commeth from thence Galen and Plini, agree this to be that Barbary, calling it Trogloditis Pomponius Mela, a great writer in his first boke of the situation of the world sayth: the vile people, wheras these precious Spyces and rootes do grow, do rather grin like Dogges, than speake like men, and dwel in Holes, and feede on serpentes flesh. And Strabo lib. xv Geographia doth testifye, that all kind of Spice and plantes begin in Arabia Foelix, and in the South part of Inde, For the Sunne taketh lyke force in them, But in Arabia Foelix,
                        The cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burne the Spice trees and plantes. Pomponius. Mela lib. 3▪ 
                           de situ orbis.
                         which is betwene the Seas Arabicum and Persicum, is so Fertile that it hath twoo Haruestes yerely, with all spices, fruites and gummes. wheras the people liue euer in peace, wythout Warre, or walled townes: out of these Places commeth Rhabarbe to Alexandria, and then to Uenice, & so is dispersed into many places, to the greate comforte, health, and helpe of mankynd, to purge choller, and humours, superfluous in the body. What is better to comfort the liuer, to clense the blood, and heale the kynges euil called the Iaundice than Rubarbe. How many goodly Electuaries, Pilles, Syrupes, and purgations, haue Rubarbe in them? Uery many. Simple by it selfe, by infusion, how maruailous doth it purge, clense, skower, and expulse venemous fylthe from the bodye? It asswageth timpanies, tertians, dropsies, reconsyleth slepe in dry collerike persōs: by correcting hote choller in thē if it be slysed into cleane Goats whay, Cichory or Buglosse water ℥.iii. and Spicknard ℥.i. standyng al the nyght, in the morning, strained & dronk, it wil clense the Blod, and expulse choller. Mesue affirmeth, that Rhabarbarum excelleth all other Rhaies, both turkish and Indishe.
                     
                        It is a purgation hurtles, very gentle, and here is an infusyon thereof most excellent,An excellente infusion of Leonellus Fauentinus to clense the bloode. to clense the Blood: wrytten by a famous man of this time, called Leonellus Fauentinus. R. Rhababarū
                         of the beste ʒ.i. Spicknard. G. iii. make an infusion according to art in the waters of Borage, Uiolets, Sorel or Mallowes, as much as shal suffice: after that it hath stand viii howers, strain it hard, and put into the same infusion Diacatholicon 
                        ʒ.vi. and Electuarie e Succo Rosarum and, Diaphaenicon any. ʒss. dissolue them in the decoction of Flowers and fruites: and this drynk wil very gently purge all foule humours. If any man haue a Bloody flyxe, to helpe the same, or let hym slyce a peece of of Rhabarbe, and tost it hard, and eate the same, or crome it warme into red wyne, and planten water, and drinke it. In Italy there is Rhabarbe, which wil purge choller, but not so good. as I haue descrybed aboue: Rubarbe must be preserued in Waxe or Honny, Flaxe sede, or the seede of Psyllium so it may be kept .iii. or iiii. yeres. Rhapontike, groweth by a famous citty called Pontus, Marcellinus. lib. xij. sayth, it groweth by the riuer Tanais, which seperateth Europe from Asia. Of thys sayth Paulus Aegineta, it is earthly and colde, but the subtilier partes therof, are moist and warme, and but meanly tarte of tast. Therfore it wil helpe fractures,
                           Paulus Aegineta. lib. 7. litera. R
                         conuultions, and shortnes of wynde, and strypes: it hath vertue to direct, to draw foorth, and clense spitting of blood and paynes in the guttes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        Of AgarikeWhat say you of Agarike?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        OF Agarike there is the Male, which is compacted roūd, and the female beyng broken,
                           
                              Diosco, lib 3. Cap. j.
                           
                           How to know good Agarike
                         hath directed strayght vaines, and is flat: these Agarikes. be whyte, light compact, thycke togeather, and sweete in the beginning of theiretast, and then very bitter in thend of the same, with biting on the tounge. It groweth vppon the region of Sarmasia, in a place called Agaria, whereas is a famous riuer and Citty so named. Some saye, that the Roote therof doth growe, and bryng forth this Agarike: other that it groweth like Musroms, on Ceder trees. There groweth Agarike in Italy sayth Plinie. lib xvi. Cap vij.
                        Agaricke clē
                           clenseth the guttes, & expulceth rawe humours. But because it is a stranger vnto vs, it shal suffice vs to know the vertue therof. It is hot of nature, and is good agaynst a tourmēt of ye guttes, raunesse in the stomacke, aboundance of Flegme, ruptures, dropsies, brewses or falles, stoppyng of vrine, strangury, swelling of ye matrix, falling euil, poyson, or stinging of any venemous worm. One vnce steeped in sweet wine or sweet water, & strongly strayned, & dronk before the cōming of a Feuer quotidian putteth it cleane away.Agarike helpeth ye falling sicknes. Dronke with vineger & Suger soddē and then wel strayned, it helpeth Sciatica, and the fallynge euill. This Agaricke is no lesse commended then muche vsed in sundry electuaries and pilles. &c. to the great helpe of Mankynd Galen. lib. vj. Simplicium medidicament
                        ▪ doth remēber Agarike among some kynd of Rootes, and that groweth on

the trunke of a tree. Fyrst in tast sweete, then bitter,Agarike purgeth all the orgaynes of the senses. and so forth hee declareth the vertue thereof, to purge the guttes, heale the Iaundice, and open the galle, and discharge all viscous humours: who dyd euer commend any purging thyng, more than Mesue dooth Agarike? sayth he, it clenseth fleume and choller, and al the instruments of the sences, & the braynes, backe bone, muskles, sinewes, lunges, breast, Liuer, Gall, and splene. Democrites sayth, it is a familiar medicine to all the Pryncipall partes of the Body, and from theym, to all the other parts: It purgeth and doth not weaken or decay, any natural or animall vertue, wyth many goodly commēdacions which, he giueth to the same Agarike. And thus I end, giuyng you warning, that it be very fynely beaten, and close kept, and Spicknard put to it in medicine.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Cassia, and Lignum Aloes, and Cassiafistula.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           GALEN maketh mencion of Cassia in lib viij. Simplici. medica. sayinge it is dry, and hoate in the thyrd degree,
                           Cassia Aromatike.
                         and doth warme the body, and strengthen the instrumēts thereof. This Cassia is of Aromatike nature, and is good for UUomne to drynk whose termes be suppressed: a goodly medicine of Cinamon beaten in pouder, with Lignum Cassiae, is thus made.A precious water made with Cinamon, Cassia, rose water, 
                              〈◊〉
                           . white wyne, for all cold causes. R. Cinamon l i.i. Cassia ℥.ii. water of Roses. l i iiii. cleane whyte Wyne. l i.vi. put these altogether in a close potte couered: put this pot into a warme vessell of leuke warme Water, during .xxiiii howers, making a smal fyre vnder the receiuing vessel, wherein it is put. Then take it from the same vessel, and powre it into the pan of a common stillitorye, then set on the helmit close, and with a soft fyre distil ye same, kepe it in a close glasse, to giue it to them, which haue any cold syckenes, as dropsie, quotidian, aboundance of fleume, stoppyng of the Galle, raynes, or conduite of vryne, Collike, weakenes of the heart, dulnesse of spyrite,
                           Lignum Aloes called Agallocum which is Aromatike. moystereume, or lack of memory And if you cause thys water to be distilled twoo times, it is the better and of the greater strength. As for Lignum Alces, which is hoat and dry in the second degree, it is called Agallochum, and groweth in Inde, and Arabia Foelix, and is spotted, Aromatike, smelling sweete,
                           Dioscorides Lib. 1 cap 20. and is a lytle bytter to tast vpon, wyth byndyng nature, and it hath a pleasaunte verdure in the mouth. Serapius fayth the best is black, with varyable or diuers colours, ful of sappe, heauy, and hard, grosse▪ and compacted together,
                           Lignum Aloes commeth not from Paradise, but frō Mondella city of Inde with sharpe sweete smel. Thys wood commeth from a city called Mondel in Inde, and not from Paradyse as some do foolyshly fansy, it doth, and so is conueyed by the Ryuer Ganges. Wel to the vertue thereof. It wyl comforte the brayne, when it is dystempered wyth colde, through the sweete sauour. The decoction thereof, made wyth Barly, Madder and Sugar healeth Ulcers, and UUoundes in the Guttes: and it is good agaynst bloudy flixes, and hardnes of the Spleene, and is a very holsome Perfume.
                           Cassiafistula▪
                            commeth frō Egypt. 
                        Cassia solutiua, or Fistula, called the Coddes of Egypt, can not be spaced among old Persones, and tender People: for the gentle purgyng of the Bodye, clensyng of the Raynes, prouokyng Uryne. Eyther drawen wyth Endyue

water, Goates whaie, or eaten new from the Cane, tempered with Barly water,
                           Cassiafistula haue many vertues to help mankynd it can not bee forborne. or Morell UUater. It maketh a good Gargarisme for Angina or paynes in the throate, or Apostumacions in the Guttes. It is good in washyng or clensyng Clisters, and it wyl make soft a hard Apostumacyon applyed thereunto, in any part of the body. It is good for the Goute to bee made in plaster, for the same purpose. Who so hath great paines in the Guts, it is not good to giue Cassia simply alone,Note. but to mingle it with the pouder of Hiera Picra, and for the raynes, to put it in the Syrupe of Liquorice. It is hoat and moyst in the fyrst degree, the heauier, the Ramisher in sauour: the shynyng blacke of colour, is best Cassiafistula, & frō 
                        Memphis, and Alexan
                              •
                           ria in Egypt commeth Cassia.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     There is a verye sweete Mosse, which groweth vpon trees, men say it is good in medicine, what say you to the matter?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Dioscor lib. 1. Capi. xx.
                        
                        THE best Mosse that groweth vpon any Tree, is of the Ceder: the second of the Popular Tree, the thyrd of the Oke. The white is good▪ but the blackishe is to be refused. It is sweete and odoriferous, and hath vertue to stop: the decoctyon thereof is good to wash, and help the paines of ye mouth, & of the matrix. Thys whyte Mosse is good in Bathes, and in comfortable Oyntments, for the weakenes of a cold feeble stomack. Plinie doe commend it, Lib. xij. cap. xxiij. calling it Sphagnos or Brion: saying. it groweth in the Prouince of Cyrenaica, which is a coūtrey in Afrike. &c. In other places, as Cyprus, Egypt, and Phaenicia: there groweth very good in Fraunce and Italy, both sweete, and wyl molify Galen lib. vj. s
                              •
                           mplici medica. sayth, Brion, which is Splanchnon, is found among Okes, Pine trees, and white Populors: it hath power to stop or bynd, but very weakly: it is neyther hoate nor cold,To comforte the spyrites. but meane. It hath vertue to direct and molify, chyefly that, which commeth from the Ceder trees. Auicen sayth, it wyl make a wholsom Cordial medicine. And also the sauour is good for the brain, and spirites or senses, that be weake. Of sweete Muske Serapius sayth, it commeth frō a beast, mutch like a Goate, that feedeth vpon Aromatike trees, Ruellius and Simeon Sethi affirme that Muske commeth from a city in the East,Sweete Muske. called Chorasa, the Barbarians cal it Pat, and of colour is somwhat yellow An other Musk commeth from Inde, not comparable in vertue to the fyrst: & this is blacke of colour,The beast which giueth Muske, is like a Goate that which bringeth S
                              •
                           
                           uette, is lyke a Catte. The blaunching of Muske. and this commeth from a beast like a Goat. armed with one horn in his forehead. And this commeth from betwene their legges: and also is gathered in the cleare ayre, and bryght shining dayes from the dunge, and closely preserued in Uessels: and sold to the marchants, both this pure dūge and sweete coddes, and or it commeth to our vses, it is adulterated by the Apothicaries, by manye craftye wayes, as with Mouse dounge, Charcoles. &c. But of the own nature it is most pleasaunt and comfortable to the weake spirites of mankynd, against frensy, collike▪ Cardiace, Palsie, lack of memory, heauines of minde, dropsy, lack of digestion &c. And what is pleasaunter in sweete water,Swette thinges bee good. to wash hands, head, & beard, and good in apparel

and may be rightly vsed, it is Gods gift, to adorne and garnysh Mankynd with, although, lyght wanton, lecherous people,for mankynd but yet abused of youthfull wanton
                              •
                            are not to bee suffered in them. do make it an Instrument of prouocacion to naughtines withal. Yet the good vse thereof among the honest, is no more to be forborne, than the abuse is worthy to be suffered among the harlots. Precious Balmes and perfumes are not forbydden by Gods woord: although Iudas dyd murmure, when the Woman dyd anoint Iesus, with the precious Nardus. And Isaac beyng blinde, dyd reioyce in the precious smel, which came from the Garments of his Sonne Iacob,
                           Marc. xiiii.
                         when he blessed him, saying: behold the smell of my Sonne,
                           Gene. xxvi.
                         is as the smell of a field, whych the Lord hath blessed. And thus I end of Muske, which is hoat in the second, and dry in the thyrd degree. Some affirme,Muske. that if Musk do swim in water, then it is good, but the contrary yf it synketh, As for Sibetto, called Siuet, is a beast like a Cat, which Beast commeth from Syria, and sometime there be seene of them here in England brought from Venice:Of the Siuet Cat. and betwene the testiles of this beast, commeth the sweete Siuet, whych is hoat and moist of nature: if Women be stopped in the matrix, put some of this anoynted vpon a pessarie, into the mouth of the matrix, and she shall be sone helped. Matthiolus, reporteth more therof. Lib. 1. Dioscorid Cap. xx. which I wil not name, it is so venerous. As for Amber Grice, or Amber Cane,Diuers opinions, how Amber Grice is found. which is most sweete myngled with other sweete thynges: some say it commeth from the rockes of the Sea. Other say it spryngeth out of the earth, in Arabia Foelix, or Inde, vpon thynges that smell like Mosrumes, and so is pressed forth & preserued. Some say it is gotten by a Fish called Azelum, which feedeth vpon Amber Grece, and dyeth, which is taken by cunnyng Fishers and the belly opened, and this precious Amber found in hym. Other do say, it is found swimming vpon a fountain of pure water: and that is thought to be the best inuencion. For Symeon Sethi, sayth Amper called Amber, is increasyng, or found in diuers places. and is gathered in Fountaines swimming aboue, as Bitumen is▪ or Brimstone, whereof be three kyndes, the fyrst is Fuluus, which mixt of greene and red. yeldeth a darke yellow,Amber Grice of three kinds whych is brought from Inde. An other kinde commeth from Arabia Foelix, whych is darke, white, or gray in colour: the thyrd is blackish, and is the worst, a very counterfeit Amber. This Amber Grice is of nature hoat and dry, the sauour thereof doth greatly comfort the heart and brain of old People, or weake women: and to comfort the heart, it is equal to any other odoriferous treasure. It is put into many precious Cordials, and wholsome medicines: and nothing is more better to quicken the spyrytes and comfort memory, thā this rych Amber Grece. Gloues sweetely perfumed with Muske, Siuet, Amber Grece, and Oyle de Ben, be very wholsome for Cytizens,Sweete Gloues, their profite. that dwell in close, corrupted foule ayre. In deede, it can not bee forborne of noble Princes, Lords, Ladyes, and gentle folkes: God gyue them grace to know it to bee hys gyft, to pleasure the Sense of smellyng, and to defend euyll ayres, and not to moue, or to be an instrument of Ungodlynes. Whereas to vse it well, it is of no small profyte to Nature, as example. R. Storax Calamite 
                        ʒ.iii. Beniamyn ʒ.ss. Cloues. ʒ.ss. Lignum Aloes. 
                        ʒ.ii. Galia Muschata. 
                        ʒ.iii.ss. Amber

Grice. ʒ.i.ss. Muske. G. xvi. Siuet. G. xii. a lytle sweete Terebinthin, all put into a warme morter,A good Pomamber against coldnesse of the brayne very pleasaunt. & strongly beaten with the pestell, pouring in sweete Rose, or Damaske water. Of this is made a precious Pomāber. to be worne against foule stinkyng aire: weaknes of the brayne, comming of cold. And thus I do end of this most sweete Oders.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Wood, called Ebenus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           Diosco. lib. 1. Capit. iii. Ebenus of .iii. kindes.
                        THe best Ebenus commeth from Ethiopia, and is very black, it hath no vaines in it, but abyting sharp taste: yet very sweete in perfume, and is gummie, this is the best. There is an other darke yellow, and spotted, and this hath a byndyng vertue & is good to be put in Colliries, for sore eyen. And Galen lib. v. simplj medicam. Ebenus is one of the woods, beaten into pouder and resolued in water, to be drunk to help the Stone: and of Nature is hoat and scouryng. And for that cause, it is good to be put in Medicines, for to helpe the syght of the eye.A goodly medicine for sore eyes, of Ebenus.
                         or blysters in them. If Ebenus bee fyne ground. vppon a whette stone, and wyth a Knyfe taken from it. G. iiii. and the pouder of Lapis Calaminaris. G. ii. Seef. G. iii. Chamfer. G. i.ss. the whyte of an Egge, Rose water, and Womans Milke ana. ʒ.ss. myngled together: this wyl most effectually, clense & scoure sore darkened Eyes. Theophrastus lib. 4 cap. vi. de historia plantarum. saith, in Inde the wood is common▪ and of two kynds: the one is precious, and doth seruyce, and the other is of no estimacion. The Prynces of Inde doe esteeme Ebenus,
                        Sceptees for Kynges▪ and the Heathen Idolles of Ebenus.
                         rycher than gold, for of that Wood, they do not onely make theyr drynkyng Uessels, agaynst poyson, but also the Scepters of regall honour. And fynally theyr Idols of their Gods, whome they do worshyp. Thus the Indyans do both vse and abuse thys rych Wood, whych wyll syncke lyke Mettall, and not swim. When Pompey dyd tryumph ouer Mythridates the Kyng of Pontus, one of the greatest gloryes the Romaynes had, was in this straunge wood,When Ebenus came fyrst to Rome. Seades of Ebenus.
                         whereuppon the Scepters and vesselles were made of it. This Ebenus also though it be good, yet it hath ben an instrumēt of Idolatrie, in many places of England: whereof beades haue bene made, not onely of Ebenus, but of Corrall, Iette, Amber, Iasper, Granites, Glasse, Amyll, Gold and Syluer: whych creatures were ordayned for mannes bodily health, and not for theyr Contemplacyon, and Spirituall prayers. I dyd know wythin these few yeres,Two Witches in Suffolke Charmed with Ebeni Beades. a false Witch, called. M. Line, in a town of Suffolke, called Perham, which with a payre of Ebene Beades, and certain charmes, had no small resort of foolysh women, when their Chyldren were syck. To thys lame Wytch they resorted, to haue the Fairie charmed, and the Spyrite coniured away: through the prayers of the Ebene beades▪ whych she sayd, came from the holy land, and were sanctifyed at Rome. Through whom many goodly cures had ben don, but my chaunce was to burn ye sayd beads Oh? That dānable witches be suffred to liue vnpunished & so many blessed mē burned: witches be more hurtful in this realm than either quarten, Pox, or pestilence. I knew in a towne called Kelshall, in Suffolk

a Witch, whose name was M. Didge, who with certain Aue Maries vpon her Ebene Beades, and a waxe Candle,A Witches blessyng for sayncte Anthonies tyre. vsed this charme folowyng for S. Anthonies fyre, hauing the sicke body before her, holding vp her Hande saying: there came two Angels out of the North east, one brought fyre the the other brought frost, out fyre. and in frost. In nomine patris. &c. I coulde reherse an. C. of sutch knackes, of these holy gossips, the fyre take them all, for they be Gods enemyes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THis is wood of great vertue, and excellent goodnes, few woods may be compared to it, for the estimacion: yet for the French disease, there is an other rich wood, called Guaicum, I pray you speak somthing of that wood.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           GVAICVM, or Guaiacanum called Lignum sanctum, or the holye wod, or wood of Life, is of a kynd of Ebenus.
                        Of the Wood of life called Guaicum.
                         And as almightye God prepared a tree of great vertue, for Moises to cast into the water called Mara or bytternes, throughe which tree, the same water was made pleasaunt and sweete, for the chyldren of Israell to drynke vpon in the wyldernesse, when as they murmured against God and hys holy Prophet Moyses: Euen so it hath also pleased him to ordayne & prepare this Guaicum: wherby through his mynisters knowledge,
                           Exod. xv. d
                         it myght be a meane to make whole, and clense the fylthy stinkyng corrupted bodyes of his dysobedient chyldren, which haue lyued in most shamelesse lust and lechery, among paynted stinking harlots, for whych offence, they be smitten with the plague, called the French Pockes,The Pox of Fraunce. an euyl most noysome to nature, cosin Iarman to thincurable Leprosye. This Guaicum I say wyl not onely make a Pocky body cleane, but also is good to clense any of the princypall humours, when they do abound, whereby there shalbe a temperance most perfect in nature, it wyl clense the raynes, itch, and skabbes. And nothing may be compared to the same, to rebate, asswage, clense, consume, and wast without hurt▪ great fatty grose bellyes of idle men and women, which be puffed vp with eating, drynking, sleapyng and sytting in the house al ye day without labour, the tables, cardes, and Pot, excepted which causeth them but lytle to sweat, and lesse to thriue: for sutch folkes Guaicum drynke is incomparable aboue all others for the goodnes, to renew them & make them appeare young againe: for the Goute, Dropsy, Sciatica, Canker, and Timpany. This is equall to the best medicines, therefore it may be called Lignum vitae, the wod of lyfe, because it hath vertue to renew. This worthy wod of lyfe, God hath giuen to the christian people, in these last Dayes; which wod was vnknowen to the old Fathers as Dioscorides, Theophrastus,
                        
                           Antonij Musae exam. omnium, Simpl. de lignis.
                         
                        Plinius, Gale, Paulus, Aetius. &c. And yt is no maruel, for ye part of ye world wheras this wod doth grow, was neuer found forth by the famous Cosmographer Ptolomaeus, Pomponius, & others, but of late yeres only. This wod was found by the saylers into the new Ilandes, called Corterali, Hispaniola, distāt somwhat from the Equinoctial line, & in many other parts there about, wheras the people of those lands be often infected with soores, biles, and a sicknesse

mutch like the Pox, or els the very same in deede: and to recouer the same, the sicke folkes do eat of the fruict of Guaicum, and are made whole: this fruict wyl sone rotte,Three kynds of Guaiacum but the white is most excellent. but whereas the fruicts can not be gotten, then they do make a decoction of the wood or barkes of the same which bringeth the lyke health. The Spaniard perceiuing the same, did bryng this wood in to Europe, not onely for to heale theyr owne Pox, but also for Fraunce, Italy, Germany, and for England, in whome this wood taketh no small effect for the foresayed Pox: of this Guaicum are three kyddes, the fyrst is black within, in the heart, pale coloured, hauing in it ru
                           •
                        let lynes, very hard and heauy. The other black within but white without, hauing very smal lynes, is hard and heauy, and not so great as the first. The third is al right whyt
                           •
                         within and without, hauing very small lynes, and the hart of this Wood is the best,The consideracion of Guaicum.
                         the arme of the tree is better then the body the bowes nearer the fruicts hath more vertue, warmnes and drynes, than the lower partes of the tree, which are groser & more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is the better, the sappe is not so good as the heart, neither the barke as good as the sappe. But the white wood is sweete and most excellent in operacion, and is Lignum sanctum, the holy wood. The barke of the straight young braunches or bowghes, being heauy and white, moyste and without lines hard compacted be the best barkes for the Pox. All these woddes called Guaiaci, haue a rosin or matter like Beniamen or pleasaunte Gum within the wood. whych is the spyrite or lyuely helpyng humore in decoction for the Pox For the ertreame paynes in the ioyntes sinewes,Mannes nature is subiect to many euils for want of perfit temperament. vaines muskels, head handes, feete, and the bones, no sycknesse is so sharpe and cruell to nature, but this precious wood wyl both quickly and gently asswage the payne and grief of the same, if it bee ministred accordynly in decoction, namely to them whom either the Pox hath tormented, or else the Goute hath torne or racked wyth intolerable grief: Among all mortall infirmites, which is more grieuous to nature, than the Strangurie, pyssyng of bloud, or stoppyng of the stone: what diseases againe be more Enemyes to mans nature, than swelling of the Belly, Hydrops, putrifaction of Humours, opilacions, he dach, Vertigo, Feuers through heat aboue nature, with fyer in the arteries, shingles and horrible apostimacions, with a great nū
                        ber of plagues more. which be all mortal enemyes to the nature of man, as a contynual fyer to burne hym, or els a merciles drowning water of vtter destruction, or fynally a deadly earthly Graue to swallow him vp, through the corrupcion & infection of aire? Thus the .4. eliments or humors in mankynd, through euil mixture, or one aboūding aboue the other, grow to corrupcion. The cases of deadly peril, & an hard matter to bring the body again into good order or perfit healthful estate.What euill haue happened through the abusing of Guaicum emong the imperikes. As I haue sayd. what is better thā 
                        Guaicum, called wood of life, which wood was not a litle abused of a great number of ignorant, murdering, shameles practicioners, which haue taken vpon them to bynd sick men to a law, obseruing the new diet, onely wyth Guaicum, wherin they haue sodden in the decoction therof many drugges Colocinthis, Briony, Turbith. Diacridium. with an hundreth sondry more such like simples sodden or brewed with this Guaicum: this, they do vse one geenerall

rule, to euery complexion a like, to euery age the same, and to the Man: Woman, and Chyld al a lyke, neither obseruyng the quantity, place or time: but as I haue sayd, one onely generall rule. Close Chamber like a Bee in a boxe, bread by the ounce, a few Raysons, and sometimes a chickens Legge,Beware of the new diat except you-haue twoo liues. or els a wise minister of the same. with many sutch folish Ceremonies, mutch cost and small good cheare, if one be healed by chaunce medly, a hundred are slayn through this diat wilfully. or els very foolishly: and who so goeth to borde to sutch an hoost, first let him make his last wyl and testament, perhaps he shall not die the soner, but lyue the wiselyer For this diat with close ayre, Raysons and Chickens legges, is very good victail for mareners that purpose to sayle throughe the daungerous rockes, and sandes of the fearfull passage betwene Scylla, and Charibdes. Experience hath learned vs sufficientlye, by the deathes of manye which haue ben slayne in this purgatory of this folysh Phisycke, ignorantly vsed, or this Guaicum rather folishly abused for money: as many goodlye creatures, by. and through money, are chaunged, transformed and altered out of kynd, for money is a marueilous instrument a chaunger, a transformer, or a bewytcher of mankynd, and an instrument whereupon the couetous man doth continually play his infernall discordes vpon: as example, if lawers take wrong matters in hand: if djuines desyre many spyrituall promocions, and be carelesse of theyr heauenly duety,Couetousnesse and Money, do make blind, both Diuines, Lawers, and Phisicions, & trāsforme thē from the nature of men into infernall monsters. if Phisicions prolong or abuse theyr times, with their miserable syck pacients, then what is ye cause? nothynge but coueteous Heartes, and Moneye. Couetousnesse is the Mother of all the euilles of this worlde, and golde and Siluer ar
                           •
                         euer deceiptfull, and beguile mankynd. Gold is the prynce of euil, ye shortner of tyme, the waster and consumer of vertue, loue, liberality rest, peace. and quietnes, the instrument of treason, warre, thefte, whoredome, slaughter, bloudshedyng, and perilous periurye: this wretched money should not thus be abused of the Chrystians, seinge one of the Heathen wise men moste vehemently doth count it a vice most hurtfull and intollerable in any common wealth, according to my words aforesayd, crying out agaynste couetousnesse, wyth her instrumentes (Golde and Syluer) whych is abused saying.

                           Auaritia mater est vniuersae malitiae,
                           Aurum argentum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               semper insidias struunt hominibus,
                           
                              Nummus dolosusO aurum malorū princeps, vitā distruens omnia deni
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               minuēs.
                           Vtinam non esses amabile nocumentum mortalibus.
                           Tua enim eulpa pugnae, praedae, coedes
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vitā humanā perturbāt. &c.
                        
Therfore God graunt of his mercy to thre kynds of callyngs in this worlde yt they may walk truly. obediētly, & charitably, in the sight of God and man,Three most notable and best instruments of the cōmon welth The Deuine the Lawer & the Phisicion▪
                         wherby that Chryst may be chiefly honored, & his peple profited. First, to thē of the church which should be ye mouth betwene God & his flock. Secōdly ye Magistrate, or Lawer, that ryghteousnesse may be ministred, and Iustice, boserued, and no Man wrongfullye oppressed. Thyrdly, for the preseruacion of the Bodye, that the Phisicion marre not, or caste awaye that whych God hath so richlie garnished with the Giftes of Nature whi
                        
                           •
                        he is Mankinde. And now let vs retourne againe vnto our Guaicum or Lignum vitae, called the wood of Life, which through couetousnesse, hath

ben rather made the wod of death, through long new diates, to small effect to many, though fortunate to few. Marcellus my brother, when your fryend Senior F. Neopolitani was smitten with the Pox, his haire fell away, he coulde not sleepe for boneache, his breth did stinck, Lord how pale hee looked, hys muskles consumed, the skabbes appeared, vnder whom were deepe hooles grauen with putrifyed matter. &c. but now his head is couered with hayre his skin cleane, rose coloured in his cheekes, full of strength, he sleepeth very well, and is in health.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        I Am not a litle glad of ye good tydings, but gladder, I would be to learne how he was healed, and with what medicine. For a man may throughe chaunce medly fall into this perill: then a present remedy for a Myschyefe would do well for that purpose.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        March and Apryll are the best time to help the Pox.THus he made his drink for him selfe and one of his companions in the month of March and Apryll last past. R. The best Guaicum, most heauy, and ful of gum l i.iiii let it be wel rased with a rape or turned into fine chips by a Turner. and of the same barks. l i ii. Carduus Bened
                              •
                           ctus, whych is called the blessed Thystell,
                           Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. xci. Atractylis is Carduus Benedictus.
                         which Thistel Dioscorides calleth Atractylis, with prickes like Carthamus, with many leaues, which Thistell is good agaynste pryckyng of Serpents, and among herbes it excelleth all other agaynst poison. And in decoction with Guaicum, sayth Petrus Andreas Matthiolus, it wyll helpe the French Pox. Therefore of the sayed Thystell, put. l.ss, Mayden hayre, Cetrach, the flowers of the wyld, and Garden Buglosse, ana. l.i. sweete Cassia. 
                        ʒ.vi. Anisseede. ℥.i.ss. whyte Sugar l i.v. cast all these into a Wine vessell, cleane and apt for the same purpose, vpon which poure of the cleanest & best whyte Wine, that may be got, very hoat, in quantity. l i. one hundreth and fyfty, couer this Uessell close three dayes, then strayne it throughe an hayre cloth. then kepe this in a cleane vessell, for the Pacient at Dinner and Supper, but not to drynke in the Mornyng, and euening, like vnto Syrupus, or medycines as many men rashly haue vsed. Besides the drynking of thys Guaicum at Dynner,A good way to seeth Guaicum for the Pox. and Supper, the Pacient may betweene the tymes, as one hower before and after Dynner and Supper drynke. ℥.iiii. or .v. Also your foresaied receiptes may be put in cleane new whyte or claret wyne, being fyned, and made in the prescribed maner. Furthermore, the paciēt which hath the Pox, Dropsye, or Goute, may drinke amonge, this worthy medycine folowing, the dosse or quantity is. ℥.ii. or more according to the age and complexion of the pacient. Take maiden haire, clean fresh Hops, Fumitorye Sitrach, called Asplenū, Sene of Alexāder, of ech .M.iii. gret Cētauri roots Liquorice, Polipodie, wyld & Garden Buglosse, ana. ℥.iiii. Anisseedes. Nigella, Romana, ye flowers of Bugloss, ye thre Sāders, Cinamō, an. ʒ.v. put this into. l i.xxiiii. of the Guaicum water, sodden after the description in the Compoundes folowyng, then put it in a close Uessell, and stoppe the mouth. and whan that is done, set the sayed Uessell, in an other seethyng kettell vppon the Fyer, so let it stande and seeth for .xx, Houres fayre and softlye, then

strayne it, and kepe it in a cleane close vessel, for the vse aforesayd. But if the pacyent be very ful of humours, then do thus.The most excellent & best maner to seeth Guaicū in composicions with other simples to clense the Pox from all the members of the body. Take Sene of Alexander l i.ii, Succorosarum solitiue 
                        l i.vi. white Sugar. l i.vii. Rhabarbe elected ʒ, iii. finely cut, Turbit of the best. ℥.i. put these in a cleane stone potte with a narrowe mouth. poure into this pot. l i.xxjiii. of the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the compounds folowyng, stop your pots mouth, seeth it in the foresayd maner vpon a soft fyer .xxiiii. howers vntyll it come to a thin Sirupe, called a Iulep, then strayne it and kepe this precious pourging drynke for mornyngs, the dose. ℥.i.ss. accordyng to the age, complexion and strength the pacient must also eate bread. ℥.iii. well baken like Bisquet, and the fleshe of Chicken, Hen, Capon, Patrige Fesant, small Birds of the wod rosted, excell sodden meates: and if the common drynk be to strong,The diat for the pox, shortly declared. then the pacyent may poure thereunto some small cleane wyne or beere: let the pacient be mery, kept in a faire cleane chamber with sweete perfumes, not mutch feeding but lytle and fyne, with cleane warme apparell, and a fyer of charcoles. eschewyng venery, wynes, fruicts, fish, grose flesh potage, and white meates. Care, anger, cold, mutch heat: and thus I doe end of this precious wodde Guaicum called Lignum sanctum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     I pray you what is the nature of Mumia, Bytumen, Sperma Caeti, Tartar, Terra sigillata, and Dragons bloud?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           MVMIA, is of nature hoat and dry, in the secōd degree,
                           Mumia, or Mumme.
                         and commeth from Arabia, & is made of dead bodyes, of some of the noble people: because the sayed dead are rychly embalmed wyth precyous Oyntmentes and spyces, chyefly Myrhe, Saffron, and Aloes. This Mumia hath vertue to staunch bloud, to incarnate wounds, to help the Fallynge sycknes,Against running of bloud or bruses. beaten into pouder and squirted wyth a syringe with Mariarum water into the Nostrylles. Tempered with Cassiafistula and drunke with Planten water, it is very good against bruses: but Dragons bloud, Planten water, Madder, Terra sigillata, and Mumia,
                        
                           Bitumen of the dead Sea tempered together and drunke, helpeth great bruses, bloudy flixes, and stauncheth wounds applyed to the place. Bitumen, which is a fome of the ded sea,
                           Sperma caeti of the whale▪
                         and turneth into a matter like Rosen, and is hoat in the second degree. it hath Uertue lyke vnto Mumia, to staunch bloud. to heale wounds &c. The Greekes call it Asphaltos, Sperma Caeti, the seede of the generacion of the mōstrous Whale,
                           Tartar, made of wine lies. hath vertue being drunk with Planten water, Ale, Malmsey or other old cleane wine, to help bruses of great falles. Tartare, is made of wine lyes, hoate and dry in the third degree, it is most excellent against itch & skabs, put in ointments whan it is beaten into pouder, it clenseth the Morfew. A litle Seue, Mastick & Tartare, sodden in a Chickens broth, is beneficiall to purge ye belly. Terra sigillata
                        ▪ is stipticke & will cleaue to the tongue,
                           Terra sigillata stoppeth bloud. of nature hoat and dry, and is put to oyntmentes to stop bloudy flixes, new bloudy woundes, and hath vertue of Bitumen▪ Sanguis draconis, is colde & dry in the third degree

stypticke of nature, therefore it stauncheth bloud, and bloudy flixes: If it be stamped wyth Mouseare and Planten, it wyll stop Bloud, applyed to the place. But myngle the pouder of Dragons bloud wyth Terebyntine. and Frankensence, it is good for to stop a new bloudy wound.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What Uertue is in Masticke, Rosen, Frankensence, Beniamen, Storax, and Mirrh called Stacte. &c,
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           MAsticke is a fyne sweete droppyng Gum, from a tree of great vertue, and is hoate and drye in the seconde degree, and is good for the Reume to champe vpon,
                           Mastick, is holsome to champ vpon for the reume. & pleasaunt agaynst corrupted ayre in perfume. The pylles be of synguler Uertue for the sayd Reumes. The Oile wil mutch comfort the Synewes, and also wyl incarnate the flesh. Mastick
                           •
                         with Stauesager prouoketh humous, by retraction from the brayn to the mouth,Myrrhe preserueth the body from putrifaction or rotting. champed vppon. Myrrh a noble gum of most singular vertue, which is hoat and dry in the second degree, and preserueth agaynst rotte and putrifactyon, and is of great vertue in fresh wounds to defend them from apostimacions or rotten matter: to heale a wound quickly, nothyng is better: in balmes artificiall, Mirrhe is pryncipall. In wound waters, Mirrhe taketh the chief force. In the pylles of Ruffius agaynst the pestilence, Myrrhe, Aloes, and Saffron, do resyst the poyson of the same pestilence: for wounds in the head, Mirrhe is of great vertue. The bodyes of Prynces are long preserued after death through Myrrhe. The sauour of the same and dayly drynkyng in Betony water,
                           Thus called Frankensence or Olibanum Dioscor. lib. 1. lxx.
                         G. vi. of Myrhe, defendeth from the fallyng Euyll, and sorenes of the lunges. Thus, called Frankensence is hoat in the seconde and dry in the fyrst degree, and droppeth from trees of the same name, which we do cal Furre trees, it hath vertue to nourish and engender flesh in the tender bodyes of men or women: and this Frankensence is vsed in manye salues, to help mankinde, and is more profitable for mankynde in medicyne then commendable to be wasted in Churches, in parfuming the insensible Images. Frankensence is good to parfume the Clothes, for them whych haue the bloudy flixe, and thus I ende of Thus called Frankensence. Olibanum is not mutch vnlike in nature to thys Frankensence. but the very same in Greeke.Gum Sarcocole.
                         Gum Sarcocoll, is dry in the fyrst degree and hoat in the second, it is a sanatyue gum to incarnat wounds and sores, and nothyng excelleth thys gum to put into Collyries for sore eyen. as whan the sight is couered wyth whyte spots.
                           
                              Resina.
                           
                           Rosen.
                           
                              Diosco. lib. 1. capi. lxxiiii.
                           
                         Rosen called Resina pini, hath warming, mundifying, and dissoluing nature. This Rosen no Shyppe, or Chirurgian can want. Rosen dryeth and warmeth colde Melancholy, sores Apostimations and Ulcers: and furtermore it wyll produce Fleshe in the Woundes of stronge persons:
                           Picea. Pix naualis and Tarre. there be sundry kyndes of Rosen, as dropping from the Ceder. &c. but all of one nature. Also a little I shall put you in remembraunce of Pix. commonly called Pix Naualis, of nature hoate, and dry, and hath vertue to dissolue, Consume, and is put into Plasters, agaynst colde Dyseases, it is also put into inward Medicines to be drunk against Bruses, as Mummea is.

There is another Pix called Liquida, which is more h
                           •
                        at
                           •
                        r and thinner, euer moist commonly called Tarre, whych hath vertue to spread, consume & wast humours, put into sondry goodly Oyntments agaynst cold soores, and also to heale Skabs. Tarre is not only holsome for Mankind to kyl sondry skabbes and soores, and scaules (as take Pix Naualis, Tarre, Litarge of Syluer, Hony, ana, 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. sharpe Uyneger, Planten water, Beane meale, a lyttle Salt, boyle all these in a litle close vessel, sturre it, and shaue the heade,A goodly place for a skaule in the head. and make a plaster, and lay it on hoat .xxiiii. houres, and then teare it of, and put on another, & so do vntil the skabbe be rooted forth). But also Tarre, grease and French Sope, tempered together, is good to anoynt skabbed Sheepe, horse. &c. wyth a tent of Baken and Tarre, I haue healed the Fistula often times: and thus I do end of Tarre.
                     There is a goodly Gumme called Galbanum whych commeth from ye 
                        Galbanum trees in Syria, which is put in sundry plasters,
                           Galbanum is a holsome gumme. and is hoat in the beginnyng of the thyrd degree, and dry in the second, and it hath vertue to mollyfy and spread. Dioscorides affyrmeth,
                           Galbanum wyl draw forth dead children. that if it be applyed playster wayes or in subfumigacion, it wyl not only draw forth the stopped Termes, but also a dead abortiue Childe: The smooke thereof maketh venemous thynges to flee. It preuayleth agaynst poison. And a lytle Galbanum with Myrrhe drūk, clenseth the lunges, cough, and stoppyng of wynd, but yet it is very noisome to sauour vpon: therfore it helpeth the Mother. To clense Galbanum,
                        To clense Galbanum.
                         put it in very hoat water, and by litle and lytle the filth thereof will seperate from the cleane part, and so you may vse the sayd cleane part for your Plasters, as it is written in the booke of Compounds. You may also resolue Galbanum all the Night in Uineger, and in the morning boyle it: and in water or vineger you may do so to other Gummes. and some other hard Gummes you may break into pouder in a morter, or vpon a stone.
                           Eupherbium of Lybica.
                        
                     
                     
                        Euphorbium commeth from a tree that doth grow in Lybica. The beste Euphorbium is that is cleane, like vnto Glasse, and is sharp of taste: this is hoat and dry in the fourth degree, and is very good for woūds in the head,To help the prycking of synewes. dropped into them. It is holsome in Linaments and Cerots. If it bee sodden with Oyle of Elder, Beane flower and earth wormes, it is good agaynste the pricking of the sinewes. In plasters and Cerots, for the French Pox it is profitable. Plinius affirmeth, that Iuba the king of Libye did fyrst finde this Euphorbium vpon the mountaine Atlante beyond Hercules Pillers, and called it by the name of his Phisicion which healed Augustus the Emperour: it will not onely draw forth raw fleume, but water abounding, as in Dropsy: but it is euyl for a dry cholorike body to drynke in medicine, it is so hoate of nature.
                     
                        Ammoniacum commeth from Africke, by the place where as the Oracle of the false God Ammon was.
                           Ammoniacum of Ammon.
                         This gumme Ammoniacum is mutch like Frankensence, bitter in tast, and smelleth like to Castorium, it mollifieth, warmeth and draweth. It is good in any Linaments. And being drunke, doeth lose the belly, and casteth forth the dead childe, helpeth the Spleene, and Sciatica, one dragme being drunke. And thus I do end of Ammoniak, which is hoat in the third, and dry in the first degree.
                     
                        
                        
                           Assafoetida doth stinke yet it helpeth the Mother & Lunges.
                        Assafoetida stinketh, and is good for Women to smell vppon, that be commonly sicke of the Mother, it is hoat and dry in the seconde degree, some do affirme in the third. It hath vertue to dry, to consume, to clense, & spread. Fiue pilles of Assa, taken in a reare Egge at midnight, do cleanse the lunges, and helpeth a short wynded Man or Woman. Oyle of Spike, Mastike, Safron, Wax, Castor, and Assafoetida
                        ▪ stamped and sodden together, make an excellent medicine for the gout, or paynes in the ioynctes: and thus I dooe ende of stinking Assafoetida.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sagapen, or Serapinum, a goodly gum
                        Sagapenum or Serapinum is a precious gum, running from a small tree, lyke a Kix or a Reede, and is hoat in operation. The best of this gum is yt which shyneth through, and in couler is darke, yellow without, and whyte wythin.
                           Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. 79 Sagapen wyll help ye lunges, and splene. Thys Gum is good in many Lenetiues, and also inward medicines: as to pourge Fleume, to help the Falling sicknes, to cleanse the Lunges, help ye swelling or hardnesse of the Splene and is good agaynst the resolution of the Synewes, conuulsyon, ruptures, fyrst steeped in Wyne or Hydromell, then drunke.
                     
                        
                           Bdelium helpeth hard Apostumations
                        Bdellium is a goodly tree, growing in Arabie, from which tree distilleth a worthy gum like Waxe, but cleare shyning, vnctuous, and sweet of sauour, and bitter in taste: it is hoat in the second degree, and is put in many oyntmentes: it resolueth, consumeth, and disperseth apostumations yt be hard.
                     
                        
                           Boras.
                        
                        Boras, is hoat and dry of Complexion, whose vertue is to knit, and glewe woundes together by attraction.
                     
                        
                           Glaucium, is good for to clense sore eyen.
                        Glaucium or Memitha, so called, is colde and dry in the first degree, and commeth from Syrra: Plinie affirmeth this to be the lesser Celidon, and that cānot be, for Celidon is hoat, and Glaucium is colde: therefore they cannot be one, seeing they be of two sundry natures: yet in couller it is yellowe, and marueylous good for to make Syef, for to clense and helpe sore eyen. Dioscorides doth commend this Iuyce. lib. 3. cap. lxxxiiij
                     
                     
                        Gum Arabike will stoppe a bloudy woūdGum Arabyke, is hoat and moyst, of vertue will staunch bloud in woundes, because it is slimy, it wyll also mollify and make thinges soft yt be hardened, as apostimations, and it will stop the bloudy Flixe, resolued in Red Wyne, and drunke.
                     Glew, called Glutinum, of nature is hoat & dry, and is made of the skyns of beastes:Glew, the best is made of the strongest beastes, as Bulles, Oxen, red Deare. &c. that whych is whytest, and cleare shynyng, is very good. Resolued in Uinegar all the night,
                           Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 85. the same will clense Leprous fylth, and Marmols from the skyn, the place being warme anoynted therewyth. And sodden in warme Water,Glew hath many vertues wyth Oyle of water Lyllyes or Flare, it will helpe skalding & burning of the body, to anoynt the sore place therwith. Woūdes be helped wyth Glewe resolued in Uinegar, and tempered wyth Hony, and put into the sayd woundes, or els wyth Uinegar resolued for the same purpose. And thus I doe conclude of Glewe, made of Skinnes, whych cannot bee forborne,3. Glewes, of Beastes skins, of Fish, and of Corne. neyther of Bowyers, or Fletchers. There is a Glewe made of Fyshes, as of the Bellyes of Whales or other great Fyshes, which will quickely bee resolued. And this is very good for to make Emplastrum for the head, or clense ye fylth or red spots from the face. There is

another Glew made of Corne, as Wheat. &c. good for Paste for Stacyoners, which Galen doth remember libro. vij. simplic. medic.
                     
                     Gum Opoponax, is a gum commyng from an herbe called Panax,
                        
                           Opoponax, doth resolue. and of nature is hot and dry, and of vertue resoluyng, warmyng, & making softe thinges which be grosse, cold and hard, and is vsed in sundry Oyles and Linaments.
                     
                        Tragacantha commeth from Mons Gargano,
                        Gum Tragacantha helpeth the raines. and is a noble Gumme of greate vertue, and helpeth wounds inwardly in Linaments: and resolued in Fenel water, and dronke, helpeth the raynes of the backe and bladder. And with cleane clarifyed Hony. ʒ.i. doth clense the lunges, and wyll cleare the voyce from coughes, and is of great effect to helpe sore eyen. Many good Pilles, and mixtures to be put vnder the tongue be made of this gum,
                           Diosco. lib. 3. Cap. 20. against Angina, and all the paynes of the mouth and throate.
                     
                        Laudanum, is a precious gum, hauing vertue to heat and humecte or moist in the second degree: the best commeth from Cyprus, and is sweete of sauour,
                           Laudanum.
                         
                        Galen doth commend it lib. 7. simplic. medica. because it putteth away cold, and giueth heat, and is good agaynst the coldnesse of the brayne, or cold reume. And Laudanum melted with Beares grease,
                           Laudanum, doth help the haire from falling saith, Pausus.
                         wyll keepe the haire from fallyng, to anoynt or emplaster the naked or bare pallet. It maketh goodlye Pessaries for to comfort the Matrix that is cold, and openeth the mouth of the vaynes. Melted in hoat Oyle of bytter Almonds, it maketh a singuler oyntment for deafe stopped eares: in subfumigation close vnder the secrete clothes of Women, whych be newly delyuered of chylde, it will eiect or cast quickly forth the seconds, it moueth vryne. If it be drunk in olde Red wyne it wyl stop the guttes in a bloudy flixe. Masticke and Laudanum incorporate together, do fasten lose teeth, and this Laudanum is vsed both inwardly and outwardly, for the health of mankinde, and hath a sweete sauor of singuler Uertue.
                     
                        Lycium or Pixacantha, so called of Dioscorides. lib. j. cap. Cxiiii. which commeth from a sharpe thorny bush or tree, leaued lyke Box,
                           Lycium commeth from Lycia.
                         fruict lyke Pepper black and bitter, it groweth in Cappadocia and Lycia. The braunches beyng cutte, stamped and sodden, and so strayned, from theym commeth a Iuice, whych is as thycke as Hony, which is sophistical with sundry substaunces▪ as the iuice of Wormewood, Oxe gaules &c. This Lycium is yellow and bitter drying and percing, of substance very earthly, and stiptik, it hath Uertue to helpe the Eyes, dryeth moyste Skabbes, and is good to bee gyuen them which be bytten with a mad Dog, and haue Tenasmus or the bloudy flyxe.For yellow haire. It wyll make one haue a yellow haire, & stoppeth the immoderate flixe, eyther Red or whyte abounding in women. And thus I end of Lycium. Acacia commeth from a thorne in AEgipt, whych hath coddes growing vpō it lyke a Broome, out of which coddes, leaues, and seede,
                           Acacia stoppeth the blouddy flixe. is pressed forth the gumme Acatia, which wyl restraine and stoppe most effectually, and is cold and dry. This Acatia aboue all gummes hath vertue to coole and stop bloud, and bloudy flixes, and coole the burnyng of the eyes, and in the commendacion thereof reade Dioscorides. lib. j. Cap. xxv. Theophrastus lib. 4. cap. de plant. historia. Galen lib. 7. simplicium medicamentorum. &c.
                     
                     
                        
                        Terebinthus, is a goodly tree, hard and blacke, and groweth in Arabia, from which droppeth a precious liquor,
                           Terebinthus or Terebintine hath great vertue. Galen. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
                         or thin guin called Terebintine, although from euery Rosen tree a kinde of Terebintine doth drop. Terebintine is hoat and dry of nature in the second degree, and is vsed in many outward partes or paynes of the body, and is put in sundry oyntmentes & Cerots. &c It will helpe the Synewes and muskels, it stoppeth Tenasmus, which is a running of the guts or flixe, made in a subfumigation vpon ye coales. Cleere Uenice Terebintine washed & tempered with Hony, will cleanse ye lunges. Taken with Sugar in Pilles, it will clense the raynes, open the Bladder, purge Grauell,The vertu of Terebyntine. cause mutch vrine, help the Yarde, and also mollify ye Belly. Terebintine. ℥.ij. often washed in Fenell or Tyme water, then put into it ye pouder of new Safron, & Hiera simplex, an̄a. ʒ.ss. and keepe this in a boxe & who so feeleth griefe within their guts or raynes, let them eate of this. ʒ.ij euery morning, during .iiij. dayes. There is a fyne Terebintine comming from the tree Larix, vsed mutch: and thus I leaue of Terebintine which is sweete,Gum Larix is equall to the Terebinthin reede in Aetius
                         and shining cleare, yet somewhat noysome to the stomack. There is mutch counterfet Terebintine, made of Rosen & Oyle. &c, which the Chirurgians can craftely Sophisticate.
                     
                     
                        
                           Styrax calamite, and liquide Styrax; be sweete and holsome.
                        Styrax Calamite and Styrax liquide, be both hoat and dry, the best of this, saith Galen, is brought frō 
                        Pamphilia, it is good to be incorporat with Laudanum, cleane new Waxe, Muske, Siuet, it will make a pleasaunt Pomambre agaynst stinking ayre, or coldnes of the brayne or melancholy. Styrax calamite, or of the Reede so called, maketh good Parfumes. The black is worst, the gum with shining couller is best: but to say ye truth, the Apothicaries can so well Sophisticate the same wyth Waxe. &c. that we can haue but little true Styrax, as Myrrhe, Amber, Muske. &c. the Apothicaries do gieue them al their blessinges with adulterate baggage,The craft of subtle Apoth
                              •
                           caries, doth mucch harme. with a cast of legerdemayne, to fill their purse, but if we had them in their right kinde, little Waxe were worth mutch money: and now in sundry places, mutch Waxe is worth little money, or nothing at all. This very Styrax calamite doth mollify, warme, and drunke wyth Wyne, helpeth the greatest griefes in the stomacke and Reume, and letteth ye termes slip naturally: and helpeth stincking breath. Tempered wyth Oyle, maketh a precious oyntment for the head, of theym which be ouercome wyth colde. Styrax liquide is good in Oyntmentes for skal
                           •
                        s, skabbes, and French Pox, and is good to bee burnt in Parfume agaynst a pestilent Ayre.
                     
                        Diacridium is hoat and dry in the fourth degree, and is pressed out of an herbe to purge with all,
                           Diacridium.
                         the best is shining in substance, and blacke, there is good which is whitish,To knowe good Diacridium.
                         but mutch is sophisticated with spurge, Colophonie. &c. but that is not good, if it be bryttle & bitter in Sauour: and if you licke Diacridium with your tongue, so that white fome do remayne after it, then it is good to purge choler, flegme and melancholy: beware you receyue not Scammonie, before it be wel prepared as you may see in ye booke of Compoūdes: for this Scammonie is very venomous before it be prepared, & expulseth good matter, and retayneth still the euill or hurtfull humours to the great perill of the Receyuer, and will put the body in daunger of a blouddy flixe incucurable:

therefore prepare, I say, your said Scammonie in Quinces made hollow, or in gray Costards, after ye same maner: put in your Scammonie, sprinkled with Oyle of Uyolets, and bake it in Paste, yt the venime may passe away: when it is cold, then it is Diacridium fit to purge, being corrected with Mastik: and why shall Mastik bee put in?
                           Scamonie is perillous, except it be first prepared. Because it will abate the violence thereof, and kepe the stomacke and heart from daunger, and guts from the bloudy Flixe. Gum Arabik is also holsome therewith. Chollerike persons may be purged wyth lesser prepared Scammonie, or Diagridium, thā the Flegmatike or Melācholy, and it may not be occupied .15. dayes after it be prepared as wyth Myrobalans. &c. It is vsed in sundry Electuaries, pouders, & Pilles. And vndiscretly mynistred it anoyeth the heart, dryeth good Humours, and wasteth nature, yea disolueth and finally killeth the body. Read in Valerius Cordus, which is a good Apothicary, not onely to prepare this, but also all other thinges profitable for nature.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        I Thanke you wyth all my heart, I haue conceyued no lesse pleasure, to heare you all this long day, than you haue taken paynes of your parte to teache me, the vertues of so many thynges wythout many questions moued: yet I had almost forgotten to mooue you, what vertue is in Myrobalans, whych euen lately you haue named to be good wt prepared Scammonie?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           MYROBALANVM is a noble fruicte of Inde lyke Plumbes whych hath vertue to purge superfluous humours,
                           Myrobolans of .v. kyndes. and comforteth nature,To seeme yōg how to do it. and who so vseth to eate often of Myrobalans being condite, shall not seeme olde, sayth Mesue, and maketh pure couler. There bee .5. kindes of theym, as Flauj, Chepuli, Indicj. or Nigrj, Empelicj, and Belliricj, which do differ one from the other: for yt 
                        Flauj, and Chepulj, do grow both vpon one tree, for the Flauj are gathered vnripe, and the Chepulj haue their full nature and rypenesse. Myrobalans, Flauj, Indicj, Chepulj, and Belliricj, be colde in the first, and dry in the second degree Empelicj are colde and dry in the first degree, and be good for the Lyuer, Gaule, Splene, Raynes, and Bladder: and put in infusion of the Iuyce of Quinces, standing .24. houres, and then strayned, then put prepared Scammonie, they wil purge choller, as for example: Take Myrobalans Flauj. ℥.j. the iuyce or syrupe simple of Quinces. ℥.iiij. stampe your Myrobalans, and then mingle them wyth the sayd Iuyce, the Iuyce being made warme, and let it stand in a close stone vessell .24. houres, then strayne it forth, whan this is done, beate your prepared Scammonie fine into pouder. ℥.iiij. and temper it together, putting it in a close warme place to dry it by little & little, and of thys ʒ.j. or litle more wil purge choller, & humours superfluous without hurte. Myrobalans may be stamped with the Syrup of Wormewoode, & then sodden with ye infusion of Agarike, & Rhabarbe, to purge flegme & choller:To purge tē
                           der parsons. it may be drawen with Chassia & Manna, for noble persons or People of tender nature. This fruict defendeth the body from corruption, trimbling of the heart, heauines, Melancholy, & bringeth to nature, Cleanlynesse, fauour, & myrth.

And drawen wyth Fe
                           •
                        ill water and Sugar,To clense sore eyen. it wyl clense the sight to bee dropped into them morning and euening. The pouder of them wyth Rosen wyll heale sore Ulcers. And thus I do ende of Myrobalans, whych wyll draw backe the venomous force of euery purgation that doth aboūde in operation.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Gaules, called Galla?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        GAules will bynde, and nothing will cleanse the mouth from filth better,gaules grow lyke Akorns. D
                                 •
                              oscorides. lib. 3. cap. 123 applied to any sore therein. Whan the intollerable paynes of the teeth do rage on still, a peece of Gaule applyed to the place, will so one aswage the same. Gaules soddē and stamped, apply them to ye Matrix whan through weaknesse it is displased or faule downe, and it wil go back to his naturall place agayne.Gaules wyll stop the Flixe Gaules wyll staunche bloud, and make hayre blacke, and stop the bloudy flixe in Clisters. Galen. lib. 7. simplic, medic. sayth Gaules be cold in the second degree. The cuppes wherein they do grow bee of the same nature. And thus I doe ende of Gaules, whych are good to make Inke wythall.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Acorns of the Oke tree?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THe Oke tree of all noble trees for strength excelleth all other for substanciall buildinges,The Querke or Oke tree, will stop the bloudy flix or bloud, so wyll the Barke, Akorns, or leaues, wyth the Cuppes. which Tree shall bee once in no small estimation in this Realme of England to vphold houses, dwellinges, and the royall Nauies: although the Oke bee of little price, yet for the Age, strength and vertue, few other trees excell it: the Bark cannot be forborne of Tanners to make Leather to serue the common wealth. The timber, as I haue sayd, is pryncipal in buildings. The Acorns haue vertue to stop Dysenteria, and Tenasmus, whych be extreme flixes. Of al trees that be glandiferous or bearing nuts, or Mast, nothing doth restrayne more than the Oke and Acorns, as sayth Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 121 and Theophrastus,
                        The Beeche tree, with his fruit wil stop flixes. 
                        lih. 3. cap 8. and 9. de plantis historia. Fagus the Beeche tree, and Ilix do beare Mast, not only good for Swyne to feede vpon, but also in medicine doth stop termes imoderat, or restrayne or driue backe guts that be relaxed, or the precipitation or coming forth of the Matrixes of Women, 
                           •
                        f eyther the barkes, Leaues, Buddes, Acorns, or Cuppes be sodden in red Wyne, running Water, and to sit close ouer it warme, and to drynke the decoction thereof in cleane Red Wyne, Cynamon, and Suger. Suber the Corke Tree wyth hys Fruict,Suber the Corke, will stop bloud & flixe. hath the foresayd vertue to stop the Flixe, or Bloud▪ Reade Plinie. lib. 11.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What then of Castania the Chestnut?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     CHestnuts be commonly knowen,
                           Castania the Chestnut. whych of nature will stop Flixes & restrayne, make fat, & indurate the Splene. In many places of Italy and Fraunce, the people doth lyue by these Chestnuts in wynter, whā they want other fruicts. Stampe Chestnuts, Hony, and Salt together,Chestnuts help the byting of a Dog. & apply it to the byting of a mad Dogge, & it will heale it. Chestnuts mooue Venus or carnall lust, being roasted and eaten, they doe offende the heade, and Splene, because they do inflate & stop, they be called Iouis glandes, that is Iupiters Nuts, sayth Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 122.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Myrtus?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           MYRTVS the black,
                           Myrtus hath vertue to restrayn. that grow in the Gardens be of more vertue to restrayne, than they which grow vpon the Mountaines, whych be whyte, the seede hath great vertue to restrayne. The seede is good to be giuen to them which haue the bloudy flixe and spit bloud, and it openeth the vryne. The Iuyce of Myrtes drunke in Wyne, doth stop the flixe, & healeth filth, breading about ye priuy-mēbers being washed therewith, & it doth clēse ye eyen. Myrtes hath vertue, restrayning both inwardly, & outwardly, & do dry,To stop the flixe, called Dyscenteria, & Tenasmus with Myrtes as Galen affirmeth lib. 7. simplic. medic. it is partly ouercome wt coldnesse & earthly nature, yet it hath also a thin substance of warmnesse, which giueth it drynesse. And thus I do end of Myrtus, called so of the Latens: and of the Arabians it is called Alas, whereof be three kindes, Saliua, Tarentina, and Exotica, and all be of vertue good to helpe the bloudy Flixe.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you to Coloquyntida?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is most bitter, white like a baule, full of seedes,
                           Colocīthis, or Coloquyntida Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 171 leaues lyke to Cucummers, hoat in the second, dry in the third degree. Good in Clisters agaynst the collike, resolution of synewes, & purgeth fleume, choller, & raw humours: it openeth the mouth of the veynes, yet it is perilous to be gyuen to Women with childe, or weake people, A peece of Coloquyntida knit in a clout, and steeped in a draught of white Wyne al a night, with .iiij. or v. Braunches of 
                           ••
                        sop, strayned in the morning, and so drunke,To kill wormes in ye 
                           
                              •
                           elly with Coloquyntida.
                         will purge a stronge body from mutch filth and Iliac: euen so it will being sodden in sweete Water, clense al the body. Coloquyntida, Oxe gaule, Hony, Meale of Lupines, and Oyle of Wormewood, and Aloes, ana. ʒ.j.ss. stamped together, and warme applyed to the belly, eftsoones a lax wil follow,To helpe the Teeth wyth Coloquyntida
                         with Wormes if any be within the guts. Sandarak. ℈.ij. vinegar. ℥.ij. Coloquyntida. 
                        ʒ.j. in pouder incorporate and sodden together put into sore Teeth, taketh away the paynes, if it come of colde: the Oyle of Coloquyntida wyll kyll Wormes, helpe Sciatica, and put into the eares wyll take away the sounde or tingling in them: and thus I do end of Coloquyntida, which is most bitter, and must be taken with discretion, the Arabians do call it Chandell.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     UUhat is Turbit?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        TUrbit is to purge flegme, but as for the very Turbit, most mē be vncertayn what it is.Turbit which purgeth flegme. 
                        Actuarius sayth it is the roote of Pytiusa: Manardus and Mesue, affirme it to be second kinde of Tithymalus which is called Mircyniles. But Dioscorides plainly doth affirme it to bee Tripolium,
                        Mutch varitie of Turbit what it is. as some suppose by the minde of Serapio. Antonius Musa supposeth it to be the second kinde of Spurge agreeing with Manardus and Mesuae.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What are Tamarindes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        TAmarindes are a sower fruicte of Inde, which be wyld Dates, called Tamardactyli,
                        
                           
                              Tamarindes or Tamardactylos.
                           
                           
                              Dioscorides lib. i. cap. 126.
                         and be cold and dry, sayth Mesue, in the second degree. Thys fruict wyl asswage the heat of choler, open the Gaule, and purge the belly. A decoction of Tamarindes with Ptisant, and the iuice of Pomgarnets, wyll quench hoat Apostumacions in the throat: whan humors be to sharp, and bytter in the increasyng or augmenting of the sayd Apostumaciōs. The very pure Garden Dates,Dates of the best kynde. be fruicts of great Uertue. This Date is the very fruict of that tree whych is called the Palme tree, whych fruict maketh precious wyne in the Lād of Syria, these Dates be commonly knowen here in England.To helpe Emeroydes. Sodden Dates in old wyne wyl help the Emeroides. A Date stamped wyth Hony of Roses, wyl glew & knit a new wound. But mutch eaten vpon, beyng raw, are vnfriendly to the head, and make grose Bloud, and stop the Liuer.Dates good in stewed broth. Notwithstandyng cleane pared Dates be good in stewed broth, as we do commonly obserue by custome. Galen doth remember Dates. lib. 7. simplic. medicamentorum, saying they be sweete and warme, and vsed mutch in meates &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     UUhat say you of Tamariscus, or Tamarix.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           TAmariscus, is a wod mutch like Quickbene, wherof there is plenty in one part of Germanye,
                           Tamariscus is a little tree like Quicben within a certayn Iland belonging to one of the Germayn Bishops: and this Tamariscus, is the better known here in England by the famous learned Man Wylliam Turner Phisicion: not onely this, but many other simples, by the same Doctor, which Doctor is a Iewell among vs Englysh men,Doctor wyllyam Turner as well as among the Germaynes, as Conradus Gesnerus reporteth of hym for hys synguler Learning, knowledge & iudgement. The wynd of the decoction of Tamarix is holsome to drynke agaynst the hardnes of the Spleene, and stopping of the vryne or strangury, because it doth open so mutch. The pouder therof in bread is holsome for them to eate whych haue the quarten or Dropsy,
                           Tamarix do helpe the Spleene. it is as good as Asplenum for the Spleene. Galen affyrmeth that Tamarix or Myricae lib. 7. simplic. medic. hath vertue to clense and open, and is hoat and dry. Sodden in

Uineger, it helpeth the Spleene, and also the tooth ake. Dioscorides, lib, j. cap xcix. doth commend Tamarix,
                        
                           Tamarix against the flixe. and sayth it is vsed oftentimes in the place of Galles, and is good to be drunk against spitting of bloud, and flixes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     WHat say you of the Nut called Pistacia, which is a Nut of Italy. The Iuglans called a Walnut, the Hasell Nut, Nutmegges, Almondes, and the vomiting Nutte,
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           PLinius affirmeth that the Pistacia is a fruicte of Syria,
                        
                           Pistacia. a nut of Syria or Italy. and was first brought into Italy by the famous Censor called Lucius Vitellius, in the tyme of Tyberius Caesars dayes, and now there be great plenty of these Nuttes in Italy. Galen reporteth of them lib 2. de alementorum facultatibus, that they be but little profitable to nutriment, notwithstanding good to the liuer, clensyng euyl humours from the same. But whether good or euyl to the Stomack, profytable or noto ye belly, relaxing or bynding, he doth not affirme. Auicen sayth thus, one saith he, affirmeth that the Pistate doth not profit the stomacke: but I, sayth Auicen, say, that the sayd Pistate, doth not onely preuaile agaynst the noysomnesse of the stomacke,The vertue of the Pistac
                              •
                            Nuttes. but also wil coroborate and make strong the ventricles. And to conclude, Dioscorides. lib. j cap. cxl. sayth that Pistates of Syria be friends to the stomack, stamped and tempered with wyne: eyther eaten or drunk they preuayle against the stinging of Serpents. Nux Iuglans the Walnut, Quasi iouis glans as Iupiters nuttes, with which fruicts the people lyued by, before they knew Tillage,Walnuts against poison▪ as Mithridatus reporttth. and called thē the great Gods nuttes. These be commonly knowen, sweete within and bitter. wythout. And this tree, with all parteining to the same is adstrictiue of nature, and good oyle is made thereof, and is bytter, and soner digested than the Fylbyrd or Hasel nut, and is vsed in medicines against poisons. They be hoate in the fyrst and dry in the second degree: and holsome cleane pycked & washed in wyne, to be eaten after Fysh, and best new. Plinie reporteth that, when Mythridates the kyng of Pontus was dead, there was found in a chest of hys, his own hand writyng, in the land of walnuts, agaynst Poyson R. UUalnuts, in number .ii. Figges .ii. Rue leaues xx. stamped together with a lyttle Salt, and eaten fastyng doth defend that day from the Pestilence or poison put Honie to it, and it helpeth the bityng of Dogges, layed vpon the woūd. The oyle of nuttes with Hony, or the grene nutrindes wil kyl the Canker, to anoynt the place, and also bryng haire, and defend baldnesse.
                     Fylberdes be good of digestion, not good to be eaten before meat,Filberdes are good after. meate and doth help the reume. for then they be not a lytle noysome to the lunges and head. Notwithstandyng if they bee rosted and eaten with a lyttle Peper or Aster, then they shalbe comfortable to help a moist reume. Stamped with Hony and Hysop water, thē they be good for old coughes.Walnuts. There is a good oyntment made of smal nuts and Beeres grease, for to anoint a bald head to bring haire, Galen affyrmeth that they be more cold and earthly than the Walnuts.To heale a prycke. 
                        Diocles sayth they do lesse nourish than the Almonds, how be it the greene be more holsome than

the dry. There is a comen medicine made of Hassell nuts, or Filberdes, the iuyce of Dittany and blacke Sope stamped together, and this will drawe forth a prick fixed within the flesh. And these Nuttes be tollerable after fish, to dry vp moyst matter & the Greekes call them Karia pontica, because they came first from Portus, & now be almost in all the places of this Worlde.
                     
                        Almondes sweete & bitter.Almondes: the bitter Almondes, their Rootes sodden, the decoction of them will clense the Face from spots. Bitter Almondes stamped with oyle of Roses and Uinegar, wil asswage the paynes of the forehead to anoynte the Head,Almondes to help the byting of a Dog Temples, or Forehead therewith. Tempered with Hony & Rue, they make a good plaster for the byting of a mad Dogge, and the reason is this, the plaster is very hoat, and the byte of the Dogge is colde with Melancholy. The oyle of bitter Almondes is holsome for many thinges, as to warme the body, stomacke, Matrix &c. and to poure into the eare to help them which be deafe, if it be curable. Bitter Almondes be hoatter then the sweete, they clense the guts, Lyuer, & Stomack, and draw foule humours from the Lunges,Almonde mylke, the vertue therof. sayth Galen. lib. 7. simplic. medic. Almond mylke wyl clense skower, and cut grosse humours, & may be made in the decoction of Hens, Partrige, or Chycken, to strengthen nature, or with cold herbes, as Sichory, Endyue, Uiolets. &c. to quench choller, & to reconcile sleape. To clense ye raynes, stampe Almondes in cleane washed Uenyce Terebintine, and eate it, both for the Collike, Strangury and the Stone: eate Almondes before meate and drinke, if you be afrayde of drunkennesse: quench Golde, Syluer, Steele, Flynt, or any of them in Almonde Mylke, wherein is put the pouder of Ryce, and it wyll stop a flixe to drynk the same. Many great vertues be wrytten of Almondes,Gum of Almondes stoppeth the Flix. as Dioscorides libro primo. cap. 139. &c. The gum of Almondes sleeped in Wyne and drunk, helpeth the Flix or spitting of bloud, so will gum of Cheryes.
                     
                        
                           Nux vomica to vomit how to do it.There is a Nut called Nux vomica, whych if it bee stamped and eaten by it selfe, or els with a little Salt, or Oximell simplex. 
                        ʒ.j. it prouoketh vomits of choller and flegme. And mingled wyth Hony, the seede of Fenell, Dill, & warme Water, it maketh a most holsome vomit for a foule stomacke, but beware yee take no more than. ʒ.j. for then it is most perillous to nature or lyfe.Dog leches. With this Nut and Helleborus Albus, many dogge Leches do put the ignorant people in daunger of their lyues. As of late one called Edwardes, a doltish impericke, came to Newcastell, and had like to haue killed Cutbert Blunt,Edwardes the imperike. Cutbert Blunt. a gentleman of the same towne, who through drinking of the Syrups of Uyolets, Quinces, and Mintes, was happely recouered, and after through infortune finished hys carefull Lyfe in London, being Prysoner in the Fleete. Anno. 1660.
                     
                     The Nutmegge or Muske Nut most odoriferous, pleasaunt, and sweet, vsed in many Cordials and holsome receites agaynst coldnesse,Nutmeg, or muske nut, haue many singuler vertues agaynste colde. and cometh from the hoat Countrey of Inde, from an Ilande called Badan, and is inclosed wyth Maces, as with a Nutshall, which Maces is a spyce most holsome: the cloue is not the stalke whereupon this worthy Nut doth grow: the Mauritanians affirme that they bee hoat in the seconde degree. The olde Wryters speak but little of this Nut, it is proued to be good against winde, collike, flegme, weake digestion▪ vomits, headache, coldnesse of the Lyuer,

cardiakes, stopping of the splene, Dropsy, swellinges, bloudy Flixes: it comforteth the Synewes, muskles, & Ueynes of colde, or olde people: maketh sweete breath, putteth away trimbling of the heart▪ and is holsome to bee beaten in pouder, and tempered wyth oyle of Myntes, and to anoynte the forehead and temples agaynst coldnesse of the head, or dulnesse of memory, and is holsome in plasters for the stomacke, quilted in Leather and Sylke: good in stewed brothes, for them which be long sicke, and the Oyle is comfortable for colde Stomackes:Nutmegs not good for hoat cōplexioned men. but Auicen speaking a little of the Nutmeg saith, it is euel for a Sanguine man to vse it, because it will adust the bloud, (and make one appeere with a face as though he had a visor of Currall) be cause of the drynesse: so to conclude, the Nutmeg is the fruicte, the Mace the flower, or Rose that doth enclose it, the Cloue is the smale Stalke that beareth it, as they say. But Cinamon is a nother maner of Barke.Sinamon. 
                        Dioscorides sayth there be diuers kyndes of Cinamon whych are hoat, and dry of nature in the third degree, and help the stopping of ye Lyuer, Dropsy, Flixes, and all the paynes of the Guts, Lunges, and breast, & cause a sweete breath, and are holsome in blanch pouder or soppes. Cloues come from Inde, and grow lyke nayles vpon Trees, and be hoat and dry, and odoriferous,Cloues. and be good agaynst colde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Fraxinus, the Ashe tree?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THis tree is commonly knowen,
                           Fraxinus the Ashe tree. whose leaues being stamped or sodden in Wyne, do heale the stinging of serpentes. Plinie sayth, ye leaues of Ashe trees be deadly to beastes, but that should seeme to be erroniously spoken of Plinie, because we see the contrary: but there is an herbe whych hath leaues like Ashe leaues called Ditten▪
                        Ditten. of which Matthiolus maketh mention in his comment vpon Dioscorides, which herb is good for man agaynst poyson, Wormes and swellings, but no beast dare eate thereof. And I suppose Plinie ment this Dittany, whych I haue proued to be good agaynst the Tympany of Water. I haue proued it at Tinmouth Castle, where plenty doth grow vpon the Rockes. But to conclude of the Faxin, or Ashe tree, the leaues being sodden with the Oyle of S. Ihons grasse and Terebintine are good agaynst Cuttes, sores, and open woundes to glewe,To help broken booes or draw them together agayne: they also be good wyth Consolida, Compherie, Beane meale, & oyle of Myrtes, to lay vpon broken Benes.To helpe the Splene. And ye kayes of Ashe tree sodden in Wyne, Citrach, fresh Capers, and Sugar, are good to drynke to diminishe the swelled Splene, and of nature are colde and dry in the seconde degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Marc
                              •
                           llus.
                     
                     What say you of Populus, called the Popler tree?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THere is the white and the blacke Popler,
                           Populus the Popler tree. whych bee colde and dry in the third degree. Of the Popler is made the goodly Vnguent called Populeon. The Iuyce of the Leaues bee wholsome to bee dropped into the hoat stopped Eares. The Popler young Buddes, incorporate wyth

cleane Hony and Rosewater, be holsome to asswage the paines of the eyen, comming of heate. And the Iuyce of the bark sodden in red Wyne, wil stop a bloudy Flix. and the Sciatica: reade further. lib. 1. Dioscorides. Cap. xciij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Brome called Genista?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THe Brome, and the Whin or Furre Bushe be hoate and dry in the second degree:Brome. ad the seede will prouoke vomits, cleanse filth in the stomacke, and kill Wormes. The Iuyce tempered wyth Staphisagry, oyle of Wormewod & Aloes,To kyll Lyce. wil kil Lyce. The oyle of Brome wil heale a Tetter.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of the Ienuper?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Ienuper
                        
                           DIOSCORIDES is his first booke Cap. 87. sayth, there are .2. kindes of Ienupers, or bigger than the other both sower or tart of taste, hoat of nature, mouing vrine, Serpentes wil flee from the smoake thereof. Ienuper beries be holsome to clense ye Stomacke,Ienuper wyll driue away Serpents. help the coughe, inflations, and the torments of the belly. There is a precious Oyle made of Ienuper to warme the synewes and comfort the head, being ouercome with colde. Ienuper beries be holsome to put in medicine agaynst the Pestilence, & byting of Serpents. Plinie in the laude of Ienuper sayth,Ienuper was the beames of Dianas Temple. Plinie. lib. 16. Cap. 40. that the beames in the riche temple of Diana of Ephesus, were made of Ienuper, the whych remayned many hundred yeares vnperished, vntill the burning of ye same. The Chemistes or Distillars of Waters, make their ardent hoat Fyres of Ienuper.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What vertue is in Hypocistis?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Hiposistis.
                        
                        
                           HYpocistis is colde and dry in the second degree. Galen sayth, lib. vij simplic▪ medicamentorum. Cistus is a binding fruicte, the leaues and. small buddes do dry and bynde and glewe Woundes together:
                           Hipocistea wil stop blod. but the flowers be of most effect. Drunk in Wyne they are good against the bloudy flix, or weakenes of the belly: and also for Women, that haue to mutch red fluxe menstruall. And wyth Sanguis Draconis and Bosearmen, wyth the whyte of an Egge, it wyll stop a bloudy Wounde.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Pomgranet, and Balaustia, Lymondes, & Oringes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Malum Punicum the Pomgarnet.EMplasters made of Pomgranets, bee good against hoat Feuers: the Wyne of Pomgranettes, is good to comforte the Stomacke after meate. There are two kyndes of theym, the sowre, and the sweete the sowre bee colde,
                           Balaustica the flower of Pomgarnete which wyll stoppe a flixe. and dry in the seconde degree, but the sweete bee colde and moyst in primo. And thys Fruicte is called Malum punicum, the flowers be called Balaustium, of the Wylde Pomgranet whych flower hath

vertue to stop flixes, by the reason they be colde and dry, and slipticke of nature, and very good to be put in Clisters and in the drinke of them, which haue Disenteria, or Tenasmus. The sower Limondes are cold and dry,Limondes Orynges. but the sweete are warme, the tindes are al dry. And Limondes are good in Wine and do resist poyson: Oringes are weaker of nature, and are cold and dry.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Cubebes, I pray you of nature?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THey be hoat in the begynning of the thyrd degree,
                           Cubebes haue goodly vertue agaīst melancholy. and bee good to clense the breastes and bellies, of rawe flegmatike persons, which be full of grosse humours. They help the splene, and coolenesse of the Guts: wyth Mastike they will draw filth from 
                           〈…〉
                        . And wyth Balme Water, there is nothing better agaynst Melancholy trembling of the hart, and the falling euill. And these Cubebes bee vsed in many goodly medicines.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Figges?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        FIgges be of diuers sortes, but hoat in the first degree,Figges wyll 
                              •
                           ipe apostumes, best of al fruictes and are wholsome to be eaten. and dry in ye second: and be full of maturity or ripenesse, and will open ye poares, cause sweete breath, breede Lyse, by the reason the foule humoure is clensed through the skin by them. Relaxe the belly, and sodden in Wyne with Hysop, strayned and drunke, help the throat, lunges, and olde rotten coughes. Figges be good agaynst Melancholy, and the Falling euill, to be eaten. Figges, Nuts, and herb Grace, do make a sufferent medicine against poyson, or the pestilence. Figges make a good Gargarisme to cleanse the throate, and stamped with Shomakers ware, wyll heale an vlcer. Figges will ripe hard apostumacions, of ye plague sore: Snayles, Swynes grease and Figges, wyth Beane flower stamped together,Figges heale vlcers. and warme applyed to a sore swelled throat, will ripe it, and help Angina. The Wyne of the decoction of Figges, is wholsome to be drunk agaynst bruses, or falles. Figs be fruict most worthy and commendable to mans nature, both inwardly in meat to clense the bloud beyng also a goodly Medicine:Figges bee both meate and medicine. and outwardly in wholsome plasters, to ripe an hard Apostumacion or sore: by the reason they will warme, and make the skin thin. And thus I do end of Figges.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Mulbery?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           GALEN. lib 7. simplicium medicamen
                              •
                           orum sayth,
                           Morus the Mulberie. the ripe sweete Mulbery will somwhat relaxe, but the Tarte vnripe will restrayne and stop the belly: so it is then of nature relaxing and binding. The Barke of the Mulbery tree roote sodden in Water, to drinke that Water doth resolue the belly, Dioscorides. lib. cap. 143. the leaues stamped with Uinegar do heale scalding, or burning, to anoynt the place therewith. Tricoctus called the Medler,
                           Mespilus.
                         or Mespilus hath vertue also to restrayne, stop, and coole.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is Sebesten good for?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Sebesten will helpe Struma
                        
                        SEbesten and Iuiubes be good to helpe the griefe in the throate called Struma if they be sodden in sweete water, Meede, or in the decoction of Lyquorice and Figges. And they be both of a temperate heate and moystnesse, vsed in many medicines.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Leuen?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Leuen dissolueth harde thinges, and maketh theym soft.LEuen called Fermenrum, is hoat and moyst, and will quickly dissolue a hard apostumation: and if it be stamped with Figges it will speedely rype and draw. And Leuen is wholsome to help the pricke within the flesh or Synewes, made lyke a Cerote.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Ceruse?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Ceruse tooleth inflamed soresIT will scoure, and is vsed among the Chirurgians, for to quench hoat vlcers: it hath vertue to dry, and is colde & dry in the seconde degree.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What then of Licium?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Licium.
                        
                        LIcium is very subtle, drying and penitrating: and of nature is colde and stiptike.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Wherefore is Litarge good?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           GALEN remembring Spuma argentj: sayth Lytharge doth dry, as other medicines do,
                           Galē. lib. 9. simp. medica.
                         that be made of Mettell, Stone, or any other earthly thing, of a stronge faculty, and is vsed in sundry linementes, agaynst hoat burning Ulcers.Litarge. And is naturally colde and dry, and is tryed out of Sande, called Molybdis. Looke Dioscorides. lib. 5. Capt. lxiij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Galanga, and Cost?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Galanga.
                        
                        
                           GALANGA is hoat and dry in the thirde degree, and biteth as Gynger doth vpon the tongue, wyth burning like Peper, and wil take away coldnesse of the breast, heart, guts, matrix and raynes: drunke wyth Planten water, it stoppeth the bloudy flixe, and strengtheneth nature,Ciperus. comforteth the braynes, and trembling of the heart. Ciperus, which is called Aspalathum, is very sweete, and of the nature of Galanga, and is called wilde Galanga, but it doth more vehemently expell the termes being drunke: the rootes be like Ginger. Coste is diuritike, hoat and warme, and resisteth Uenime.
                  
                  
                     Marcellas.
                     What say you of Iris, called Ireos?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           IRIS is so called, because of similytude of the Raynebowe,Ireos. and is commonly knowen: it is called the flower Delice, hoat, and dry in the ende of the thirde degree. And is of two kindes, Garden,To resolue. and Fielde Ireos: and it will resolue, soften, and open, and is put in mollifying Cerotes, with grease of Duckes, Capons, Hens, and Geese, and the Pouder of Flaxe, Beane meale, Holioke, and Waxe accordingly. Ireos pouder tempered with Hony, and therewith a conuenient Pessary made, is good to drawe forth the dead chylde. It is holsome for Struma, or swelling in the throate, in lynamentes. And the Pouder thereof wyll heale a Fistula, or a rotten Ulcer. Uinegar, Oyle of Roses, and Ireos, sodden & strayned,To couer a bone with fleshe. put thereunto Hony of Roses, and it will couer a naked place, whereas ye fleshe is gone from the Bone, and will quickly couer it agayne with fleashe. The whyter it is, & the meaner it is, the better: Plinie doth not a little commend it libro .xx. for oyntments, so do Aetius lib. xiij. cap. iiij. but not inward in medicines.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Peper?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        PEper cōmeth from Inde,Peper. the blacke groweth vppon clusters lyke to little blacke Ienuper Beries: Some growe in Huskes, & both the white Peper, long Peper, and blacke Peper be all hoat in quarto, and dry in the seconde: the long is most byting, because it is gathered before it bee rype, therefore it hath still the hoat humour. The black is perfit ripe, and is wholsome: the whyte is sweetest, but weakest of theym three. Peper is vsed in sundry medicines, and in meate agaynst coldnes:Peper dissolueth & consumeth moyst humours. it draweth dissolueth, and consumeth moyst humours, and dryeth theym, and helpeth an Agewe, being drunke many tymes, specially before the Fit. Grose Peper will helpe digestion, and neuer hurt the Lyuer. There is a goodly Dia made of the three Pepers, called Dia trion Pipereon, which hath greate vertue against horsenesse, stopping of the lunges, and colde Reumes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you then of the three Sanders, haue not they the same vertue, that the three Pepers haue?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        NO sir, for ye Sanders be Wood, or a Tree called Santalum,
                        The three kindes of Sanders. of three kyndes: the pale, the whyte, and the red, cold in the seconde degree. And all these be holsome to stop flixes, and woundes: and with Rosewater, Saunders be holsome, to be applied to ye foreheade in a clothe, with a peece of a Rose cake, to aswage the hoat burninge paynes in the forehead. Sanders be holsome in Drynkes, to be gieuen to quench a hoat Feuer. Temper the Iuyce of Solanum, and Purssen,Sanders do
                              •
                            coole the head and reconcile sleepe & helpe the Gout. wyth Saunders, and the oyle of water Lyllies, and anoynte the raging Goute therewyth, and the paynes wyll vanishe away, through the vertue thereof Auicen in libro de viribus Cordis, affirmeth Sanders bee put in sundry good

medicines, against the trembling of the heart. I noble Dia is made thereof, called Di
                              •
                           trion Santalj.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Cardamomum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Graynes of Paradice called Cardamomum.
                        
                        CARDAMOMVM, is a precious spice, called the graine of Paradice, growing in Arabia Foelix: the best be the heauiest and sharpest, bitter of tast in the mouth, with a pleasaunt verdure, flening vp into the head, or Pallet of the mouth: these be hoat of nature, and to be drunke agaynst the falling sicknesse.
                           Cardamomū
                            helpeth the Faling sicknesse. 
                        Sciatic
                              •
                           , Cough, resolution of the Synewes, Ruptures, paynes in the b
                           •
                        lly, and kill Wormes in the Belly, and prouoke Uryne. A dragme drunke to Wyne, with as mutch of the barke of Laurus, breaketh ye stone: the common graynes be nigh hande as good, and are hoat and dry.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Laurus, called the Baie?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT hath bene in great estimation, since Tyberius Caesars tyme, which was crowned with Bayes: it signifieth victory, and is of a fiery nature. For example, cast two dry Baie stickes ouer eche other, and cast a little pouder of Brimstone betwene them, and eftsoones fire will flame forth. Merueylous things be written of the Bay tree: reade Theophrastus. lib. 4. Cap. viij. Galen. lib. 7. simplic, medic. sayth, the Baie tree leaues and beries, do dry, and warme vehemently:
                           
                              Laurus called the Bay.
                           Agaynst the stone.
                         the more they be bitter, the more they are adstrictyue. They will breake the stone, and are good for a colde Lyuer, drunk in strong Wyne. ʒ.j. yet they are euill for Women wyth chylde. The berry is hoatter then the Leafe, and the Oyle is holsome agaynst colde Agues, and goodly plasters be made thereof.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     THe children of Israell, in their hunger had Manna falling from Heauen, during their passage in the Wildernesse: and after their comming ouer the Ryuer of Iordan, they were fed no more therewith. And as I do heare say, there is a certayne Manna, whych our Apothecaries do sell, to delicate persons, to quench the heat of choller, and purge their bloud wythall.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Manna. Exod. xvj. Sapi. xvj. Psalm. 78. Ihon. 6.
                        
                        THE children of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, were fed by the prouidence of God: because he
                           •
                         was their God, and they his owne people. Hee prouided for them by myracle, because they should loue hym, and honour hym aboue all earthly thinges, for feeding them with heauenly Breade, called Manna, whych as the holy Wryters affirme, was ye Spirituall foode, euen Iesus Chryste: wyth whych the true faythfull Chrystians, are most comfortably nourished within the blessed sacrament of Chrystes body, whych is our redemption, once bodyly offered on the Crosse, & daily in the congregation of ye faithful, spiritually mynistred in the holy Sacraments, vntil th'end of yt World according to his promise.

But thys Manna, which we do vse in bodyly medycine, is a sweet lyquour, whych doth still from the Ayre, in the tyme of the Canicular dayes▪
                        Manna of Calabria.
                         fallyng vpon Trees, Braunches. Herbes, Flowers, and Stones. &c. Some Manna commeth from the Orient, and other from Calabria, whych is sweet, light and in small graynes, mutch lyke vnto Mastike.
                        Manna of the Ashe tree in Italy. There is a Citty in Calabria called Coslentia, and the Ashe trees about the same once a yeare in the Canicular dayes, haue great plenty of Manna hanging vpon them. There is but little dyuersity betwene Manna and Teryniaben, but that thys is lyke drops of Hony, and wyll quenche heate, purge bloud, and relaxe the belly, & Manna wyll do the same, and is whyte and cleare lyke gum. And yet these two do descend from heauen. Galen, Plinie, and Theophrastus, remembrynge Manna, say: that in one time of Summer, there is Hony rayning from heauen vpon trees. &c. At which tyme, the Husbande men play, and singe,The great vertue of Manna for mankynde. saying: Iupiter rayneth Hony, Iupiter Melle pluit. This Manna is holsome for to clense the breast, lunges, raynes. &c. And of nature is hoat▪ temperate, and moyst, and the more it is to be lamented, by false craft it is sophisticated, or it cōmeth hether. And when it cōmeth into England, it is but little helped among some Apothicaries: and this Manna with Cassia is holsome to purge: and you may receyue Manna Simple. ℥.ij. in your drynke, or eate it lyke bread in the morninge, or at noone: it is most delicious, and pleasaunt to tender Folkes. Chyldren may eate. ℥.i. at once, and young Babes in their milke, may receyue. ʒ.ij▪ss.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Suger of the Cane?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           DIOSCORIDES remembring Suger. lib. 2. cap. 75. sayth,Suger of the Cane. there be Reedes in Arabia, in whych is a thinge contayned like Salt, & breaketh in the mouth lyke Salt, and is both pleasaunt, and good to the Belly & stomacke: deluted or steeped in water if it be drunk, it helpeth the raynes. And Suger is good to clense the darknesse of ye eyen. Suger is vsed in most Sirupes, and Iuleps, Manus Christi. &c. Suger cannot be spared in bankets, or garnishment of feastes: Although Suger cannot be simply made, from the panell, or sande, whych cometh from the Cane, wythout some arte, yet there is much craft in it, by sophisticacion, to make it trim to ye sale, sweete and pleasaūt, lyke Muske to the mouth more pleasaunte, than profitable. But the cleane clarifyed Hony,Hony is more excellent than Suger to preserue. doth excell for health the Suger, specially the Hony of Athens, where as the Bees feedeth most vpon tyme. Sugar Candy is good for the Lunges.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Spiknard?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     SPiknard is odoriferous, pleasant & sweet, comfortable to the brayne, & synewes, and warmeth ech part of the body being cold,Spicknard of Spaine▪ help
                              •
                           th 
                              •
                           he bray
                              •
                           
                         & is good to bee drunk against ye falling euill, Collicke, Flix, Cardiaca▪ Dropsies, & Hickit, & it wil increase hayre, ye pouder being tempered with Hony to anoynt ye place.

Spicknard beaten into pouder tempered with the Waters of Fenell,For sore eyes to help them. Roses, and Eyebright, putting a little Lapis tutia and Aloes Epatike, standing all the night together, and strayned in the morning▪ this dropped into dimme eyes, wyll comfort, scowre, and strēgthē the sight. And of nature it is hoat in the fyrst degree, and dry in the seconde. And thus I do end of Spica Nardi, whereof there be two kindes, one of Syria, and the other of Inde. Reade more thereof. Dioscorides. libi 1. Cap. 6.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Caphura, commonly called Campher?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Caphura called Campher, a gumme of a great tree of Iude.
                        IT is a Gum of a tree of Inde, whose bignesse, & breadth of the braūches be so large, that a. C. men or more, may be shadowed vnder the same: this tree groweth neere the sea syde, and the people of Inde do couer theymselues from the heate of the Sunne vnder the shadow of the same. There was a certayn kyng among them called Riach,
                        
                           Riach founde first Campher which found out the worthy vertue of thys Gum, and from the base coullour thereof did by arte change it into shining whytnesse, whych is the best Campher, all the other is but base and of small estimation. Some also say that Campher is a heauenly influence,Sundry opynions of Campher. cast downe by the violence of thunder, and lightning, and is gathered out of the earth like vnto Sulpher or Brimstone, although it be by the iudgements of Serapio and Auicen cold and dry in the third degree, and cōmeth from the Meridian part of the World: but there is mutch craft and sophistication of the Campher, through the craft & subtilty of straungers before it is brought into the Realme. But if you wyll know good Campher,Howe to know good Campher. do thys, take a new Manchet hoat from the Ouen and cut it a sunder in the middes, then put in the Campher and cloase the loafe loose together, then if the Campher do cast a moystnesse, it is the best argument to proue it to be good Campher, but if it remayne dry like vnto earth, then it is false, and counterfait: good Campher wyll burne vppon Snowe, and also in Water, it ought to be kept close, couered about wyth Flax seede, Pepper, or sutch lyke, for by it selfe it wyll waste away quickly: it is put in many goodly oyntments to quench the heat that is aboue nature & to extinguish carnall Lust,Campher wyll quench nature. as to temper it with the Iuice of Nightshade, Uinegar, and water Lillyes, then to anoynt the Testicles or priuye partes, and this shall quench the heat of nature: it wil also reconcile sleap, to make an oyntmēt with Rose water, Oyle of water Lillyes, & Womans Mylke,To cause fleape. and to annoynt therewith the Temples▪ and Foreheade. Planten water and Campher, wyll stop the bleeding at the nose: it is put in goodly oyntmēts to clense ye spots from the face, & the filth from the skin: it preserueth the eyes frō blindnes tēpered wyth medicines accordingly. It stoppeth the running of ye Raines & white Fluxes passing from Womē,To stop the whites & running of the Raynes. drunk with the Iuyce of water Lillyes: it is good agaynst ye Pestilence, & finaly it wyll preserue a dead body from stincking putrifaction. And thus I end of Campher called Caphura. Vitex called Agnus Castus is also of the Nature of Campher,
                           Agnus Castus or Vitex for chastity. to dry vp the seede of Generacion, but in complexion as

                        Galen sayth, it is hoat and dry in the thirde degree, bitter of taste and bynding Reade Galen therof. lib. 24. cap. 9. And Dioscorides the fyrst booke the. 116▪
                         Chapter of the nature of Agnus Castus doth greatly laude it for ye syngular vertue, being so goodly an instrumēt for chastity. And how the Women of Athens that professed chastity did straw the Leaues thereof about their Beds. And thus I do end of Agnus Castus, that is to say, chaste
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Sulpher, called Brimstone?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           SVLPHER called Brimstone,
                           Sulpher or Brimstone. is hoat and dry in the fourth degree: with this Sulpher, and fyre, God plaged the People of Sodom, and Gomor, for their abhominable Sinnes against Nature. Su
                              •
                           pher is one of the simples put into the receypt of Gunpouder, wherewyth God by his instruments hath plaged the proude World with, through mercilesse Gunnes, Sulpher is found in diuers partes of ye worlde, as in vaynes of the Earth, Welles, Pittes, aswell in the colde partes of Iseland, as in the hoat partes of Inde. Of a sulpherous humour it is presupposed that the waters of the Bathes heere in England haue their continuall warmnesse. Also in Italy in the fielde Senensis,
                        Bath springe came from a vayne of Brimstone. vpon ye mountaines not farre from the warme Bathes of S. Philip, is mutch Brimstone foūde, therefore it is none errour to say that the hoat Bathes haue their originall spryng of Brimstone. Sulpher hath vertue to dry vp Scabbes being tempred wyth fasting spittle, Uinegar, and Swynes grease. It also helpeth Leprous, Scabbes, and Poxes, being sodden in Oyle Debay, and sharpe Uinegar. And Galen sayth, that it doth resist the venom of Serpentes.To clense scabbes. Notwythstanding through the heate thereof it wyll exulcerat, if it be not corrected. And thus I end of Brimstone, the whytest & clearest is the best.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Hetherto haue I not remembred the noble Rose, wyth his singular vertues, I pray you shew mee the nature of the same?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           DIOSCORIDES wryting vpon the Rose.The Rose, a friend to the brain, & eye
                              •
                           . 
                        lib. 1. Cap. 112 sayth that the Rose is colde, and bynding, and is friendly vnto the eyes. Roses being fyrst dryed in the shadow, and sodden in Wyne, the same lyquor is good for ye paines in the heade, Eyes, and eares,Oyle of Roses for ye head. the places to be washed or annoynted therewyth. The Oyle of Roses is of a syngular vertue to bee put in Linementes, for to coole hoat burning Ulcers, inflamations, and sutch like, because it will resolue, & also extinguish, & comfort woundes in the head, through any stripe or fall. And of this Galen doth remembre lib. x. simplic. medic de sanguine. There is a precious oyntment of Roses called Vnguentum Rosarum, whose vertue is to extinguish the heate of the Raynes of the backe, and it reconcileth sleepe for to haue the Temples, and Forehead anoynted therewith, if it be made sweete and white according to Arte.
                     There are sewe Cordials can wante the helpe of Roses, and Rose water.

And as Dioscorides sayth, when the Rose is pulled from the bushe, the whitest must be cut away from the red wyth a payre of Sheeres, whych red leaues must be dryed, preserued, or stilled to the vse of medicine. There bee dyuers and sundry kyndes of Roses, as the red Rose, the whyte Rose, and the prouince Rose,Sundry kindes of Roses all of great vertue. whych is excellent in medicine, and most pleasant to be smelled vpon, comfortable to the Brayne, and Heart: among all Flowres none excelleth the prouince Rose for his manyfolde vertues: as agaynst ye trembling of the heart, dimnesse of sight, frensies, lacke of sleepe, corruption of the Ayre, heate aboue Nature, Flixes. &c. Of Succus rosarum is made the most excellent electuarie to purge choller with all. The waters of Roses excelleth all other waters, if they be purely stilled. Read Plinie the 21. lib. cap. 4. whych wryteth most copiously of the natures, shapes, & vertues of Roses. The more leaues that Roses haue, the preciouser they bee. The best Roses of the World do grow in Italy,The best Roses be in Italy. and Fraunce. The Roses of England bee not mutch inferiour vnto theym. The little yellow tuftes growing within the Roses, finely beaten into pouder, be holsome to stanch bloud, to kill Wormes, to clense the Canker in the mouth, and to take Pollipus from the Nose. There be also many wylde stinking Roses, as Theophrastus maketh mention. lib. 6 cap. 6. de historia Plantarum. There is also Rosa Solis which is distilled to make a water compounded to preserue nature withall: and thus I do end of this precious flower called the Rose, which the Arabians for the excellent sweetnesse thereof▪ doth call Narde.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Alum?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Alum.
                        
                           DIoscorides doth remember the same in his .5. booke, the 22. cap. saying it cōmeth out of Aegypt, founde where as mettals do grow, & in many other places, as in Melo, and in Macedonia: also there is great plenty thereof in Italy, whych is most whyte and cleare, it is hoat and dry in the fourth degree, and is very holsome in the cure of Cankers:Alum for the Canker. and if it bee sodden wyth Planten water, it helpeth vlcers yt seeme incurable: sodden wyth Hony and Uinegar alone, it will stablishe & make fast teeth. Alum doth cleanse & scoure, & is vsed in many medicines: brunt alone,Burnt Alum consumeth flesh. maketh Corosiues to corode, consume, & take away dead flesh: you may reade more thereof in Galen. lib. 4. simpli. medica. of ye vertue of ye clensing, and the scowring. Alum is profitable in euery common wealth, where as good clothes be made.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Quickesiluer?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THere is mutch variety wheather it should be hoat or colde in the .4 degree,Quicksiluer or Mercury. but it should seeme rather to be hoat, by reason it doth dissolue and pearce: it hath vertue to consume, and it is perillous to be vsed in oyntments to kill scabbes with all, for it is percing, and subtill, that at length it will come into the inwarde partes, where as finally it will mortify and kill. It is founde in Minerals of Syluer, and is a destroyer of other mettals. Wyth this Quickesiluer and Sal Armoniake,
                        
is made Mercury sublimate, whych must bee kept in a close vessel,Mercury sublimate. adusted in a Ouen, or burnt vntill it come to the couler of whyte Suger, whych Mercury sublimate is vsed of Chirurgians for to cleanse foule vlcers and soares, and is a poyson inwardly to be taken, except with al speede after the same a vomet be taken of Oyle or Azarabaccha. If Quickesiluer bee taken inwardly, it is also pearillous, and nothinge better to helpe it, than to drinke Wormewood wyne with the seede of Clary boyled therein. Marueylous thinges be done by meanes of Quicksiluer as the Chimistes doth know, and yet for all that wee see little Golde multiplied thereby. Thus to conclude, Quicksiluer may bee conueniently ministred in oyntmentes, to heale the Pox.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     I pray you what is the nature of Atramentum, of the Minerall?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     It is a naturall Corosiue, and hoat and dry in the third degree.
                           Atramentum.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of vnslecked Lime, called Clax viua?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is hoat and dry in the third degree: vnslecked Lime, oyle of Roses,
                           Calx vius Lime, helpeth rotten soares. ye Iuyce of Enulacampana and Uynegar, strongly beaten together in a leaden Morter with putting in Terebintine: maketh an Oyntment whych will heale scabbes, infecting the Thighes, or Legges, and al rotten vlcers.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Uerdigreace?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     IT hath vertue to consume superfluous flesh,Uerdigreace. and doth mundefie rotten humours, filthy vlcers, deepe stinking soares, and rebateth & consumeth proude flesh, and is the chiefe thing in Vnguentum Aegyptiacum,
                        
                           Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                         for Uerdygreace. Hony, Roche Alum, Wax, Oyle, and Uynegar, sodden together in a conuenient vessell, sturred together wyth a sticke till it come to a thycknesse, this oyntment is good Aegyptiacum whych hath the foresayd vertues, and is hoat and dry of nature.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus
                     What is the nature of Spodium?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        SPodium is colde and dry, and tempered with Roche Alum,
                           Spodium.
                         it will heale vlcers, and Cankred matter in the mouth.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Minium?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        MINIVM is vsed in dyuers linementes, and Cerotes,
                           Minium and Cerusse,
                         and by burning in the Furneis, it is made of Cerusse, and of nature is colde, and dry.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of Uernishe?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Uarnish.IT is good for Armorers, it hath vertue also to scower and clense soares, and woundes, and is hoat and dry in the seconde degree.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Sope?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           SMigma is called Sope. Sope cannot be forborne in any common wealth,
                           Smigma or Sope. for washing of Lynnen, and clensing of the Bodies of Men and Women, whych be defiled wyth sweate and filth, through trauell & labour. But it is perillous to be put into woundes, because it maketh separation: notwithstanding, it is hoat & dry, yet it doth neyther burne, nor adust. French Sope, Nighter, common Salt,French sope. ana. ℥.j. put in a little close stone vessell, with three spoonefulles of Uinegar, let it stande in the Fourneys, vntill it be dryed. Thys is good to wash the heade, in a little Malmesy, wherein Azarabaccha hath bin sodden, agaynst al coldnesse, and dulnesse of ye Brayne. French Sope mingled wyth the pouder of Elleborus Niger, called the roote of Beares foote, Uerdigreace, Litarge of Siluer and Golde, Tartar, and Quicksiluer corrected, beaten all together in a Leaden Morter wyth the Iuyce of houselike, and Stonecrop, maketh a goodly Oyntment to kill Tetters, blacke Morphew,Sope wyll kill Tetters. Ringwormes, Spots, and Melancholy, infecting the Skin. French Sope, Oyle of Roses, and the white of an Egge beaten together, are good agaynst scalding, or foule stinking Scabbes, or itch. It Sope bee applied in a Walnut shell to the Nauell of a childe, forthwith it wyll cause the vryne speedely to purge. Sope is vsed also among the emperikes, or vnlearned practicioners to be takē inwardly, to prouoke vrine & stoole: but thys practice is not to be cōmended. And thus I end of sope, called Smigma.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Leade?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Leade wyll coole▪ & helpe soares.
                        
                           GAlen. lib. 9. simpli. medica. sayth Leade to refrigerat and coole, it hath also humidite, and is a little earthly of nature, cold and moyst in the second degree, and is good agaynst foule cankred soares, and filthy vlcers, fistulaes, Emeroides. &c. thus washed. White or red Leade beaten wyth an Iron Pestill in a Leaden Morter pooring in oyle of Roses,Burnt leade. or Vnguentum Rosarum, labour it well, and then it will make a good oyntment for hoat burning soares, & will resolue ye hardnesse of them. A plate of Lead is good to coole the burning of the raynes: Plumbum vstum burnt Leade wyth Brimstone, hath vertue to corrode and waste superfluous flesh.
                     
                        Iron do mū
                           difie & clense.Iron doth mundify mutch, and is colde and dry in the second degree, so is Scoria or Rubigo, called ye skales or rust of Iron, but more dryver: stamped in a Leaden morter, wyth Uynegar and oyle of Roses, it maketh a good cooling & drying oyntment. And the rust of Iron beaten fine and sodden with strong Uynegar is holsome to be dropped into soare running eares, reade Galen, lib. 9. simplici. medicam. Calebs, or Steele made hoat, quenched in red Wyne and drunke, doth stop the Flixe.
                     
                        
                        Spodium is cold and dry of nature,
                           Spodium stop
                              •
                           peth bloud. blackish and heauy, tempered with Olibanum, sanguis draconis, and Beanemeale beaten in a Leaden morter, it will stop bloud. Spodium with Roch Alum, and strong Uinegar, beatē together, wyll kyll the Canker in the mouth. Spodium commeth from Furnaces of Brasse, or Copper Reade of this Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 46. and Galen, lib. 9. simplic. medic. Of Spodium and Pompholix,
                        
                           Cadmia.
                         it is rather a kinde of Cadmia than Tutia, and is tollerable to put into Collyries for sore Eyene.
                     Golde, the most pure and vndefiled mettell,Golde ye most vndefiled, and pure mettel. not Leprosse which Sol hath digested by heauēly influence. This mettell is most rich. This gold is not more profitable to our worldly businesse, than holsome for medicines, specially as Auicen sayth, for to put away Melancholy, and to make burninge actual cauteres of Gold is holsom, as if any filth be in the mouth, to burne the same wyth Golde is most best, so it is whan ye 
                        vvula is fallen: a Cautery of Golde is best, in medicens of Cordials.Gold put into Cordials. Golde is holsome to deaurate, or gilde Losinges. And for the dimnesse of sore eyen, Golde is tollerable for thē in some Colories, & is good for Leproses: all Mettels will corrupt, when as Gold wyll remayne vndefiled. God graunt wee vse Golde as a seruaunt, but not as a Mayster, for then wee are bonde Slaues: for Gold wyll not helpe in the day of vengeance.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Salte?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        WIthout Salte we lyue not, it is vsed commonly in our meates.Salt, what it is. Wyth Salt, Flesh, Fish, and many fruicts be preserued. The great Ocean Sea is Salt, through which Saltnesse the earth is kept from poyson, through the exhalacions, or vapour comming from it. Salt is of nature hoat and dry,Salt hath vertue to warme & dry. and hath vertue sayth Dioscorides lib. 5. cap. 85. to scoure, stop, warme, dry, and mundify, and defendeth from putrifaction, and is put into supposytories & Clisters to clense, wyth Hony & Uinegar: with Organ, and Hysop it maketh a good medicine agaynst stinging, or byting of Dogges, Snakes, Adders. &c. Salt, Uinegar, and Sugar sodden together, maketh a good holsome drynke agaynst the drynking of Opium, or eating of the Moys
                           •
                        oms called Fungus. Salt is good agaynst the vlcers of the mouth, to burne Salt, and make it white, wash it once in Water,To dye Salt. poureforth the water, and gather the Salt in the bottom, and put it into a stone vessell couered, and put it into the Ouen, & couer it with coales, and dry it, and so it may be vsed in medicine. Oribasius affirmeth Salt to be compoū
                        ded of matter Abstersiue and stiptike, whych is matter bindinge, and drying moyst humours: but salt is not good for leane persons,Salte not good for leane persons. it wyll make them seeme old, and mooueth anger to the Chollerike. Mutch salt is made in England, as of Sand and Salt water Pits, in Hollande in Lyncolnshyre, and only by a marueylous humour of water, at the Wytch, far from the sea: and in ye North there is salt made, at the shiles by Tinmouth Castle. I Bullein the author hereof haue a pan of salt vpon the same Water. At Blith in Northumberland is good salt made,Sir Ihon Delauall, a good knight. and also at sir Ihon Delauals Pannes, whych syr Ihon Delaual knight hath bin a Patrō of worship,

and hospitalitie, most like a famous Gentleman, during many yeares: and powdreth no man by the salt of extorcion, or oppressing his neyghbour, but liberally spendeth his Salt, Wheat, and his Mault, like a Gentleman, I neede not put his name in remembraunce in my booke, for it shall lyue by immortall good fame,The floweyng of Salt at Nilus. when my poore booke shal be rotten, deare brother Marcellus.
                     
                     There be also sundry kindes of Salt, among which there is a Salt flowing about the brinkes of that famous Riuer Nilus called Flos Salis, the flower of Salt, of a Saffron colour, of tast and sauour vnpleasaunt, whych Flos Salis is put into sundry Oyntmentes to heale soores about the priuye parts, or other places of the skin. In colliries it is tollerable for to clense sore eyen. And tempered with Vnguentum Rosarum, or other Ointmentes, it moueth sweat to all the body,
                           Sal Gemmae
                         well rubbed with the same.
                     
                        Sal gemmae, is a Salt of the earth, plenty is digged thereof in Calabria in a place called Altomonte, and is cut forth like stones most cleare Translucens, or through shinyng like to Chrystall, which if this salt be cast into the fier, it wil not cracke nor breake, but kepe styll whole, burnyng like Iron. Plinie maketh large mencion of Salte. lib. 21. cap. 7. saying that Salt is either growing naturally in the Earth,
                           Plinie of salt. or in veines of hilles. &c. or els made of Salte water sodden in Pannes, vnto a thycknesse, whereof common Salte is made.
                     
                        Salt Armoniac is hoat and dry in the fourth degree. sayth the Pandact, saying that it commeth from Armoniac, and is made of Camels vryne: but it is called of the best writers Sal Ammoniacus,
                        
                           Sal armoniac. doth clense th skinne. that is found vnder ye sands in Aphrike neare vnto the Oracle of the God Ammon, and also in the regiō called Cyrenaica, which salt is blacke without and whyte within like Alum, but not very bright, noisome to the mouth, but holsome in medicine, to clense the skinne, myngled with Campher and Rosewater tempered together and made warme:Salt of Inde Many and sundry Lotyons for Apostimacions and soores, he made with these saltes, and they must be mingled with other simples.
                     
                        Sal Indus groweth in Inde, through the heat of the Sunne, vpon Reedes, which salt is mutch lyke Suger. With Suger and common salt, the Apothicaries do sophisticate and craftely counterfeit this Salt.
                           Sal Niter. or Peter, for Gun pouder. Spuma nitri or Barach.
                        
                     
                     
                        Sal Nitrum, or Saltepeeter. is digged in vaultes, flowers of houses, or walles, which Salte is white, whan this is prepared: thereof wyth other receiptes, as Cooles, Brimstone &c is Gunpouder made, whych doe shote of Gunnes, whych are the instruments of Gods wrath. And Spuma nitri, is is called Barach of the Arabians:Salt of Mare Mortuum. whereas Sodome stoode. Asphaltum.
                         of these saltes read Dioscorides. lib. 5. cap. 86. Galen. lib xi. simplicium medicamentorum: further sayth Galen in the same booke, there is salt made of the water of Maremortuum, the dead sea, whereas Sodome and Gomor stodde, called Asphaltnm.
                     
                     Salt of ye Earth is grosser, and more colder astringing, than the salt of salt water: but there is a salt called salte vpon salte, whych is very good to the vse of Man, so is Baie salt, whych through the Marche wynd is so made and fynished, which wyl contynue for euer lyke stone, beynge kepte close but

yet Salt peter wyll grow therein at length: and thus I end of salt, which the Arabians call Mesha.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        I Haue seene sundry saltes before this time: as white salt & Bay,Bay Salt. whych we do vse to pouder Flesh, and Fish wythall. I woulde your salt Peter had neuer bin knowen, whereby Gunnes do so mutch mischiefe, and ye noble state of Mankinde through them are decayed,Boies can kil the strongest men wyth Gunnes. yea through a very vile Coward or Boy, often the valiaunt man is slayne & cast away, But Hilarius, I will a little more proceede in simples, and leaue Gunning matters, to the Men of Warre, or Seruitors to ye noble Prynces: now I pray you what is the nature of Spuma maris, and Fumus terrae?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THese are two cleane contrary simples, of .ij. sundry natures, the one of the land called Fumaria,
                        
                           Spuma maris Fumus terrae.
                         an herbe ingendred of the Fume or vapour of the Earth, Dioscorides. lib 14. Cap. 105. in forme mutch like Coriander, and in couler like Ashes, purple flowers, bitter of taste, ye Iuyce will make cleane sore eyen, and thys Herbe drunke,Against stopping of the Splene. Fumitery doth preuayle. the Decoction thereof wyll purge choler by vrine. Fumus terrae, or Fumaria, is good agaynst the stopping of the Splene, Lyuer, Gaule, or Raynes, and doth make strong the Uentricles, through the drynesse, warmnesse, sharpnesse, & bitternesse, sodden in Wyne, stilled, or in syrupe, and so drunk. And so I do end of this Fumus called Capnos: but as for Spuma maris, the Fome of the Sea, it hath vertue to clense,
                           Spuma maris doth make clene ye teeth▪
                         scowre, and, dry and is cold and dry in the third degree: it is good to rub the Teeth, to clense them: and the fyne pouder thereof wyth the white of an Egge, Rose water and Sief beaten together, put into the eyes,To clense sore eyen. doth clense them, and taketh away the Web: and thus I do ende of Spuma maris, or ye Stone whych the Scriueners do rub, and make cleane their Parchment wythall. What haue you els to say?
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Spongia, the Sea Sponge?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           GALEN. lib. 11. simplic. medic. sayth that they did vse Sponges to be a manuel instrument to receyue bloud,Sponge of the Sea. wherewith they vsed to wype and dry bloud in Woūdes: and also they do receiue thynges to stop bloud. A sponge is hoat in ye fyrst degree, and dry in the second, it is of a resoluing vertue.Sponge good for woundes. A sponge adust, or burnt not mutch, the pouder thereof wyll consume fleshe, whych is superfluous, and may be put in Woundes of the Head. Wyth a Sponge whych is soft, tentes for the heade may bee made. Wyth sponges sodden in Wyne, and Oyle of Capers it is good to washe, and chafe the left side: nothinge is better to anoynt the Stomacke for a Pleuresy than wyth a spong in warme Oyles, as of Myntes, Chamomel, Roses, the grease of Hens, Capons, and Duckes.Sponges new are good but olde are euill. Newe sponges are holsome of them selues, & wyll heale woūdes, wtout any thyng put to thē. Old sponges be euil. Pitch & the Ashes of Sponges together, wyll stop bloud.

A sponge sodden in Hony, will heale and resolue Woundes, and harde Apostumations,Sponge stones do breake the stone. Reade more thereof Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 96. and Aristotle of the nature of sponges, whych grow among the rockes of the Sea, and haue stones in them beaten in pouder, and drunke, wyll breake the stone in the bladder.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Corall?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe Indians haue Corall in no leste estimation, than we haue their Diamondes and great Perles.Coral groweth 
                              •
                           n ye Sea. 
                        Diosco. lib. 5. Cap. 97. calleth Corall Lethrodendron, whych is a braunch growinge in the bottome of the Sea, whych by certayne meanes is drawen forth, and soone turned into hardnes, and eftsones into a stone: we do see of this Coral great plenty of beades, more vaine glorious,Coral of two kyndes. than religious godly. Of Coral be two kyndes, ye red which is best, and white which of nature be cold and dry in the second degree, and be restrictiue and stopping. Coral beatē in pouder, myngled with Dragons bloud,To stoppe bloude. whytes of Egges, Bolearmeni and the Iuyce of Sheperds purse, Knot grasse, and Rabbets woll beaten in a Leadē Morter, will stop bloud. The pouder of Coral drunk wyth Wyne, prouoketh vrine, and wyll rebate the swelling of the Splene, and finally as Auicen sayth, doth comforte the heart,Coral prouoketh vryne, and helpeth digestion. The Pouder of Corall wyll cleanse woundes, in whom flesh superfluous doth remayne, and also heale ye same. What is beter to stop a bloudy flixe, called Dysenteria? it stoppeth both the flix of men, running from them in their sleape, and also the whites from Women. Reade more in Matthiolus vpon Dioscorides. lib 5.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Pearle called the Margarite?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        The Margarit or Perle—good in Cordials.THe Pearle is not only riche and pleasant to behold, but also holsome and good in medicine. Plinie. lib. 9. cap. 35. sayth, that there be plenty of Pearles in Arabia, in the mouth of the Red sea, growing within the shelles, called the mother of Pearle, in whych they are conueyed: the vnion which is cleane, bryght, whyte, round, and heauy, is the richest. The pouder of Pearle is good to be put in cordialles, as Manus Christi, and the same pouder with the white of an Egge, will clense the eyes. About thys Realme many Pearles be gathered in Muscels, and other Shell fishe, but not the most orient.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     Is there any vertue in Lapide lazulj?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THere is nothing better to purge Melancholy. There be Pilles called Pilulae de Lapide Lazulj,
                        
                           Lapis lazulj.
                         againste olde Quartens, or Madnesse: thys stone is colde and moyst.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Saphyrus?
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           DIOSCORIDES affirmeth,
                           Saphyrus resist poyson. this heauenly coloured precious stone, is wholsome to be drunke against the stinging of Serpents, to resyst the poyson: and being drunke it helpeth all exulcerations of the Guttes, and also is holsome for sore eyen, to cleare the sight. Many goodly vertues are belonging to the Saphyr, as chastity &c Yet it is not cold inough for the quenching of Venus They say the Turquois wyll kepe a man from fallyng, but it is a lye. The rich Hemerald, some saye, wyl declare whan the knot of Mariage is vndone, and than it wyll separate and break a sunder, and that were a perilous case to lose a good Iewel for an euil wife:Fables gathered. with many sutch folish old fables gathered out of some writers which haue rather vnwittily reported, than truly proued the nature of stones so farre passing theyr natures, although they be of great vertue, and both pleasaunt and profitable to mankynd, and nothing vnder heauen more rich or costly.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     IF the Emeraldes would so quickly breake or cracke whan sutch parts be played, I assure you there would be great losse in costly Iewels, and some separacion of friendship, but they be of mutch vertue and patience when sutch offences be committed, that they wyl tell no tales by breaking them selues: well let this matter passe, it is but to feare folkes withal, and I pray you what say you of Lapis Naxius, and the Iasper.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THe pouder thereof with Beares grease wyl increase hayre,
                           Lapis naxius, helpeth to increase hayre. and kepe one from baldnesse. This stone wyl make smal a maydens Breastes, and defend them from growyng: if the pouder thereof with Uineger be drunke, it wyl consume the greatnesse of the Spleane. And this stone is good against the falling sycknesse.Iasper doeth comfort digestion. The Iasper is holsome to bee hanged about the necke, downe to the mouth of the stomacke, for it is comfortable to the same sayth Galen, lib. ix. simplic. medicamentorum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What then of Lapis Tucia, and Lincis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is vsed in many vlcers, and foule stinking Cankers,
                           Lapis Tutia and lapis Lincis.
                         for through the coldnesse and drynes, it doth clense and incarnate foule sores: and this Tucia is most excellēt, if it be prepared, to be put into Colliries to clense the eyen. What is better wyth Planten Water to clense the yard? Lapis Lincis, is hoat and dry, ingendred of the vryne of Lynx, and is good in pouder. ℈iij. to be drunk at once, or put into Cassiafistula. ℥.i. to consume the stone, and clense the Raynes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the stone called Byzabar.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     THe Arabians do call it Bizabar, whych Stone is precious, and resysteth Poyson,
                           Bizabar 
                           
                              •
                            precious and is put into precyous Antidotaries whych preuayle agaynste

all foule ayre, pestilence and venim. This stone is yellow wythout oder or smell:stone agaynst poyson. if it be hanged vpon the left arme, touching the flesh, it wil preuaile against the foresayd euils. looke Matthiolus lib. 5. Diosco. cap. 73.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What then of Lapis Phrygius?
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        GALEN lib. ix. simplic. medic. with this stone combust sayth he▪ I vse to help or clense stinking vlcers,
                           Lapis Phrygius for sore eyen. and it hath the same Uertue that Lapis Pyrites hath. And of this stone, medicines be made for sore eyen, myngled with Colliries accordyngly. And thys stone called Pyrites looketh lyke Brasse, and wrapped in Hony, then put it in a small earthen Pot sutch as Goldsmithes do vse,
                           Pyritis lapis. against proud flesh. and set it in the fyer blowyng vntyll it be red hoat so coule it: and this stone in pouder wyll clense scower, and consume flesh superfluous,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Haematist?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Alexander Tralianus vpon the Hematist for the flixe.IT is cold and bynding of nature. Alexander Tralianus sayth, I haue often times without any Thyriaca or any precious medicine cured many, namely by the Haematist stone, for them that had the bloudy flix: and wyth the Pouder of this stone, the iuices of Pomgarnets, and Knot grasse, myngled together: of this. ℈.iiii. was his dose in this iuice for the flix.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Iette.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           Ieta for the Mother.THereof is great plenty in England and Ireland, and at Whithe in the North: it hath vertue beyng drunk to clense the bladder: & burnt, the Smoke doth helpe theim whych swell and are in peryll wyth the Mother.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Lapis Magne?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        The magnet stone.
                        THe best is that whych wyl draw Iron or Ste
                           •
                        le to him: geuen three halfe peny weight in pouder tempered with sweete water, it wyll cast forth fylth and groose matter out of the body. Plinie sheweth. lib. xxxiiii. Cap. xiiij. that one builded a Temple, couered with this Magnes stone, wherein hys Image with pompe was brought in, which was made of Iron, which ascended by attraction, and did hang in the roffe; his name was Arsion. The Arabians and Mahumetans did in like case bryng in the steele Toumbe of maister Mahumet (theyr iuglyng false Prophet) into a Temple of Magnes stones, whose nature was to draw the sayd Toumb vp. But the best seruice that the Magnes doth, is in the Ship, for the compasse of sayling in true settyng the needle. Also in plasters the pouder thereof to draw forth Iron or prickes from the flesh.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of the flesh of Oxen, Steeres or Bulles, and Calues.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius
                     
                        I Wyl not vndertake to shew myne opinion at your request onely, but I wil also declare the mynds of some wise and learned men: and fyrst of Simeon Sethi, who saith that the flesh of Oxen,Of the flesh of Oxen, steres, Bulles, and Calues. that be younge doth mutch nourish and make them strong that be sed wyth Beefe, but it breedeth choller adust, and melancholious diseases, it is cold and dry of nature, and hard to digest, except it be eaten of chollericke persons, but being tenderly sodden,Beefe good for the cholorike, but euyll for tender stomackes. it nourysheth mutch: Beefe customably eaten of idell persons, and nice folke that labour not, bringeth many diseases, as Rasis saith: and Auicen saith, that the flesh of Oxen, or Kine, be very grose, ingendryng ill Iuice in the Body, whereof oftentime come scabs, Cankers, and Biles: but vnto hoat strong chollerike stomackes, it is tollerable and may be vsed as wee haue the daily experience thereof. The broth wherein the Beefe hath ben sodden,Beefe broth agaynst the flixe. is good to be supped or drunke half a pynte euery mornyng against the flix of the belly, and running forth of yellow choller, if the sayd broth bee tempered wyth Salt, Mustarde, Uinegar, or Garlike, commonly vsed for sauces to digeste the sayd Beefe wyth all: for the said sauces doe not only help digestion, but also defend the body from sundry inconueniences, and dyuers sycknesses, as Dropsies, Quartens, Leprosies, and sutch lyke. The Gaule of an Oxe, or a Cowe distilled in the Month of Iune, and kept in a close Glasse,Oxe Gaule clense the eyes doth helpe to clense the eies from spottes, if you put a drop of this water with a fether into the eyes when yee goe to bed: the Milte of a Bull dryed, and the pouder thereof drunke with Red wyne, wyl stop the bloudy flixe:Oxe Mylte stop the flixe. lyght poudred young Beefe is better: than either fresh or mutch poudred▪ in specially of those cattell that be fed in fayre and dry pastures, and not in stynking Fens. the great learned man Gesnerus in his description of beasts, doth wryte more of the vertues of Bulles, Oxen, Kine, and Calues,
                           Gesnerus writeth mutch of brestes, the male better then the female. than any other hath don and thus to conclude, the flesh of the Male beasts, is more better than of the female, and the gelded beasts, be more commodious to nature than anye of them, and the young flesh more commendable than the old, for it is moyster, and a friend to the bloud. Haliabas sayth, roasted flesh doth greatly nourysh the body, for it is warme and moist: baked meates be very dry: cleane boyled meates wyth holsome herbes, and fruicts. be excellent in vertue to comfort the body if they be nutrimental flesh.Calues flesh the profit thereof. Calues flesh doeth greatly increase nourish, and make good bloud. Specially the brawne or Muskels of the thigh, are best, sayth Maister Conrade Gesner, and further sayth he, if a man be wounded, then lay Calues flesh newly slayn to it, and this wyl defend the wound from apost
                           •
                        macion or swelling: and sodden in vineger, and warme applyed to any part, as armeholes,Against Ramishnes vnder ye armes. breast of them that stinke like a Ramme or Goate, it wyll take away the sayd stynke: also it helpeth the bityng of a Man or a mad Dogge, so that thys flesh remain vpon the sayd wound, during fiue dayes, and v. nightes close and not taken away.
                           Celsus for a vomitte.
                     
                     
                        Celsus in hys medicines agaynst the byting of Serpents, if nothyng can sucke it forth by medicine or boxing, sayth he, then drinke the broath wherein Geese or Ueale hath ben sodden, and then prouoke vomit.
                     
                        Great is the goodnes of this flesh, both in meat and medicine. Take the knuckel or sinew part of a Calfe, seeth it in Wyne and water, puttyng in Dates, Prunes, Reisynges of the Sunne, grated bread, Maces, Cloues▪ Fenell rootes, Liuerwort, Planten, Purs
                           •
                        en, fresh Capers, Borage, and Rosemarie flowers, sodden all together in a siluer, iron, or stone pot, close boyled that no aire can go forth. You may put in half a Cocke: this flesh and broth giueth health to them that are in consumption, weake bodyes, or them which be euill complexioned, or cold of nature. ouercome by Melancholy. &c.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the goodnes of Porke, or of gelded swine, Pigges, and Bores flesh. &c.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        Porke the commendacion thereof.
                        MOst of the auncient, and wisest Phisicions that euer were in this world, dyd consent, that of all flesh, the flesh of young gelded swyne, partly salted or poudered, was euer meat of the best nourishing, moyster, and colder than other flesh. For Isaac sayth, it is a flesh most moyst, except it be the flesh of Lambes. as Galen reporteth: yet it is not good for euery complexion, nor to euery age, but vnto youth and myddle age. And whereas Almighty God, dyd prohibite the Iewes to eate. swynes flesh: it was a figure to abstayne from vnclean thyngs, whych I leaue to the diuines. The Mahumites abhorre swynes flesh, because theyr drunken false Prophet and Pseudo Apostle was torn, and rent in pieces with Hogges:Swines bloud. beyng drunken and fallen into the mire: & now we must giue credence to tyme, and to learned Phisicions. The Bloude of Swine doth nourish mutch, as is seene in Puddinges, made with greate Otemeale,Pigges Peper, sweete suet, and Fenell, or Anisseedes. Younge Pigges be very moist, therefore Sage. Peper and Salt doth dry vp the superfluous humors of them when they be rosted.Tripes. They be not wholsome to bee eaten, before they be three-weekes old:Bacon. the Trypes and Guttes be wholsomer, and do nourysh better, than any other beastes Gutts. Bacon is very hard of digestion, and mutch discommended of some men. and is hurtfull onely vnto a hoat Chol
                           •
                        rike labouryng body▪ but a tender gammon of Bacon is tollerable, and very good flesh with wyne as custome doth proue it.
                     
                        Swine of Inde haue hornes.
                        Agatharsides sayth, that the swyne in Aethiopia haue hornes growyng vppon their heads, there be diuers kynds of swyne, both wyld, & tame: whose inward partes, be not mutch vnlike vnto mankynd, and for that Galen begā to make Anatomies of theim, in the beginning of his practise, teachynge the Chirurgians to do the like.Why hogges are diseased. These kynd of beastes do heare very easely, and be giuen mutch to sleepe, and wyll eate their owne Pigges, and feede vppon most vile thyngs: for which cause they haue most vile diseases, as Angina in the throat▪ sores, botches, and byles. If they be letten bloud in the veyne vnder the tongue, and Madder be giuen them and an herb called Pancis, otherwise named in Latine herba Trinitatis, it helpeth them, if it bee sodden in Whey. Those swine that vse to feede by the sea side. & eate of young Crabs, be deliuered of many diseases: if they doe feede vpon Polipodie, they shalbe deliuered

of the Pestilence. Amonge the Chrysten Men, Bores flesh is had in great estimacion, to be eaten in Winter: and chiefly vpon Chrystmas day. Galen doth greatly commend the same flesh, or Braune, to be eaten in wynter: and also this Bores flesh is proued in the tyme of Pestilence, to breake a plague sore. Bores grease, and his stones, or any part of them stamped together and warme applyed to the same sore, worketh that effect. And thus I do end of Swyne, which in their liues be most vile, noysome, and neuer good vntill they die.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertues of Lambes, and Weathers flesh?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           SImeon Sethi saith, Lambes flesh is partly warme,Lambs flesh good rosted. euil sodden. but superfluous moist, and euyll for flegmatike persones, and doeth mutch harme to them that haue the Dropsie, boneach, or a disease called Epialus, which is spitting of flegme, shyning lyke Glasse. Therefore, if Lambes flesh were sodden, as it is rosted, it would bryng many dyseases vnto the bodyes of them, without it were sodden in wyne, and some hoate Grosseries, herbes, or rootes. When a Weather is two yere olde, whych is fed vppon a good Ground, the flesh thereof shall b
                           •
                        e temperate, and nourisheth mutch. Hippocrates saieth, that the Lambe of a yere old, doth nouryshe mutch. Galen seemeth not greatly to commend Mutton, but that whych is tender, sweete, and not olde, is very profitable,Mutton. as experience and custome do daily teach vs. The doung, Tallow, and UUolle, bee very profitable in medicines, as Plinie sayth, and Conradus Gesnerus, de animalibus
                        ▪ and Galen in his thyrd booke de Alementis,
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     UUhat be the vertues of Goates, or Kiddes flesh?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THese be beastes very hurtful vnto young trees and plants but Simeon Sethi sayth,Kiddes flesh very good. that Kiddes flesh is easy of digestion, in health and sicknesse, they be very good meate, they be very dry of nature. Hippocrates sayth, it behoueth that ye conseruers and kepers of health, should study that their meat be sutch as the flesh of Kiddes,Flesh good for sicke persones. young calues that bee sucking, and lambes of one yere old, for they be good for them that be sicke, or haue euil complexion. Haliabbas sayth, that the flesh of Kids, doth engender good bloud, and is not so flegmatike, waterie and moyste, as the flesh of Lambes: they remaine Kiddes for sixe monethes, and afterward come into grosser, and hoatex nature, and then be called Goates: the flesh of them that be gelded are wholsom to eate, The lunges of them eaten before a man doth drynke, doth defend him that day from drunkenes,Goates flesh. as I haue heard, by the reports of learned men: but the flesh of old male Goates is euyl, and engendreth Agues, or Feuers.
                           Conradus. Gesnerus de animalibus Matthiolus super Diolco.
                         If the Uriue of Goats be distilled in May, with Sorel the water distilled is not hurtful nor noisome▪ but whosoeuer vseth to drink therof. ʒ.ii. morning & euening, it wil preserue him frō the Pestilence. The Milke of Goates I wil describe in the proper place.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Red, and fallow Deare:
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Dere red and fallow▪ bee spoylers of Corne.
                        THey are more pleasaunt to some, than profitable to many as appereth once a yere in the corne fields, the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates, and Simeon Sethi do playnly affirme that ye flesh of them doth engender euil iuice, and Melancholy, cold diseases,The wynter Dere better then the sommer. and Quartēs: the flesh of winter Deare, doth lesse hurt the body. than that which is eaten in Sommer, for in winter mans digestion is more stronger, and the inward partes of the body warmer, and may easelier consume grosse meats, than in sommer, as we see by experience, in cold weather and frostes, healthfull people be most hungrest. The lunges of a Deare sodden in Barly water, and stamped with Penidies, and Hony, of equall quantity,The lunges o
                              •
                            the Dere. to the sayd lunges, and eaten a Morninges doth greatlye helpe the old coughes, and drynesse in the Lunges: there be many goodlye vertues of theyr Hornes, bones, bloud, and tallow. Looke Conradus Gesnerus de animalibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Hares and Conies?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Of Hares flesh and Conies.
                        
                           AVICEN sayth, the flesh of Hares, is hoat and dry, an engenderer of Melancholy, not praysed in Phisicke for meate, but rather for medicine: for in deede if a Hare be dryed in ye month of March, in a Ouen or Furnice and beaten into pouder, and kept close, and drunke mornings in Beare, Ale, or whyte wine, it wyl breake the stone in the Bladder, if the pacyente be not old:The pouder of the Hare, for the stone. if chyldrens gummes be anoynted with the braynes of an Hare, theyr teeth wil easely come, and grow. The gaule of an Hare mingled with cleane Hony, doth clense watry eyes, or red bloudy eyes. The flesh of Hares must be tenderly roosted and wel larded, and spyced. because of the grosenes, but it is better sodden. The flesh of Conies, is better than Hares fleshe, and easyer of digestion, but Rabets be holsome, for meate of sycke people: and thus to conclude of Conies, experience teacheth vs, that they are good: they be cold and dry of nature, and small mencion is made of them amonge the auncient Phisicions,
                           Galeni de simp. medica.
                         as Galen sayth. I neede not to speake very long of euery kynd of beasts, as some of the beasts that be in Hiberia, like lyttle Hares which be called Conies.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the nature of a beast called Erinaceus, called the Porpentine, and Echinus called the Hedghog, which is ful of pryckes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                           DIOSCORIDES lib. 2. cap. 2. saith, the skins of them combust or burnt, and beaten in fyne pouder,
                           Erinaceus or Porpentine for baldnesse▪ to increase hayre. and tempered with Tarre, is a good oyntment for to increase hayre, and kepe of baldnesse. The dryed flesh of them sodden in Uineger and Suger, is good to be dronke

against the stoppyng of the raynes, conuulsions, Leprosies of flegme, or an euyll complexion. The pouder of this Porpētine must be kept close in a vessell for medycine. The pouder of the Hare whych is dryed in March,Hares pouder for the Raynes. must be vsed for the purging of the Raynes, and clensyng of the bladder, ye sayed pouder is to be drunke with whyte wyne, and Cassiafistula. Also the grease of the Propentine, or Hedghogge, with Beares grease and Laudanum, ana. ℥.i. beaten in a Leaden morter, this is a good oyntment against baldnesse or losse of hayre, to rub the place daily therewyth The Liuers of Porpentines dryed and beaten into pouder are good for the Raines, or Morbus Elephantiacus. Tese beastes be of cold nature. better for medicine than meate. and bee vermen or beastes of the nyght, armed against Dogges, with long prickes, and headed mutch like a Hare, with teeth according, and eares like an Ape. &c. The Urchin or Hedghogge is commonly knowen, and headded lyke a Swine or younge Pigge. The pouder of them as Plinie affyrmeth, beynge drunke, will helpe and defende the consumption: and thus I doe ende of this beaste called Echinus, which the Arabians call Caufed.
                        The Urchin or Hedghog. The Urchin of the the Sea is good for the belly, stomacke and vryne. Dioscorides lib 2. cap. 1.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     uWhat say you of the Fiber, Beuer, or Castor?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     THis Castor liueth by water and land, he loueth to feede vpon Crabs and Cankers of the Sea.Castor or Beuer. The stones of a Castor are a warme medicine, and preuayle against poyson, to be drunke or in oyntment. And the pouder of ye same stones be good to moue sternutation or neesyng, blowē into the noose Of the pouder. ʒ.ii. with Penyroyall, called Pulial. ʒii.ss tē
                        pered together in wine and drunke, wyl cause a woman in her trauel soone to be delyuered, and the seconds to folow, and finally to clense the body, and helpeth swellings, collickes Iliaces, syghinges, Cordiaces, Lytharges & poison drunke with Uineger: and in fine it is so warme, that it helpeth all the passions or sickenesses in the brest, belly, liuer, and sinewes,Castor stones do help all cold infirmites both in men & women commynge of cold: the Beuer stones be best, that be most graue and stronge of sauour and haue a liquor mutch like Cerase within the Cod, and couered with a naturall coueryng. Plinie. xxxij. cap. iij. Castor is good to help the Comitiall or fallyng sicknesse, to be drunke. The Oyle of them is also good for the Teeth, raynes. belly, brest, and to be dropped into the Eares.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the litle beast Mustela. called the Weesell or Wezell, which is commonly knowen?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     This Mustela called the Weesel, is commonly known: and this Weesel, the flesh therof sodden in Wine & drunk,The Weesel is good agaynst the fallyng sikenes and Struma. Angina or swelling of the throate. is a present remedy against all venim, poyson, and the Falling Sickenesse. with Uineger the grease of the Weesel sodden, is a goodly medicine to anoynt the Gout with all. The Bloud of Weesels is good to anoynte the Neckes. Throates, and stomackes of them whych haue Struma, that is, the swelling of the Throate

or the Falling sycknesse, or Palsie. The donge of the Weesell wyth Hony, Fenigreeke, and Lupines beaten together, is good to anoynt warme the throat, for the sycknesse called Struma: the gaule of the weesel tempered with the water of Fenell, is a present remedy for the dimnesse of the eye, to be put therein: and all the spottes as Morphew of the skin, is clensed therewyth. The Lunges of the Weesell is good in pouder,For to heale ye Morphew. to be drunk agaynst all the infirmities of the Lunges, with many other Uertues of the Weesell, and properties, as to kyl Mise and Rattes, to serue in the house like Cattes, but the sauour of the sayed Weesel is mortiferous and deadly. Plinie lib. 8. cap. 22.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Raynard the Fox, and the Beare?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe Lunges of the Fox is good in Medicine, for the sycke Lunges of mankinde.The Foxe the Beare the Badgarde. The grease of the Fox is also good for all Coldnesse, Palsey, and the contraction of the sinewes, and tremblyng of the body. The Beare is a beaste whose flesh is good for mankynd:To help baldnesse. his fat is good with Laudanum, to make an oyntment to heale balde headded men to receiue the hayre agayne. The grease of the Beare, the fatte of a Lambe, and the oyntment of the Fox, maketh a good oyntment to anoynt the feete against the payne of trauell or labour of footemen.Beare, Fox, and Brocke are good to helpe the Palsey. All the parts of the Foxe, the Badgar, and the Beare are good in medicine, or meate agaynste the Palsey, tremblyng or coldnesse of the flesh, or any of them. Ther is a common fable among the people, that is to say a Beare hath a disformed Whelp in the tyme of delyueraunce, without Members, whych is not true: for the Beare in the byrth hath all the members, as other beastes haue. Reade Matthiolus in Dioscorides lib. iii. cap. supra.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of a Birde, called the Osspraye.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        
                           Haleetus the Ospray a water Egle.
                        LIke as the Egle, and all kyndes of Haukes, doe pray and feede vpon the flesh of birdes: euen so God hath ordayned ye water Egle, called Haliaeetus the Osspraie, to fear the Fishes, and feede vpon them. And all Haukes, or Birdes of the Nature of Egles, with hard croked billes, are compted vncleane fleshe. Leui. xi. are not vsed common among vs, vnto this daye.Ospraies oile good to put in water to gather fi
                              •
                           h ready to be taken. Howbeit, the Oyle or grease of the Osspraie, is had in great estimacion to take Fish withall: and the head thereof dryed and beaten into pouder, maketh a good medicine for young infant chyldren, to be put into the Nosthrilles, to breake wynde very gentle. And the Gaule is wholsome for sore eyen to be dropped with the white of an Egge into them. And the geease and Gaule,Medicines made of the Ospray. wyl heale the stinginge and bityng of Serpentes, and also is good to be dropped into the eare to clense them, and h
                           •
                        lpe hearynge Reade Gesnerus. Lib. iij. de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Iuery.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     IT is good, to astringe or bynd, and to race it with Turmerike and Saffrō putting in Diacurcuma in Tabulis, sodden in the water of Endiue,Iuery. wherewith many people are helped of a perilous hoat and dry sicknes called R
                              •
                           gius morbus, or the yellow Iaundice.A drinke for the Iaundice.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Chickens and Hennes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        ALL foules, whych haue hard pennes, be strong of nature,Of house Cockes. Capons and Chickens. Their flesh mutch cōmended. as Chickens or Hennes, sayth Auenzoer, which be most commē
                        ded, and laudable of any other flesh, and nourishe good bloud and are light of digestion, and doe also comfort the appetite. Cocke chickens be better than Hennes. the Capon is better than the Cocke, they do augment good bloud and seede, as Rasis reporteth, and experience proueth in men. both whole and sicke. An old Cocke whych is well beaten after his feathers be pulled of, vntil hee bee all bloudy, and then cut of his head, and draw hym, and seeth hym in a close pot with fayre water, and whyte wyne, Fenell rootes, Burrage rootes, Uiolettes: Planten. Suckerie, and Buglosse leaues, Dates, Prunes, greate Reisons, Maces, and Sugar, and put into the Marie of a Calfe, and Saunders, maketh a very good broth, for them that bee sycke, weake,A good broth for a body which hath ben long sicke. or consumed: the braynes of Hennes, Capons, or Chickens, be wholsome to eate, to comfort the brayn and memory: and wyl cause young Childrens Teeth to grow quickly. And thus to conclude, these foresayd fowles be better for Idell folkes that labour not, than for thē that vse exercise, or trauell, to whom grose meates are more profytable. The Cocke is the best clocke, to keepe the tyme. Gesnerus lib. iij. de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Geese?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe flesh of wyld Geese and tame,Of Geese and Goslinges. are very grose and hard of digestion, as Auicen sayeth: the flesh of great fowles, as of Geese, bee slow and hard of digestion, for their humidite, doth breede Feuers quickly: but their Goselinges, or young ones, beyng fat, are good, & mutch commended in meates, Galen sayth, of the Flesh of Beastes, & Birds.Goose flesh breedeth Melanchory. But vndoubtedly, Geese, Mallardes, Pecockes. Swans, and euery foule hauing a longe necke, be all hard of digestion, and of no good complexions: but if these be well rosted, and stuffed, with Salt, Sage, Peper, and Onyons. they wil not hurt the eaters of them.The Barnakle of Scotland, neuer lay Egges, but are bred onely of the Ocean Sea, dead Gesnerus de Auibus. lib. 3. There be greate Geese in Scotland which brede vpon a place called the Basse, there be also Barnacles, whych haue a straunge generacion, as Gesnerus sayth, whych neuer lay Egs as the people of the North parts of Scotland knoweth, and least it shoulde seeme incredible to many, I wyl geue none occasion to any, either to mock, or to maruel: and thus I geue warning to them which loue their health, to haue these foresayd fowles somwhat poudered, or stopped with Salt, al the night before they bee roasted.
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Cranes flesh?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Cranes, are hoat, and encrease seede.
                        SImeon Sethi sayth, their flesh is hoat and dry, the younger be good but the old encrease Melancholy, they do engender seede of Generation, and beyng tenderly rosted, doth help to cleare the voice, and clense the pipe of the Lunges. Cranes be byrdes of a wonderfull prouidence, Gesnerus de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Duckes flesh?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THey be the hoatest of all domesticall or yard foules, and vncleane of feeding:Duckes are very hoat of nature and Melancholy▪
                         notwithstandyng though they be hard of digestion. & maruelous hoate, yet they wyl nourish the body, and maketh it fat. Hippocrates sayth, that they that be fed in puddels, and foule places, be hurtfull, but they that be fed in Houses, Pennes, or Coopes, are nutriue, but verye grose, as Isaacke affyrmeth. There are sundry kyndes of Duckes. Gesnerus de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Pigeons, Turtles, or Doues?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     THe flesh of Turtles is merueilous good, and equall to the best birds: and Auicen sayth,Doues are very hoat. they bee best when they be young, and wholsome for flegmatike people▪ 
                        Simeon Sethi affirmeth, that the house Doue is hoater than the Field Doue, and doth engender grose bloude, the common eatyng of them is euill for cholerike persones with red faces,Of Doues. for feare of Leprosie▪ therefore cut of the feete, wynges, and head of your Pigeons or Doues, for theyr bloud is that, which is so venemous through heat: they be best in the Spryng tyme, and Haruest, and Isaack sayth, because they are so lightly conuerted into choller, they dyd commaund in the old tyme, that they should be eaten wyth sharp Uineger,Doues flesh. must be eaten with Uineger. Purssen, Cucumbers▪ or Citrōs. Roosted Pigeons be best, the bloud that commeth out of the right wynge, dropped into ones eye, wyll sone helpe the eye, if it swell, or prycke: and thus mutch haue I spoken of Pigeons, or Doues.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Pecockes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        Peacocks flesh is hoat & moyst in the first degree Gesnerus lib. 3THE Peacocke, his voice feareth Serpents: Aristotle de natura ani. and is hoat and moyst, in the fyrst degree. But Simeon Sethi sayth, it is a rawe flesh, and hard of digestion, vnlesse it be very fat, but if it be fat, it helpeth the Pleurisie▪ 
                        Haliabas saith, that both Swannes, Craines, Pecockes, and anye great fowles, must after they be kylled, bee hanged vp by the neckes, twoo or three daies,
                           de Auibus.
                         with a stone waying at their feete, as the weather wil serue▪ and then dressed and eatē, prouided that good wine be drunken after them. Their Egges are noisome to be eaten, Dioscorides.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        What is the vertue of Swannes flesh?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     EUery grose fowle is Chollerike, and hard of digestion.Swannes flesh, cholerike The Swanne is grose, therefore flow of digestion. But the Signets bee better than the old Swannes, if there gal
                           •
                        ntines be well made, it helpeth to digest their flesh The Swan is numbred among the vncleane byrds, Leuiticus. xi. and wyl synge a litle before his death. Plinie Gesnerus de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Marcellus.Swans sing.
                        
                     
                     What is the vertue of Her
                           •
                        nes, Bittures. and Shouelers.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THese fowles be Fishers, and be very raw and Flegmatike,Bitters▪ Herons. Shouelers. like vnto the meate whereof they are fed, the young are best, and ought to be eaten with Peper, Cinamon, Sugar. and Ginger, and it is good to drynke Wyne after them, for good digestion:Sutch meat, such cōplexiō, and thus doe for all Water fowles,
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Partriches, Fesantes, Quayles, Larkes, Sparrows, Plouers, and Blacke byrdes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        PArtriches wil bynd the belly, and do nourish muche, the Cockes bee better then the Henne Byrdes,Partriges they do dry vp fleume and corruption in the stomacke. Fesantes be the best of all Fleshe, for their sweetnesse is equal vnto the Capon or Partrich,Fesantes. but they are somwhat dryer, and Rasis sayth, Fesants flesh is good for them that haue the Feuer Ethicke, for it is not onely a meate, but a medecine,Quailes. and doth clense corrupt humours in the stomacke. Quayles although they be eaten of manye, yet they are not to be commended, for they doe engender Agues, and be euil for the fallyng sickenes For as Conciliator sayth, of al foules that be vsed for meates, a Quayle is the worst, Dioscorides sayth, Larkes roosted bee wholesom to be eaten of them that be troubled with the Collike. Black birdes taken in the tyme of Frost be holsome and good of digestion, The dunge of Black birdes tempered with Uineger,Larkes hel
                              •
                            the Collicke. Black birdes Plouers Sparowes, Woodcockes▪ smal Birds. and applyed to the place of any that hath the blacke Morphew, or blacke Leprosy, oftentymes annoynted with a Sponge doth helpe them. The flesh of Plouers doth engender Melancholye. Sparrowes be hoate and prouoke Uenus, or lust. Plinie doth descrybe their propertyes: the Braynes be the best parte of them. Woodcockes be of good digestion, and temperate to feede vppon. Al small byrdes of the Fyeld, as Robin Redbrest, Linnets, Finches, Redde Sparrowes, Goldwinges, and such lyke: if they be fat, they be maruailous good, and do greatly comfort nature, either roosted, or boyled: and thus I do conclude with thee of byrdes: that the small fyeld byrdes are most holsome for sycke folkes: Read Gesnerus lib. j▪ de Auibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Fishes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IN many Ilands of this World, placed neare vnto the Ocean seas, the people liue there most chyefly by Fysh, and be ryghte stronge and sound people of complexion, for as Aristotle sayeth, consuetudo est tanquam altera natura, custome is like vnto another nature: but because I speak of Fish, I wyl deuide them in thre parts.
                           Three things considered in fish.
                           Sea fish holsome then yt of the fresh water.
                         First of the Fishes of the Sea. Secondly the Fish of the fresh runnyng Riuers. Thirdly of the Fishes in Pooles, and standyng waters▪ The Sea hath many grose, and fat Fyshes, whych be noysome to the stomacke, but the small kynd of Fyshes, that feede about R
                           •
                        cks, And cleare stony places, be more dryer, and lesse of moystnes than the fresh water Fish, and doe engender lesse flegme, and wynd, by reason of their Salt feedyng, as Galen sayth: they be the best fyshes, that feede in the pure Sea, and chyefest of all Fyshes, for the vse of mankynd, and Haliabas sayth, new fysh lately taken, is cold and moyste, and flegmatike, then the beste of all nexte the sea fysh, is that which swimmeth in fresh cleare Riuers or stony places, whereas the water is sweete, beyng fishes that beare skales, these be marueilous good: but if they feede neare vnto places where mutch fylth is daily cast out,Muddy Fish not holsome. there the fishes be very corrupt, and vnholsome, as the sayd Haliabas sayth. Fyshe that feedeth in Fennes, Marshes, Ditches and muddy puddels, be verye vnholsome,Fish that haue skales. be good, but fish without skales are not holsome. and do corrupt the bloud, they be grose and slymie, corrupt and wyndie: but those that be fed in fayre pondes, whereunto running Water may ensue. and whereas sweete water, herbes, rootes, and Weedes, that grow about the bankes, do feede the fish, those fyshes be holsome▪ 
                        Galen sayth, Fysh that is whyte skaled and hard, as Perches, Breames, Cheuins, Ruffes, Carpes, Roches, Troutes &c. be all good, but vnscaled Fyshes, as Eeles, Ten
                           •
                        hes, Lampres, & sutch like be daungerous. vnlesse they be well baked or roosted, and eaten with Pepper and Ginger, and Uineger. And note this, that it is not holsome trauailing, or laboryng, immediatly after eating of Fish, for it doth greatly corrupt the stomack, and as Galen saith the nourishments of Flesh are better, than the nourishments of Fish: and thus mutch generally I haue spoken of Fysh. Of the natures of Fyshes, reade Rondoletius
                        ▪ and Conradus Gesnerus de Piss
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus
                     WHat, it seemeth by these words, that greate Fishes, which bee deuourers in the Sea, as Seale, Porpose, and sutch like, bee vnholsome, and that the small Fishes, as Cods, Whitynges Plaice, Smelts, Buttes-Soole, Pike, Breme, Roche, Carpe and sutch as feede in cleane stonye Waters, thou sayst they be very wholsome. Eeles Lampers, and other muddy Fishes, thou doest not greatly commend, There be also some kindes of Fish soft, and some hard, but which be the best.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     IF Fysh be soft, the eldest Fysh is best: if Fish be hard, the youngest Fish is best,Fish soft and hard. for it is either soft or hard, of hard Fish take the smallest, of soft Fish take the greatest: prouided that your Fish be not very slimye, and thus sayth Auicen in his booke of Fyshes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What is the vertue of Shelfishes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        CRauises, and Crabbes, be very good fyshes, the meat of them, doth helpe the Lunges,Shel fyshes. but they be hurtful for the bladder, yet they wil engender seede. If Crabbes of the fresh water, be sodden in pure greene Oyle Olife: this Oyle dropped into the eare luke warme, doth heale burning obstructions, and stoppinge matter,For deaf
                              •
                           es, that hindreth ye hearing. As for Lympetes, Cockels, Scallopes, as Galen sayth, they be hard of digestion. Muskels, and Oysters, would be wel boyled, rosted, or baked With Onions, wyne, Butter, Suger, Ginger, & Peper, or els they be wyndy, & Flegmatike:Oysters cholorike stomackes may wel digest raw Oysters, but they haue cast manye one away, yet raw Oysters wil clense the raynes.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Milke, Butter, and Cheese?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        WOmens Milke is the most gentle nutriment for yonge children, which milke is of the decoction of pure bloode,Milke of women is the best of al Milkes. by natural heat and drawen foorth by the Nibles from the breastes or Pappes, this is the fyrste foode of mankynd: for lyke as bread is a blessyng of God for men, euen so is Milke one of the great blessinges, as appeareth in the promise whych god made to Israell. Without Milke, it is not possible to bryng vp man or beast. The best milke is of women, and most temperate, for it preserueth agaynst consumption. The second is Goates Milke, which doth norysh, and is hoatter than womēs.Milke of Goats. Sheepes Mylke, is not so much noryshyng, and not pleasaunte to the stomake. Yong Cows milke is thicker, and ful of Butter: Note also that iiii. thinges must be considered in milke, the whitenes of coloure,Milke of Kyne Milke foure thinges considered in it. the sweetnes of sauour, the pleasantnes of taste, the substaunce, neither thicke nor thinne: it is good Mylke, when a drop wil stand whole vppon youre thum nayle, without sheading. There be three essences of Milke, Cheese, Butter, and Whay, the best milke is of the yongest and fattest Kyne, or Goats, that bee fed in ye cleanest, dryest, and sweetest Pastures. wheras plentye of sweete flowers are growing, and purest Clay or Chalke water, with holesome layer. The best time of milke, is in April, May, and Iune. The new Milk is most holesome for them to drynke, which hath cleane stomackes, to drink i
                           •
                         with Suger, as it commeth from the Cow thre howers before al other meat or drynke, and then it wil not coagulate nor crude in the stomake, but quench Choller. Moreouer milke is not only good to yonge children & helthful people: but if it be sower, then beware the stone in the raynes,Milk hurtful to whom. and bladder through the same: and to them which haue Feuers or headache, Milke doth much harme, as Hippocrates sayth Lac dare caput dolentibus, malum: malum vero febricitantibus & quibus hypochondria suspensa murmurant, & siticulosis: malū autem in febribus acutis, quibus biliosae sunt deiectiones, & quibus sanguinis multi deiectio facta est: conuenit autem tabidis, qui non multum febricitant & in febribus longis & paruis si nullum ex supradictis signis affuerit &c,
                     
                     
                        That is Milke sayth he, is very vnholesome to such as haue paynes in their heddes,Hyppocrates of the hurt of Milke, and ye vtility therof or that be sicke of any Feuer, and also to them which haue any noise or wynde in the vpper parte of their bellye called Hypochondria, & that haue cholericke decoctiō in hoat feuer, or haue lost much blood: notwithstanding milke is good for such as haue a consumption without a Feuer, and maye be geuen to them. which haue had Feuers long tyme, if none of the foresaid tokens do appeare &c. And to conclude of mylke, seeynge oftentimes it is verye euill, and will throughe the couldenesse, and wynde offende the whole Bodyes of menne,Milke is a good thing in a common wealth. what harme doth it than to Sicklye personnes? howe be it, we se Milke is a goodlye staye in a common Wealthe, and the feeders therof are people of a good temperament, or complexion, as in Wales, Suffolke, Essex, and in a place in the Mountaynes in ye North called Alston More,Alston Moore in the North wheras little▪ tillage is, but bringyng vp of Chattel: in this country the people be al chiefly nourished with milke, little other drinke they vse, milke excepted. This country was somtime the land of a worthy knight, called syr Thomas, the Baron of Hylton, to whom I dedicated my little Booke intituled the Gouernment of health,
                        Sir Thomas the Baron Hylton his lande. promisyng in the same Booke to set f
                           •
                        rth an other booke, wherof the copy perished with my Bookes, in shipwracke: and when I came to London to haue reuined my dead book, one William Hilton gentleman, brother to the sayd syr Thomas Hilton, accused me of no lesse cryme,William▪ Hilton letted William Bulleine to fynish his boke of healthful medecines then of most cruel murder of his owne brother, who dyed of a Feuer (sent onely of God) among his owne frends, fynishing his lyfe in the christen fayth. But this William Hilton caused me to be arrained before that noble Prince, the Dukes grace of Norffolke, for the same: to this end, to haue had me dyed shamefully: That with the couetous Ahab he might haue through false witnes, and periury, obtayned by the counsell of Iezabell, a Uine yard, by the pryce of blood. But it is wrytten, Testis mendax peribit a false witnes shal com to naught, his wicked practise was wisely espyed, his folly deryded, his bloody purpose letted, and fynallye I was wt Iustice deliuered. Notwithstanding, yet am I by the same William Hiltō stil molested and troubled as much as lyeth in him, to shorten my dayes, by some meanes or accidente, who with neither lawful pollicye, nor false testimony, cold hetherto accomplish his wicked intent▪ Now therfore blame me not my deare frend Marcellus, though this man be remēbred in my booke heare of health, and preseruing of lyfe, seyng I was somtyme in his booke of a false indightment, conspyring my death This man hath letted me, in so much that I cannot run to the marke, that I did set before myne eyen, therfore I must make a shorter course, fynishing with fewer things, trusting not vnprofitable for the common welth: whose profyte I doe seeke, and more would haue done, this his malicious factes excepted, whose malice doth the lesse molest mee, beynge a Straunger to him, seynge hee hath vexed a Ladye, which was his owne Brothers Wyfe, whose shame, losse, yea and Bloode hee hath soughte: whiche Brothers Wyfe redeemed mutch of hys Lande from losse,A bloody practice agaynst ye lady Hilton. in lendyng him a great Summe of Money. And when this man should thankfully haue repayed this lady her Money, then he gratifyed her, as he did mee.
                     
                        And so to conclude, you that are gentlemen, beware of shameful ingratitude, wheras you haue reaped comodity. For it is the most leprous sicknes agaynst nature, to doe euil for good, preferryng a little lucre before honesty. worldly worship, shame, and fynally, Gods wrath or vengeaunce, due for such wyckednes agaynst conscience, and nature.What a very gentelman is For ingratitude doth degenerat mankynde, and transforme him most monstruously, into an euil vile nature, from gentlenes, into Churlishnes. For lyke as gentlenes with vertues maketh a very gentle man: although somtime obscurely borne: so doth ingratitude, blemish, and defyle them, which can bryng nothing els for thē
                        selues, but Pedegrees, lynes, cotes. and standerdes, most aunciently descē
                        ded, yet themselues void of al goodnes. Thus I leaue to molest thine ears with him, who hath thus molested me, profitable to fewe, and noysome to himselfe. A louer of few, a flatterer of many, a vessel of ignorance, ful of ingratitude, vnnatural to his Children, if that he spoyleth in lawe,Cataplasme for M. Hilton of Bidicke, of the Bishoprik of Duresme. whiche should be their reliefe: & thus I commend hym to thys Cataplasma, to his mortifyed conscience. Faythles and fruitles he is.
                     Butter of nature is hot & moist, & hath vertu to mollify hard apostimatiōs yt are aboue nature, as Galen sayth: fresh Butter doth rype, clense, & warm ye inward parts in meats, ointments or drynks. Fresh butter is good to annoint ye swelling of Hypochondrion or belly, & for ye 
                        Phlegmon & Bubo. Furder to cause yong children their teeth to grow, through the annointing of the place and it is good to make annoyntment for the Pleuritici, And to be dronke in wyne or Beere, for the stopping of the lungs, Butter, Hony,Butter the vertue of it. and bytter Almonds, be wholsome for to clense the brest, and being put in suppositories, and Glysters, doe mollify the belly. New Butter meanly salted, is good wt Bread, Flesh, and fysh. The olde Butter changing with many colours, is the worst, it is noysome to the stomacke. Butter is good in the morninge, but not holesome at night: yet Butter preuayleth agaynst poysone in woū
                        des, it wil purge, clense, and encrease Flesh. When y• Butter is fyrst made, there is a mylk coming from the same somwhat sharpe, sower, and cold, very holesome to be dronke in the morning or euening,Butter Milk called Char
                              •
                           n Milk is good agaynst hoat burning choller: it openeth the liuer, clēseth the gaule, prouoketh vrine, causeth, sleepe and nourisheth much if it be eaten with Sugar, and new whyte breade.
                     Cheese which is a part of Milke of the grosser substaunce,Cheese freshe is best. throughe the coagulation or cruddes, beyng gathered and pressed togeather, from ye moist whay, the same cheese is finished: and if it be made of cleane milke and the Creame therewith, then it is beneficial to the stomacke, specially, if it bee fresh and good it norisheth the flesh much,Greene cheese helpeth woundes. and is good for greene woundes to knit them, and wil also quench heate, or clense a spot in the eye, beynge layed theron .xxiiii. howres. Cheese meanly salted nourisheth but little, by ye reason of the Salt. old Cheese stoppeth the flixe of the Belly, but it is hard to digest hurting the stomacke, gaule, & raynes,Cheese olde stoppeth the fluxe, but bredeth the stone. and wil breede the stone in the bladder, and cause the increase of melancholy with much coldenes and drynes Gal. lib. 4. alimentorum facult
                        ▪ commendeth the Cheese of his own natiue country, because of the purenes of milke, and sweetnes of the Cheese, but in his x. lib. of Simples, he refuseth Cheese for the sowrenes. &c. whan

stone pottes be broken, what is better to glew them a gayn or make them fast,Sundry kyndes of Cheese nothing like the Syment made of Cheese. Know therefore that it will quickly build a stone in a dry body, which is ful of choller adust. And here in England be dyuers kyndes of Cheeses,Much good Butter little good cheese as Suff. Essex, Banbury. &c. accordyng to their places and feeding of their Cattell, tyme of the yeare, layre of theire Kyne, clenlines of theyr dayryes, quantity of theire Butter, for the more Butter, the worse cheese. And thus I conclude of Cheese. lyke as the Welchmen loue it rosted, euen so do Flemminges loue Butter at al tymes, and of all makings refusyng none, what coloure soeuer it hath, and from whence soeuer it commeth, their stomackes are suche.
                     
                        Whay the vertue therof.Whay is the thinnest part of Milke. Whay wt Fumitory sodden in May, & dronke cold in the morning and Euening▪ hath vertue to scowre, clense & open the partes of the body that are stopped, prouoketh vryne, and maketh clean the Bladder, & is good to quenche choller, helpeth the bellye, asswageth thirst, yet it inflameth, and bryngeth wynd to the guttes but recocted or two tymes sodden whaye, is the best whay and wil bring sleepe, and also is good in Clisters, to coole, scower, & quench choller in the guttes, or helpe the 
                           •
                        xcoriation in them, made by bloody Flixe: Galen commendeth Whaye lib. x. simplicium medic. and Mesue doth not a little prayse the Whay of blacke Goats,Gotes whay and how it is hoat and dry in the first degree vnto the second: this whay is good to be geuen to them which abound with much melancholye, or frensies, and clenseth the water betweene the skin and the flesh, openeth the Gaule, & mollifieth the Spleene: in sharp acute Tertian Feuers, or stopping of the vessels, wt yellow choller, this whay doth much helpe, to drinke ye same, & nothinge is better to be dronk against hot Leprosy thā whay, it maketh a clean skin. Whay is vsed in many decoctiōs, & infusiōs, for lenitiues to purge the belly▪ and thus I do ende of Whaye, whiche is a good drynke in Sommer in the common wealth, wheras good dayries be, as in Suffolk, the best country of Milke, as about Lethringham, Stratbrooke, Laxefield Keishal▪ &c.
                     Egges be commended of the moste excellent Wryters, as Dioscorides, and Galen,
                        Egges of Byrdes. that they do excel al other nourshing meats, & also are good in medecine Isaac the Arabian, in his diates, doth prayse Hennes Egges, for that▪ they be pleasaunt to the mouth, and profitable to the Stomacke and that they nourish more then other meates, and are soonest turned into good blood, & ef
                           •
                        soones into seede of generation, specially Egges that be new and whyte, but old Egges be most fylthy and noysome to the stomacke. Furthermore Egges haue no part of the Fowle, sayth Galen Simplic medi. but a portion of the thing frō whence they come:Egges three thinges in thē. & Symeon Sethi sayth .iii. things must be considered of Egges, the fyrst is the substance & cleannes of nature: the second is their age, eyther new or olde: the third is of the manner of their dressinge, as potching, see thing or rostinge. Potched Egges be holsome to bee supp
                           •
                        d vp in the morning vppon an empty stomacke. To clense the Lunges, breast & the rayns: hard Egges doe bynde: fryed Egges be hurtful to the stomake: next in goodnes vnto them are the Egges of Fesantes, & Partriges, & the Egges of smal Byrdes of the wood, whose Egges are white, but ye Egges

water foules, as Swannes, Gees
                           •
                        , Duckes, with al their kyndes, be grosse and not pleasaunt to nature,Egges of great 
                              •
                           oules be not good, althoughe good to stronge stomacked labourers. Doues Egges, because of their great heate, are more better for medecine then meat. Pecockes and Estrige eges, bee not good: of an euil nature and ennemy to mankynde: In foode,Of Egges their vertue. the yellowe partes of Egges bee warme, and nourish the bloude, and the whyte of the Egge, is colde, and flegmatike. Galen doth cōmend the whyte of Egges, because they freat not, but coole: and therfore they are good for medecines for the eyes, and vlcers and woundes of the head, and other places wheras blood doth flow. Raw Egges, with Oile of Roses beaten togeather, are good for Flegmon in the Eares, breastes, Armes, Legges, or priuy members. The white of an egge the iuice of Pomgranets: Uineger, and the oyle of water Lillies,Egges for 
                              ••
                           eepe. are good beaten togeather, to annoynt the forehead, to cause sleepe. Egges sodden in stronge sharpe vineger, vntil they be harde, eate theym, and they wil stop the belly. Whytes of Egges, the pouder of the flowers of Pomgranetes, Planten water, and Hypocistes, with oyle of Roses, and Alume,For burninge beaten in a leaden Morter, wil heale a burning or skalding in the fleshe, coueringe the place with a Launde Clothe, and annoynting the sayd Launde with this oyntment. Oyle of Egges is good to heale Serpigo the breaking or Crames of the Lippes, handes, skalding, burning, payns of the eares, stomacke,Oile of egges raynes, belly, and the priuy members, which haue great burninge, fylthe. or heate: and fynally, all the paynes of the ioyntes.
                     Of Egges come all foules, saue Barnacles, which are ingendered of the marueilous worke of Occean Sea: Read Gesnerus, of the nature of Foules. The horrible Serpent called the Cockat
                           •
                        ise, is bred in the Egge: so is the Crocodile, and many moe Serpentes, and many fyshes of the sea,Egges of serpentes. and little Wormes, as the Antes. And thus I do end of egges, whose yolkes or reddes be fyrst bread, within the Foules body
                           •
                        s, as it doth appere when they be killed, by the great plenty of the sayd yolkes and no whytes, of whiche Yolkes the byrd is bredde. and nourished of the whyte: So is mankynde ingendred, and formed of one part, and nourished of an other, Read Hippocrates in libro de natura pueri
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What vertue is in Coagulo Leporis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THree halfe peny weight, after the old weight of the Apoticaryes, tempered in wyne,
                           Coagulun or the cr
                              •
                           ddes of yong beastes▪ that suck and drunke doth preuayle agaynst venim, or pricking of Serpentes, bloudy flixes, & paynes of the matrix, after the tyme that the 
                           •
                        termes menstruall be past: it helpeth conception, but to drynke it, it wil drie the Seede, and let conception. Aristotle doth remember Coagulum lib. iij cap. 12. de historia Anima
                        ▪ saying: it is the substance of Milke, of those beastes which chew the cudde, and sucke of a curdye substaunce, as Calfe, Lambe. Kidd, &c. And of nature is sower and drying, and dronke with vineger, it helpeth the fallyng sicknes as Galen afyrmeth lib. x. simplic. medic.
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     
                        What say you of Sepum called Tallow, and Adeps, which is fat or the grease of beastes and foules. I pray you tel me?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        FIrst of Tallow, vnderstand that of nature it is warme, and therfore it hath vertue to resolue,Tallowe of male best are hotter thē the female. and make softe: and is vsed in sondry medecines, among the Chirurgians. Notwithstandyng, you must vnderstand, that one Beaste beareth more warmer tallow than an other: & the Male hotter thē ye female As exāple, the Hart hotter then the Hind: the Ram more warmer then the Ewe, &c.
                     But for the fattes of beastes and byrds, they be al warme and moist: some more, and some lesse, according to their ages, fatnes, and natures, as example following shortly sayed.
                     The fat or grease of ye
                        
                           Swannes, Geese, Duckes, Bustardes. Hennes and Capons, beyng fresh, doth comfort the Matrixe, breastes, and ioyntes, and are warme.
                           Gelded Swyn not salted is much lyke Oyle, and moyste & good agaynst the pleuresie, and vsed in manye oyntmentes.
                           Goats is harder than ye Swynes, & is also dryer, & is good against the pains of ye great guts, in Clisters or Suppositers
                           Beares is warme, and melted with Laudanum, maketh an oyntment to encrease haire.
                           Foxes, is good agaynst cold and palseye, and paynes of the eares.
                           Porpentine agaynst baldnes, as the Bears grease is.
                           Bulles and Calues doth warme, and are good to bynd and stoppe flixe, put in Clisters, oyntments &c.
                           Male beastes, hotter and dryer than the female.
                           Lyons is moste subtil and hotte of all fattes.
                           Cattes hoate, and good, to annoynte Aches, and Goutes.
                           Seales or other Seafish, clarified with Honny wil clense the iyen that are dimme
                           Snayles clenseth the iyen helpeth the Cares, and is wholsome for bone ache.
                           Uipers good to annoynt the dim syght, dropped into them,
                           Yong lusty creatures, not salted and cleane clarifyed, is best kept close.
                           Raueninge beastes hotter then them, which eate Grasse: & the water Foules, hoatter than the land byrdes.
                           Wolles called Oesypus, wil resolue heat apostumations, and Struma in the throat.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Mary, which in some place is called Marthe: contayned within the bones of Beastes.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT hath power to mollify, and make hard thinges soft, and of nature is hoat and moyst, as Galen sayth. lib. xi. Simplicium medicamentorum. Example.
                     The Mary o
                           •
                         
                        Medulla of the

                           Stagge or Hart is the best of al beasts, to mollify Muskles, ligamentes, tendons, and the guttes.
                           Calues or yong Steeres is next in goodnes, vsed in sondrye oyntmentes, and linimentes.
                           Bulle and Goates are very warm, and good in pessaryes for women.
                           Oxe, is good for the stomacke, and the Lunges, and increaseth, seede of Generation.
                           Foxe, for the palsey, and tremblyng of the memberss.
                           Backe bone of beastes is dryer than other Mary, and vnpleasaunt to the stomacke, drunke with Aligante, it stoppeth the whytes in women.
                        
                     
                     Al these must be kept in cleane vessels, a loft in a chamber, wt Windows towardes the North. For the South wynd, or standing in vessels nere to ye groūd, wil soone corrupte Maryes, excepte they be clarifyed vppon the fyre,To preserue fatte. and preserued in clean closse stone or Glasse vessels.
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Gaules of beastes, or Fyshes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        THe Gaule is the most hottest and bytterest part of albeastes, the place of Choller, and choller it selfe and drye, specially in hot Beastes, as Lyons, wolues. Foxes, Dogges &c,Gaules of Beastes. more then of the other Beastes, which denyde the hooues. Euen so it is among foules, the croked bylled byrdes, are hottest of al next them which feed vpon weedes or seedes, and the water Foules, more then the fyeld byrdes, as Dioscori. affyrmeth-lib. iij. cap. lxxj. and are vsed in medecines as example.
                     The Gaul or fell of ye
                        
                           Scorpion of the Sea, the Sea Snaile, or suche lyke of the Sea for sore eyen.
                           Whyte Cocke, & Capon, Henne, Fesant, Partrige, Doue, agaynst sore eyen, dropped into them.
                           Crane, Osspray, for paynes in the eares, with oyle of bytter Almondes dropped into them.
                           Swanne, Mallard, wyl kil wormes.
                           Bull, Oxe, Cow, Goat, Ramme, good for woundes or swellynges, and to kyl wormes in the belly made in Plaster.
                           Swyne, For vlcers in the eares.
                           Beares, to annoynt the heads and nosetrels, of theym which haue the falling sicknes.
                        
                     
                     Also Gaules with Honny, and the iuice of Rue, make a good oyntmente to annoynt the belly, to kyl wormes, and helpe the Collike, and are vsed in inwarde medecines. There are stones foūd within the Gaules of Oxen & Bulles, the pouder of them dronke, wil clense the raynes and Bladder. As you may se, Matthiolus in Coment. Dioscor.. lib. ij. cap. lxxj.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Braines
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        BRaynes are cold and moyst of nature, of euery beast or foule, according to their kyndes. Some not so moyst as other, as you haue had example, of heat and cold beastes: and their braynes are vsed in medecines. As example.
                     The braines of the

                           Hare sodden or rosted are good to make young childrens teeth to grow
                           Hennes, Capons, or Fesauntes, to bee dronke in wyne agaynst poyson, sayth, Dioscorides,.
                           
                           Wesel or Ferret, dryed, and dronk in vyneger, against the falling sicknes.
                           Swallow mingled with hony, against the dinnes of the eyes.
                           Shepe prepared, good to cause teeth to grow, & mollifyeth apostumations.
                           Field birdes costed are good to nourish the brayne of man, when it is weake.
                           Calfe and Pigge, not good for Flegmatike people.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Liuers?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THe liuer is the Nutrimental part, and the fountayn of Blood, a spongie matter, wheras the vaynes do begin, and is warme and moiste according to the nature of the animal or Beaste, and is vsed in medicine. As example.
                     The Liuer of ye
                        
                           Madde Dogge, rosted and eaten, helpeth him which is bitten with a madde dogge,
                           Goats beyng cleane, do comfort the syght, applied raw or distilled, and is eaten to helpe the fallyng sicknes.
                           Wolfe with Liuer wort dryed, maketh a goodly pouder, to helpe the liuer and lunges.
                           Foxe, cleane washed and dryed doth the same.
                           Asse or Horse Broyled and Eaten agaynst the fallyng Sicknes.
                           Bore, both in meat and medecine, agaynst the slinging and byting of Serpentes.
                           More Hen or water Henne, agaynst the stone, or grauel in the raynes.
                           Henne, Capons Chikens Partrige, Fesaunt, and al field byrdes doth nourishe and comfort nature.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Horne
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        
                        NOt much, I assure you, although many thynges maye be sayde therof, both for nature and property: I commende the discriptiō to them, that couet to be mery.Hornes theire nature. And thus much wil I say with Aristotle in lib. de natura Animalium, who sayth: al beastes wanting their vpper teeth, haue naturally hornes, for their defense: as we do see the Bull, the Hart. &c. and they are good in medecines, as example.
                     The horne of

                           Unicorne is most excellent, to be drunke agaynste venim and poyson, and helpeth the yelow Iaundice.
                           Hart rased and dronk against Collike, or Iliacke, Iaū
                              dice, and the bloody flyxe.
                           Goats maketh good pouder to clense thee teethe, and stablish them, so doth ye Hartes horne.
                           Bulles in pouder, dronke wyth wyne, helpeth to heale the Hemeroydes burnt in pouder.
                           The Elephantes tooth wil helpe the yelowe Iaundice, rased and dronke in Endiue Water.
                           Sondry monsters of the Sea, are good agaynst poison,
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you to the Hooues of Beastes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THey are their naturall Shooes, keping stil
                           •
                         their olde fashion▪
                        Hooues of Beastes whiche God hath prepared for them. For neither horse nor Oxe should be profitable for mankynde, but for the Houe: without whiche he colde not goe or trauel, or haue any shoe made fast. They are also good for mankynd in, medecine, as example.
                     The houes of ye
                        
                           Horses rased are drunke in wyne, and good to helpe the fallyng sycknes.
                           Asses wil do the same, and helpe the mother: burnte in perfume, sodden in Oyle, they wil help Struma.
                           
                           Goats, with Uineger and Laudanum, wil encrease hair
                                 •
                               annoynting the place.
                           Any beast burned▪ the smoke therof helpeth the mother, and kylleth Gnats that trouble your chamber:
                           Any Beast dronke in pouder maketh women baren and fruitlesse.
                           Mule, wil retayne moste stronge Poyson, or deadly venime.
                           Them which are deuyded in two partes, are clean beastes. Leuit Chap. xi.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of Bones?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     BOnes are the timber and strong posts which couple the body of euery liuing man, beast, fish, and foule togeather: without which we might not be perfect. If any of thē are brokē, then are we lame. Thus bones be not only good to nature when we are liuing: but ossa humana mannes bones are good in medecine. As example.
                     
                        The bones of

                           Man beaten into powder doe greatly dry moist humours and sores. &c.
                           Lions strongly smitten together, wil bryng lyght fire and are most dry of nature.
                           Hogges beaten into pouder, & dronk, are good againste fallyng sicknesse.
                           Hennes burnt with Egshels, made in Pouder, make a frettyng pouder.
                           Pigges are good for wryting Tables, and to kyl wormes in the stomacke, dronke in wormwood wyne. Many sea fyshes are holesome in medecine agaynst poyson.
                           
                              Sepia or Cuttle, cold and dry wil clense the skynne▪ and Eyen.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of vryne.
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     
                        IT is the Whaye of the bloode, conueyghed by the raynes into the bladder: hoate and drye of nature, very salt accordinge to the complexion of the body that maketh it as Manne and Beaste. Foules Pysse not, for the moyster is tourned into Fethers. Aristotle de nature Animalium. vryne is vsed in Medecine. As example.
                     The vrine of ye
                        
                           Man is weakest, except gelded swyne, and is wholsome to be dronke agaynst venime.
                           Yong boy, to be distilled with Litarge of Mettall, a water to wash agaynst Leprosy, is made thereof.
                           Mule, to wash handes and feete, and agaynst the gout and paynes of the Ioyntes.
                           Goats or Cammels, to be dronke agaynst the dropsy, or swellyng of the belly.
                           Boore, with oyle of Wormwood, to annoynt the belly and kil wormes.
                           Dogges wil kyl wartes, and ryngwormes.
                           Urchyne, wil corrode and frette, clense, and skower corrupted humours.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of blood?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     THe lyfe of euery liuinge thinge consisteth in the vitall bloode▪ without which, the soule can not remayn within the Body, and it is vsed often tymes in medecine. As Example.
                     
                        The bloud of ye
                        
                           Geese, Duckes, and Kiddes is vsed in sondry Antidotaries.
                           
                           Stock Doues, Turtle Doues, House Doues, and Partriges, is good for sore eyen, and new woundes.
                           Hare, for the stone, and bloudy fly
                                 •
                              e:
                           Dere, for ye flix, or termes immoderate rūning in womē.
                           Goates, which are fedde with opening herbes kylled in Iune for the stone.
                           Calfe fed so, for the same stone and also the flix.
                           Dragons is declared before.
                           Swyne is cold blood: yet it is vsed in puddings, but not commendable.
                           Beares, and Bulles, are horrible, not good.
                           Shepe helpeth the Emeroides.
                           Hēnes, Cockes & Capons, stoppeth blood, and woundes.
                           Duckes, kepeth a goodly colour long tyme: the Idolatoures did practice therewith, dereyuynge the People at Hayles, with a Blood which they called holy.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you to the nature of ordure, the dung of Beastes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius.
                     ORdure or dunge, is the corruption or fylthy excrement, which nature expulceth to the earth by the office of the guttes. without whiche no creature should liue, if the dung were stil retayned, in the saide guts. and yet it is good in sondry salues, plasters, & medicines. As example. And they are hoat and drye of complexion, according to the nature of beastes,
                     The dung of

                           Oxen and Kyne, doth mittigate inflamation of woundes, and helpeth stinging of Bees.
                           Calues, soddē wt vineger, helpeth Struma in ye throat, or swelling of ioints.
                           Goats, doth resolue and make soft: a plaster therof applyed to the Matrix forceth the child to the byrth.
                           Horse or Mule, soddē in wyne, strayned and dronke helpeth ye Iaundice.
                           Sheepe sodden in vineger and oyle of Roses, resolueth, quencheth and healeth burning and skalding.
                           Dogges fed with bones, helpeth the bloody flixe, dronke in milke: with Hony, it helpeth Angina, to annoint ye place of the throat withall.
                           Mise doth clense, and with Hony tempered togeather doth encrease haire in oyntmentes for the head.
                           Swyne, clenseth, it stoppeth blood in flowing woundes.
                           Curlues dronke in wyne, helpeth ye fallyng sicknes.
                           
                              Corocodisus of Nilus clenseth the skin, the best of this is whyte.
                           Man is best in medecine, although most abhominable to the sense of smellyng: yet there is art to make oyle for the Gout, swelling of the throat, and to helpe Flegmon, of this ordoure of Mankynd, and a water to be dronk agaynste the Fallyng sicknes, Stone, and the Water betweene the Fleshe and Skynne. And finally to helpe euill complexion.
                           Reade. Gal. lib. x. Simplicium medicamentorum, and Dioscorides. lib .ij. cap lxxiiij
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Marcellus.
                     What say you of the Scorpion▪ Frogge, Mouse, Lasarde, Cantharides, Horseleeche and earth wormes?
                  
                  
                     Hilarius
                     
                        THe Scorpion is a cruel woorme, whose sting wil pricke to death,Scorpion. except the oyle of Scorpions be gotten, which reconcileth the hurte, anoynting the place therwith. Also this oyle is good to anoynte the raynes, to breake the stone,Frogge and prouoketh vryne.
                     The Frog sodden with Salt, and cleane Oyle, and so eaten, helpeth agaynst all venime of serpentes Dioscorides. lib. ij. cap xxv
                     
                     
                        Mouse.The Mouse beyng rosted, is good to be geuen to children, that pisse their bedde, to helpe thē. Furder it wil dry vp the Fome and spattle in their mouthes. There are sondry kyndes of Mise Aristotles. lib. vi de Historia animalium.
                     
                     
                        Lacert.
                        Lacerta with legges, a longe tayle, an earth Serpente. The head broken and applyed to any place on the bodye, wheras eyther prick or nayle is fixed, foorth with it shal be drawen forth. This worme is muche vsed of Chirurgens.
                     
                        Cantharides are flies hoat drye, and burninge, of nature, and haue powre to blister and make issue,Cantharid. and drawe forth water: there be that wryte in their bookes of Phisicke, howe these flies maye bee dronke inwardly agaynste the Dropsy and the stone, but I dare not here commend the same, for feare of no smal peril that might followe.
                     
                        Horsleech.Horseleeches are wholsome to draw forth foule blood, if they bee put into a hollow Reede, and one of their endes cut of, wherby the bloode maye run forthe.
                     
                        Snayle.Snayles broken from the shelles and sodden in whyte wyne with Oyle and Sug
                           •
                        r are very holsome, because they be hoat & moist for the straightnes of the Lungs and cold cough. Snails stamped with Comphory▪ and leuen, wil draw forth prycks in the flesh.
                     
                        EarthwormesEarthwormes are hoat of nature and of thē is a precious ointment made to close wounds, & if they be sodden in Goose grease & strayned it is a good oyntment for to drop into a dull hearyng eare, ꝑouring it into the contrary s
                           •
                        de. Earth woormes stamped, are good for payned teeth. The Oyle of woormes is greatly commended for the comforting of the sinewes, ioints, veines and goute,Oile of wormes· they must be washed in whyte wyne, and the Oyles of Verbascum or Cowslops, of roses, of Lyllies, of Dil. of Camomil, al sodden to geather, when it is colde, put in your earth wormes▪ stop your glasse, let it stand xl. dayes in the Sunne, then strayn it, & it wil make an excellen
                           •
                        e oyle against ache, Sciatica, gout. &c,
                     Reade more of them Plini. lib xxx. cap ix. And thus I do end of Earthwoormes,Earth the mother of euery liuing creaure. which are the bowels of the ground or earth, which earth is cold, and drye of nature, yet the mother of ech liuinge wyghte, fostereth and geueth foode to euery creature, both sensible and insensible, and remayneth stil, firm and stable, and each creature hath his originall spryng, and fyrste lyfe vppon

the earth: whan they haue run the race, some in pleasure and other some in wretchednes, the earth doth deuoure them agayne at length and swallow them, as though they had neuer ben:Generation falleth into corruption and thus is generacion turned into corruption, as Aristotle affyrmeth. But how mightye is that Lorde God, whych wyth his blessed worde dyd for our sakes make the Earth to be our owne free dwelling place duryng thys our Mortall Lyfe, to what ende, to abuse the same, as the olde World dyd, for whose sakes he dyd destroy all flesh, his small chosen people excepted? No forsooth, but to vse the Earth wyth diligent trauell, in tillage, sowyng, cherishyng herbes, plants, grasse. &c. whych be Gods gyftes, both for our medicines and meate: not to dispise the sweete Creatures of God,
                           Math, 6. whych sprynge in sundry tymes of the yeare, as flowers, fruicts, seedes, barkes, rootes, wyth conning to be preserued for mans vse, against the daily daunger of cruell sickenes, which assalteth ech man, Woman, and Chyld, through the corruption of humours, and other euyll accydentes of our Life. And for as mutch as wee can not make one flower,The prouydence of God. neyther can gyue to any of them hys proper beautyfull shape, vertue, or sauour, whych Salomon, whan he was florishyng in his regall estate, was not comperable to any of these flowers for theyr excellent beauty:
                           Psal. 103. Psal. 104. Iob. 26. Ier. 5. Gen. 3. Therfore let vs daily behold the Earth whereunto wee must once come, and also in the meane tyme, humbly laude and prayse the hyghe diuine prouidence of the almyghty our Lord and God, who hath layed the foundations of the Earth, that it should not moue at any time, and hath couered it wyth the deepe, lyke as with a garment, the waters doe stande betweene the Hylles, yea he sendeth hys Sprynges to the ryuers, whych runne amonge the hilles: all Beastes of the Fielde drynke thereof, and the wylde Asses doe quench their thyrst: besides them all the fowles of the ayre haue their habitacion, and singe amonge the braunches, and hee watreth the Lillies from the Cloudes. The earth is filled with the Fruicte of his woorkes: he bryngeth forth Grasse for the Cattell, and greene herbes for the seruyce of Mankinde, that he might brynge foode out of the earth, and Wyne that maketh glad the heart of man, and Oyle to make him a chearefull countenaunce, & bread to strengthen his heart wythal.
                           Wine Oyle &▪ bread, Gods giftes.
                           The trees of the lord are ful of sap.
                         The Trees of ye Lord are also full of sap, euen the trees of Libanus whych he hath planted Therein the Birdes do make their nestes: & the Firre trees are a dwellyng for the Storke. The hygh Hylles are a refuge for the wylde Goates, and so are the stony Rockes a refuge for the Conyes. He appoynteth the Moone for certayn seasons, and the Sunne doth know hys goyng downe: he maketh darkenes, that it may be Nyght, wherein all the beastes of the Forest do moue. The Lyons roaring after theyr pray do seeke their meate at God, the Sunne aryseth, and then they get them away together, and lurke them close in the dennes. Then man aryseth, and goeth forth to hys worke, & laboureth vntill euenyng. O Lord how manifold are thy workes, in wysedome hast thou made them all. The Earth is full of thy Riches: so is the great and wyde Sea also,
                           Psal. 92. wherein are thyngs innumerable both small and great Beastes: there sayle the Shippes, and there are g
                           •
                        eate Whales, whome thou hast made to play therein: all these creatures waight

vpon thee, that thou mayst giue them, meate in due time: when thou gyuest them,
                           Esa. 27. Io li. xi. Psal. lxii.
                         they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand, they are fylled wyth good thynges: when thou hydest thy face, they are troubled, when thou takest away theyr breath, they dye, and they are tourned agayn to their Dust. &c.
                     
                        Euery thinge tourneth to dust.Lo here my deare brother Marcellus I do ende simplie of Simples, praying thee in the meane tyme to take them in good part: waying my present case, disquietnes, and trouble. Good wyll euer was with me and shalbee to my small power, although leasour lacked, and time would not serue for the purpose:Trouble hath so hindred me, that I am constrained, presently to stay. but whan it shall please God that we shall talke together agayne, I wyll make amendes for all faultes escaped, GOD willing, who euer keepe thee, thine owne, Hillarius. Moreouer, behold two old friends approch at hand, the one is called Soarenes, & the other Chirurgerie. Let vs heare what they will say, a little whyle.
                  
                  The ende of the Simples.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           A horned Still.
                        
                        
                           Bagpipe Still.
                        
                        
                           Two heades.
                        
                        
                           Pelican Still.
                        
                        
                           The little Glasse
                        
                     
                     These stilles are very good to desti, clense and rectify al waters
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Walnut.
                        
                        
                           Satirion.
                        
                        
                           Wormewood.
                        
                        
                           Strabery.
                        
                        
                           
                              Solanū
                               the great nightshade.
                        
                        
                           Radishe.
                        
                        
                           Cherie.
                        
                        
                           Hyssope.
                        
                        
                           Chickenweede.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Scabious.
                        
                        
                           Peache.
                        
                        
                           Lauender.
                        
                        
                           Endiue, or Southistell.
                        
                        
                           Onions.
                        
                        
                           Parietory.
                        
                        
                           Parsiley.
                        
                        
                           Plantein.
                        
                        
                           Pemroyall▪
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Rose.
                        
                        
                           Sage.
                        
                        
                           Chicorie.
                        
                        
                           Housleeke.
                        
                        
                           Alkakengi.
                        
                        
                           Tilia.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        A.
                        
                           
                              AZarabaccha or wylde Nardus.
                        
                        Fol. 1.
                        
                           Asplenō
                            called Scolopendrion or Citrach.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Absinthium called Wormewood.
                        Fol. 2
                        Anisseedes.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Anagallus called Chickenweede.
                        7.
                        Apples.
                        13.
                        Aloes of two kyndes.
                        14
                        Agrimonie.
                        18
                        
                           Apium called Smalage.
                        22
                        
                           Aron called Cookoprick.
                        24
                        Arthichoke called Scolimus or Cinara.
                        
                        31
                        Asparagus.
                        36
                        
                           Aconitum two kindes, Perdalianches, and Licoctonon.
                        
                        42
                        
                           Angelica Angelles flower, or radix sancti spiritus.
                        
                        43
                        Aristolochia rotunda & longa.
                        49
                        
                           Apiastrum Mellissa or Baulme.
                        51
                        
                           Agaricum or Agaricke.
                        54
                        
                           Amoniacum, of God Ammon.
                        60
                        
                           Assafoetida a stinking Gum.
                        Ibidem.
                        Amber Grice most sweete.
                        59
                        
                           Acatia a fruit of a Thorne in Aegypt.
                        
                        61
                        Almondes sweete and bitter.
                        64
                        
                           Agnus Castus or Vitex.
                        
                        68
                        Alum, or roche Alum.
                        69
                        Atramentum.
                        70
                        Alston more in the North.
                        79
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        B.
                        BEates.
                        Fol. 8
                        Betonie.
                        Ibidem
                        Beere, and Ale.
                        12
                        Barberies.
                        14
                        Buglosse.
                        16
                        Basill or Ozimum.
                        
                        Ibid.
                        Burnet.
                        Ibid.
                        Bell Woodbynde called Smilax.
                        
                        21
                        Barley, called Hordium.
                        
                        27
                        Beanes.
                        28
                        
                           Bardana the Burre.
                        36
                        Brakes, or Filix the Ferne.
                        40
                        
                           Botris a sweete herb of Fraunce.
                        4
                              •
                           
                        
                        Basill wilde called Ocimastrum.
                        
                        48
                        
                           Brionia vitis alba the running wylde Uyne
                        Fol. 49.
                        Boras.
                        60
                        Bdellium.
                        Ibid.
                        
                           Balaustia the flowers of Pomgranet.
                        65
                        Bay, or Laurell.
                        67
                        Brimstone.
                        69
                        Barach.
                        76
                        Bay salt.
                        71
                        Bores flesh and Bakon.
                        74
                        Beare, and Badgar.
                        76
                        Blacke byrde.
                        78
                        Barnacle wonderous.
                        82
                        Bitter the byrde.
                        78
                        Butter the vertue.
                        80
                        Braynes of sundry kyndes.
                        82
                        
                           Byzahar the stone.
                        83
                        Bones of sundry kindes.
                        Ibidem
                        Bloud of sundry beastes.
                        84
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        C.
                        CAmomill.
                        Fol. 7
                        Cucumers.
                        9
                        Cabage or Brassica, wortes.
                        Ibidem
                        Claret wyne.
                        10
                        Cheries.
                        14
                        Capers, and Olyues.
                        Ibidem
                        Scabious.
                        16
                        Calamus Aromaticus.
                        17
                        
                           Centaurium or fel terrae.
                        
                        19
                        Campher
                              •
                           e called Symphitum.
                        
                        24
                        
                           Consolida minor Daises.
                        Ibidem
                        Coriander.
                        25
                        
                           Chelidon ye great or Chelidonion mega.
                        
                        32
                        Collumbin.
                        32
                        Cresses or Nasturtium.
                        
                        40
                        Crowfoote or Ranu
                                 •
                              culus.
                        
                        42
                        
                           C
                                 •
                              ocus or Saffron.
                        45
                        
                           Cartamus or wilde Saffron.
                        45
                        Calamintes of the Mountayne.
                        48
                        Clary called Orminum.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        Carawayes of Carintha.
                        
                        51
                        Cartafilago.
                        52
                        Chicorie or Sponsa solis.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        Carrets the rootes.
                        53
                        
                           Cassia lignea a sweete wood.
                        55
                        
                           Cassiafistula to purge.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Castanian the Chestnut.
                        6
                              •
                           
                        
                        Cola
                              •
                           iuthida.
                        Ibidem
                        Cutbert Blunt.
                        68
                        Clo
                              •
                           es▪
                        
                        Ibidem
                        Cucubes.
                        6
                              •
                           
                        
                        Ceruse.
                        Ibidem
                        Ciperus.
                        Ibidem
                        Cardamon.
                        67
                        Campher or Caphera.
                        
                        68
                        Cadmia.
                        72
                        
                           Corrall.
                        72
                        Calues fleshe.
                        74
                        Cockes fleshe.
                        81
                        Cheese freshe and salt.
                        80
                        
                           Co
                                 •
                              gulum leporis. &c.
                        
                        81
                        
                           Cantharides the Fly.
                        84
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        D.
                        DRagons.
                        Fol. 6
                        Dandelion.
                        10
                        Dictamnum.
                        15
                        
                           Diapentia ye great fine leaued grasse.
                        23
                        Dogges tongue or Cynoglossum.
                        
                        Ibid.
                        Darnell.
                        31
                        Dayses called Bellis.
                        
                        37
                        Diers flowers called flos Tinctoris.
                        
                        44
                        Dockes the great called Rumex.
                        
                        47
                        
                           Digitalis called fingers or Foxe gloues:
                        48
                        
                           Doronike a precious roote of Alexādria.
                        53
                        Dragons bloud.
                        59
                        
                           Diacridium called Diagridium.
                        
                        61
                        Dates.
                        68
                        Ditten.
                         
                        Duckes fleshe▪
                        
                        77
                        Doues fleshe.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        E.
                        ENula Campana.
                        
                           Fol. 15
                        
                        Elleborus Albus & niger.
                        18
                        
                           Ebulus or Waleworte·
                        
                           51
                        
                        Epithymum.
                        Ibidem.
                        
                           Eringium of the Sea.
                        54
                        
                           Ebenus Wood.
                        56
                        Euphorbium.
                        60
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        F.
                        FEnell or Fincle.
                        Fol. 6
                        Filipendula.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Fenum Grec
                                 •
                              
                            Fenegreeke.
                        26
                        Flaxe or Lint.
                        Ibidem
                        Felonweede, or S. Iames worte.
                        38
                        
                           Flos t
                                 •
                              nctoris for Diers.
                        45
                        Foxe Gloues, called Digitalis.
                        
                        47
                        Frankinsence, or thus.
                        49
                        Filberd Nuttes.
                        64
                        
                           Fraxinus the Ashe tree.
                        65
                        Figges.
                        66
                        French Sope.
                        64
                        Fumus terrae.
                        66
                        Fallow Deere.
                        75
                        Fiber.
                        76
                        Fox.
                        Ibidem
                        Fesant.
                        78
                        Fish.
                        75
                        Fatnesse of beastes.
                        81
                        Frogges.
                        84
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Garlike.
                        Fol. 3
                        Groundsill.
                        9
                        Grapes.
                        14
                        Ginger.
                        17
                        Gallowgrasse or Hempe.
                        27
                        Giloflowers.
                        35
                        Gramen.
                        38
                        Goose foote.
                        Ibidem
                        Geucian.
                        41
                        Germander.
                        47
                        Goofe grasse.
                        50
                        Grummell.
                        52
                        Gum Sarcocolle.
                        59
                        Galbanum.
                        60
                        Glaucium.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Gum Arabicke.
                        Ibidem
                        Gum Tragacanthe.
                        61
                        Gum Larix.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Gaulles.
                        62
                        Gum of Almondes.
                        68
                        Galauga.
                        66
                        Goates.
                        75
                        Geese.
                        77
                        Greene Cheese.
                        79
                        Goates mylke.
                        Ibidem.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        H
                        HOny.
                        Fol. 3
                        Hoppes.
                        7
                        Horehounde.
                        Ibidem
                        Hysope.
                        10
                        Helenium.
                        15
                        Henbane.
                        31
                        Humlocke.
                        Ibidem
                        Houslike.
                        35
                        Horse tayle.
                        40
                        Hartes Horne.
                        43
                        Hermodactylus.
                        46
                        Hypocistis.
                        64
                        Haematiste.
                        73
                        Hernes. B. S.
                        78
                        Hippoglossum.
                        23
                        Hypericon.
                        16
                        Hempe.
                        26
                        Hilton of Bidick.
                        80
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        I.
                        IEnuper.
                        65
                        Ire
                              •
                           s.
                        67
                        
                           Iette.
                        73
                        
                           Iuy. Fol. 39Iuery.
                        77
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        K.
                        Knotgrasse.
                        33
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        L.
                        LIllies.
                        Fol. 6
                        Lettice.
                        10
                        Liuerworte.
                        19
                        Lunges,
                        1
                        
                           L
                                 •
                              gusticum.
                        
                        22
                        Lupines.
                        30
                        Lions foote.
                        33
                        Lauender.
                        41
                        Lagopus.
                        43
                        Lyquerice.
                        53
                        Leauen.
                        66
                        Licium.
                        61
                        Litharge.
                        66
                        Lautus.
                        67
                        Lime.
                        70
                        Leade.
                        Ibidem
                        Lapis Lasulj.
                        72
                        Lapis Tutia.
                        73
                        Lapis Phrygius.
                        73
                        Lapis magnes.
                        Ibidem
                        Lambes woolle.
                        80
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        M.
                        MOuse Eare.
                        Fol. 2
                        Mustarde
                        8
                        Mintes.
                        10
                        Mellilote,
                        17
                        Mugworte.
                        18
                        Mallowes.
                        19
                        Marygolde.
                        25
                        Mandragora.
                        41
                        Misten, or Viscum.
                        
                        50
                        Mosse.
                        55
                        Mumia.
                        59
                        Mirobalans.
                        62
                        Mirtus.
                        63
                        Mulbery.
                        66
                        Minium.
                        70
                        Margarit.
                        72
                        Mylke. B. C.
                        79
                        Mayden hayre.
                        24
                        Masticke. R. F. B. S.
                        59
                        Mustela.
                        75
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        N
                        NEttles.
                        Fol. 35
                        Nigilla Romana.
                        25
                        Napus the roote.
                        52
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        O.
                        ONions.
                        5
                        Oyle.
                        18
                        Orpin that liueth so long.
                        38
                        Oke tree.
                        62
                        Ostpray the sea Egle.
                        76
                        Oates.
                        31
                        Oyle of Wormes.
                         
                        Otter that lyueth by fishe.
                        90
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        P.
                        
                           Philitis or Hartes tongue.
                        Fol. 1
                        Pursleyn or Portulace.
                        6
                        Plantein, or Plantago, Lambes tongue.
                        7
                        Pease, or Beanes.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        Peares.
                        13
                        Peaches, or Persica.
                        
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Prunes.
                        14
                        Polipodie of the Oke.
                        16
                        Peneroyall, or Pulegium.
                        
                        19
                        Poppie, or Papauer.
                        
                        25
                        Pease, or Pisum.
                        
                        28
                        Pimpernell.
                        33
                        
                           Paeonia, or Pionie.
                        36
                        Paunsis, or herba Trinitatis.
                        
                        39
                        Paritarie.
                        45
                        Purge, or Spurge, called Ricinus.
                        
                        40
                        
                           Psyllium, or fleaworte,
                        47
                        Pepper of the water.
                        49
                        Pellitorie, or Sternumentaria.
                        
                        50
                        
                           Phylanthropos, that will hang vpon 
                              〈◊〉
                            Apparell, called Goose grasse.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Pastnippes, or Pastinaca.
                        
                        53
                        
                           Pixnaualis, or Pitche of the Ship.
                        60
                        
                           Pistaciae a kynde of Nuttes.
                        64
                        
                           Populus, or Poppler tree.
                        65
                        Pomgranet, or Malum punicum.
                        
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Pepper, or Piper.
                        67
                        Pearles, or Margarite stones.
                        72
                        Porke, or Bakon.
                        74
                        Pigges.
                        Ibidem
                        Porpinti
                              •
                           e, or 
                              
                                 •
                              renaceus.
                        
                        75
                        Pecocke, theyr fleshe.
                        77
                        Partriches, theyr fleshe.
                        78
                        Pl
                              •
                           uers.
                        Ibidem
                        Playce the fyshe.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Q.
                        QUinces.
                        Fol. 14
                        Quercula minor.
                        47
                        Quayles.
                        78
                        Quicksiluer.
                        69
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        R.
                        RIce.
                        Fol. 8
                        Rue, or herbe Grace.
                        9
                        Raysens.
                        14
                        Rosemary.
                        18
                        Russhes.
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           Rocket gentill.
                        34
                        Rumex, called red Docke.
                        47
                        Rapes.
                        52
                        Roydes.
                        Ibidem
                        Radishe rootes.
                        53
                        Rubarbe.
                        54
                        R
                              •
                           sine.
                        59
                        Rose.
                        69
                        Roche.
                        78
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        S.
                        SAge.
                        Fol. 5
                        Sorrell.
                        7
                        Sauery.
                        8
                        Senecion, or Gronsell.
                        9
                        Scabious.
                        16
                        Spinage.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Se
                              •
                           walle.
                        17
                        Senturion,
                        21
                        Smallage.
                        32
                        
                           Simohitum, or Comfery.
                        24
                        
                           Scilla
                           ▪ or Squilla, or the Sea onion.
                        Ibi.
                        S
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           esaker.
                        30
                        Solanum.
                        Ibidem
                        Shepherdes purse.
                        33
                        Sticados.
                        34
                        Serpentaria.
                        35
                        Stitcheworte.
                        37
                        Sauine.
                        Ibidem
                        Sene Alexan.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Spatula foetida.
                        38
                        Shepherdes needle.
                        42
                        Saffron.
                        43
                        Sperma Coeti.
                        59
                        Storax.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Stat
                              •
                           e.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Stirax Calamite.
                        61
                        Sanders.
                        67
                        Suger of the Cane.
                        68
                        Sulpher, called Brimstone.
                        69
                        Spodium.
                        70
                        Sope.
                        Ibidem
                        Salte.
                        71
                        
                           Spo
                                 •
                              gia, the sea Spounge.
                        72
                        Sapbyrus.
                        73
                        Sparrowes.
                        78
                        Shelfishe.
                        75
                        
                           Sepum called Tallowe.
                        86
                        Scorpion.
                        84
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        T
                        TAsill▪ 
                           
                              
                                 ••
                              brum veneris.
                        
                        Fol. 15
                        Tyme.
                        17
                        Triplegrasse.
                        32
                        Tartar of Wynelies.
                        59
                        Terra Sigillata.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Turbit.
                        63
                        Tamarindes.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tamariscus, or Tamarix.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        V.
                        VIolettes.
                        Fol. 6
                        Ueruen.
                        8
                        Ualerian·
                        32
                        Verbalcum.
                        34
                        
                           Vngula caballina, or Tussilago.
                        
                        51
                        Uerdigrease.
                        70
                        Uernishe.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VV.
                        WOrmewood.
                        Fol. 2
                        Water of Riuers. &c.
                        11
                        Wyne.
                        10
                        Woodbynde.
                        21
                        Wheate.
                        29
                        Wilde water Peper.
                        49
                        W
                              ••
                           sell.
                        76
                        William Hilton.
                        79
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        A.
                        
                           
                              AZarabaccha, called Vulgago, hoat, and dry in the third degre: prouoketh vrine, helpeth the Liuer, and purgeth tearmes menstruall. &c.
                        Fol. 1
                        
                           Azaron is good agaynst the Feuer, Dropsie, and Frensie.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Asplenum, is good for the Splene.
                        Ibi.
                        
                           Absinthium, helpeth soare Eares, Eyes, Splene, and the Dropsie.
                        2
                        Anisseedes openeth the Raynes.
                        Ibidem
                        A good reamedy for the runninge of the Raynes.
                        Ibidem
                        Agaynst the blouddy flixe.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Agaynst poyson.
                        3
                        A medicine for the Fistula.
                        Ibidem
                        An healthfull drynk for Summer.
                        Ibid.
                        An excellent Pille, which helped. W. Bullein th'aurthour of thys booke, for the Reume.
                        5
                        A medicine of Fenill for the Raynes, and Bladder.
                        6
                        An example of Pur
                              ••
                           en.
                        Ibidem
                        An encreaser of the seede of generation.
                        10
                        Agaynst the byting of Dogges▪ and Serpentes.
                        9
                        A glass
                              •
                            for a drunkarde.
                        11
                        Ale▪ and Beere.
                        12
                        Asshes made of wylde Peare tree they
                              •
                            vertue.
                        13
                        
                           Apples theyr vertues.
                        14
                        A medicine for the small pockes.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Agaynst stinking Breath.
                        Ibidem
                        Agaynst drunkennesse.
                        14
                        Agaynst hoat choller.
                        Ibidem
                        Agaynst the Pestilence.
                        Ibidem
                        A cause of the Emeroydes.
                        15
                        A marueylous worke of Dictamnum.
                        
                        Ib.
                        A payned Stomacke.
                        18
                        A present helpe to bee delyuered of a deade Childe.
                        Ibidem
                        A medicine for Womens breasts.
                        20
                        
                           Althos, doth signef
                              •
                           e medicine.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        A good Gargarisme to wash
                              •
                            the Throate 
                        Fol. 23
                        Agaynst poyson.
                        25
                        A good Medicine for soare Eyes.
                        Ibidem
                        A quicke Medicine for a sta
                              •
                           e Ruffen.
                        27
                        Agaynst hoat inflamation, or swelling of ye body.
                        28
                        A more larger discription of Beames, and Pease.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        A knauishe practice of Inholders, & theyr Hostlers.
                        Ibidem
                        A Horse is a good seruaunt.
                        29
                        A plaster for a brused body.
                        30
                        A plaster to bryng forth a dead childe.
                        Ibi.
                        A good Medicine for the Stone, and Ray
                              •
                           es,
                        Ibidem
                        An hea
                              •
                           be venime, called Henbane, or Altercum.
                        
                        3
                              •
                           
                        
                        Against the Pestilence.
                        34
                        
                           Asparagus hath many Uertues as to encrease the seede. &c.
                        36
                        A good Medicine for the fallinge Sickenesse.
                        Ibidem
                        An alligory of an herbe, an olde Supersticion, inuented by Witches, a practice of Sathan.
                        39
                        
                           Angelica defendeth poyson, and preserueth chasticy.
                        43
                        Agaynst drunkennesse. Saff
                              •
                           on doeth helpe.
                        44
                        Agaynst poyson.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Agaynst the pestilence.
                        45
                        A good note of the nature of herbes.
                        47
                        Agaynst euill fyghte, Sauery preuayleth.
                         Fol. 48.
                        
                           Aristolochia helpeth Cankers.
                        49
                        A very good medicine for the Ulcer of the Yarde.
                        52
                        A p
                              •
                           aster for the Lyuer, or Goule.
                        Ibidem
                        A good wounde herb
                              •
                           .
                        Ibidem
                        An excellent infusion of Leonellus 
                                 •
                              auentinus to clense the bloude.
                        54
                        Agaricke clenseth the guts▪ and expulseth rawe humours.
                        Ibidem
                        Agaricke helpeth the fallinge Syckenesse.
                        Ibidem
                        Agaricke purgeth all the Organes of the Senses,
                        55
                        A precious Water wyth Synamon, and Cassia.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Amber greece of three kindes.
                        56
                        A good Pomeamber agaynst coldenesse of the Brayne.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        A Witches blessing for saynct Anthonies fyre.
                        57
                        A good plaster for a soare skabben 
                              •
                           ate.
                        60
                        
                           Ammomacum cōmeth from the Oracle of God Ammon.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        
                           Assafoetida doeth stinke, yet it helpeth the Mother, and Lunges.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Acatia stoppeth the bloudy flixe.
                        6
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        B.
                        
                           BYting of a Snake.
                        Fol. 3
                        Bees bee an exāple vnto vs, both of loue, and working in the common wealth.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        Bies mayntayne no Strangers, for they be not profitable.
                        4
                        Breade of a day olde.
                        13
                        Black Friers Peares in Norwiche.
                        Ibid.
                        Beanes in the olde Tyme, were vsed for Lottes.
                        28
                        
                           Bistorta hath a crūpled roote, lying wrinkled like a Serpente, but the Female roote is blacke wythout, & red within, & a great knot in the ende.
                        35
                        Brake Seedes were n
                              •
                           uer seene among christian people, but Witches hath vsed practice wyth theym as foolishe Wryters affyrme.
                        40
                        Bitter herbes be hoat and dry.
                        48
                        
                           Brionia vitis alba, or the wylde running Uyne.
                        49
                        
                           Brionia defendeth poyson.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        
                           Brionia increaseth milke.
                        50
                        
                           Epi
                                 •
                              hymum, and Gassutha h
                              •
                           lpeth ye Lyuer, Gaule, and Splen
                              •
                           .
                        5
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           Beware of the new dyate, except you haue two lyues, or els a wyse minister of the same.
                        58
                        Bitumen of the dead Sea.
                        59
                        
                           Balaustia the flower of Pomgranet: which wil stop a flixe,
                        65
                        Bath springes come from a veine of Brimstone
                        69
                        Burnt leade good for Chirurgians.
                        70
                        Boyes can kil the strongest men with gunnes.
                        72
                        
                           Bizabar a precious stone agaynst poysone & the bloudy flixe.
                        73
                        Beefe, not good for the Cholericke, but for tender stomackes.
                        74
                        Beefe broth agaynst the flixe.
                        Ibidem
                        Beare and Badgard haue vertue in medecine.
                        76
                        Beare, Foxe, and Brocke, are good to help the palsey
                        Ibidem
                        Butter, the vertue of it.
                        80
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        C
                        Coughes how to help it,
                        3
                        Corrupt fleume, to help it.
                        Ibidem
                        Cold coughes, to help it,
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        Coloquintida is perillous,
                        63
                        Comfort agaynst hoat choller in the stomacke.
                        10
                        Claret wyne warmeth the body.
                        10
                        Capers & Oliues: good for the spleene.
                        14
                        Couslippes, or Pagles.
                        34
                        Cresses helpe the palsey.
                        40
                        Cresses do helpe many infirmityes.
                        Ibid.
                        
                           Cartamus clenseth humours.
                        45
                        Clarie good for women.
                        48
                        
                           Cassiafistula commeth from Egypt.
                        55
                        
                           Cassiafistula hath many vertues to helpe mankinde, it canot be for borne among vs
                         Ibidem,
                        Couetousnesse and money, doth make blind both Diuines, Lawers and Phisicions, and transforme them from the Natures of men, into infernall monsters,
                        58
                        
                           Cubebes haue goodly vertue agaynst melā
                           cholie.
                        66
                        
                           Ceruse cooleth inflamed sores,
                        66
                        
                           Cardamon helpeth the fallyng sickenes,
                        67
                        
                           Caphur called Camphora, of a great Tree in Inde.
                        68
                        Camphire will quench nature.
                        Ibidem.
                        Corall groweth in the Sea.
                        72
                        Corall of two kindes.
                        Ibidem
                        Calues flesh, the profite thereof.
                        74
                        
                           Celsus for a vomite.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Castor stones do helpe all cold infirmities, both in men and women.
                        76
                        Cranes are 
                              •
                           oat, and increase seede.
                        77
                        
                           Dioscorides was an Heathen man, yet was he most cunnyng in the natures of Simples.
                        23
                        Drynke but two dragmes of nyght shade in Wine.
                        30
                        
                           Doronicus helpeth digestion.
                        53
                        Dates good for nature,
                        67
                        Duckes flesh is very hoate, and corrupted and vnholsome flesh.
                        76
                        Doues flesh nourisheth cold folkes, and is very hoat it selfe.
                        Ibidem
                        Diuers opinions, how Ambergrice is found.
                        56
                        Dragons bloud is very good to stoppe the bloudy flixe.
                        62
                        Doctour William Turner, found the very Tamarix in Germanie, which is best for the Spleene.
                        63
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        E
                        
                           Epithimum & Cassia help the gaule.
                        51
                        Edwards, a foolish Emperike, had almost kylled Cuthbert Blunt, with Elleborus albus, at Newcastle.
                        64
                        Egges of birdes, three speciall thyngs considered in them
                        80
                        Egges of great foules, are noysome to the stomacke.
                        Ibidem
                        Egges their whites helpe the eyen and quench heate.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Eringium maris, to increase seede.
                        44
                        Earth is the mother of euery thing, and into earth eche creature shal retourne.
                        84
                        Earth wormes are very holsome for Mankinde, so is their oyle.
                        Ibidem
                        Euery thinge shal turne to Dust in the ende.
                        85
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        F
                        For to helpe the biting of a Dogge.
                        6
                        For the brain and heart a good medicine.
                        16
                        For the Stomacke, Liuer, and the Spleene a good medicine:
                        17
                        
                           Fragaria hath vertue to coole.
                        23
                        
                           
                           Fragaria hath vertue to coole.
                        23
                        For to helpe the Emeroydes.
                        Ibidē
                        
                        From eating of beanes, what Pithagoras ment▪
                        
                        28
                        For coddes, when they are swelled a remedy.
                        Ibidem
                        For greene woundes, vse Ualerian to heal them,
                        32
                        For to helpe the swelling of the throate.
                        Ibidem.
                        For sore eyen to help them.
                        Ibidem
                        Flegmon is an appostumacion, gathered of corrupted blood into one place.
                        46
                        Framingham, Nettlestede, and Lethringham, auncient parkes.
                        50
                        For paynes of the head comming of heat, a remedy.
                        47
                        From whence Rhabarbe doth come.
                        54
                        Filverdes are good after meate, & also for moyst reumes.
                        64
                        Figges are both meat and medecine.
                        66
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        G
                        GArlike wil prouoke vryne, but it is not good for Cholerick persones.
                        3
                        Greene sicknes.
                        5
                        
                           Guaicum is of greater vertue than ye Bath or Bukstones wel agaynst the nosegay of Naples.
                        12
                        Good for the shortnes of wynde.
                        6
                        Goodly syrupe to clense the Stomacke is made of Squilla.
                        
                        24
                        Gose foote is a perillous herbe.
                        38
                        Genesis .xxx. doth not proue that Mandrake helpeth conception.
                        4
                        Great Spurge or Ricinus maketh stronge vomittes.
                        45
                        Goodly are the vertues of Rapes.
                        55
                        
                           Galbanum is a Gum of greate vertue to bring forth a dead childe.
                        60
                        Gaules do grow like Acornes, and haue vertue to stop flixes.
                        62
                        
                           Guaicum wil clense the eyes
                        63
                        Gum Arabike wil restrayne the flix, and woundes.
                        60
                        Glewe wil heale woundes.
                        Ibidem
                        Gum Larix is equall with the beste Terebintyne.
                        61
                        Gold the most vndefyl
                              •
                           d mettal is good for Cordialles.
                        75
                        Generacion commeth agayne into corruption.
                        88.
                        Gilloflowers are good for the hart and help woundes.
                        35
                        Goose flesh breadeth Melancholy.
                        77
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        H
                        How to correct Elleborus albus that it shal not hurte.
                        18
                        Hony is not good for hoat people, for it wil tourne most soonest into Choller.
                        3
                        Hony is an heauenly dew.
                        Ibidem
                        Hayre how to preserue it.
                        6
                        
                           Hydropiper may be vsed in the place of pepper.
                        49▪
                        
                        How to know good Agarike.
                        54
                        How to vse Radish rootes.
                        55.
                        Hempe wil kil wormes in the belly and destroy seede of Generation.
                        27
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        I
                        IF Harpe stringes were of one degree▪ vnpleasaunt were that harmonie.
                        20
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        L.
                        Leekes.
                        6
                        Lethe, a flood, whose water did cause men to forget them selues when they drink of it.
                        1
                              •
                           
                        
                        Lungworte so called, because it is lyke the lunges of man.
                        20
                        Liguria, is a parte of Itali from the Hill Apeninus vnto the Tuscan Sea.
                        22.
                        Lauender the sweete vertue therof, holsom for cold folkes:
                        41
                        Lauender 
                              •
                           ealeth the sinewes,
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Lunaria healeth woundes.
                        43
                        
                           Lysimachus, stoppeth blood, Lysimachus a king of Macedonia, found this herbe, whē he was scholler to Calistenes. & one of Alexanders worthy captaynes.
                        43
                        
                           Lathiris or Cataputia minor or the lesse Spurge
                        45.
                        
                           Lithargus helped with herbes, hoat & drye in the third degree.
                        51.
                        Liquorice helpeth the kinges euil.
                        53
                        
                           Lignum Aloes called Agallocum, which is Aromatike.
                        55
                        
                           Lignum aloes cometh not from Paradice, as fooles affirme, but from Mo
                              •
                           del, a city of Inde.
                        Ibidem
                        Laudanū doth helpe the haire from falling sayth Paulus.
                        61
                        
                           
                           Licium commeth from Lici
                              •
                           .
                        6
                              •
                           
                        
                        Leuen dissolueth hard thinges, and maketh them soft.
                        66
                        Laurus called the Baie, against ye stone.
                        67
                        Lead will coole and helpe sores.
                        70
                        
                           Lapis naxius helpeth to increase haire.
                        73
                        Lambes flesh is good rosted, euil sodden.
                        75
                        La
                              •
                           kes helpe the Chollicke, blacke birdes, Plouers, Sparrowes, Woodcockes, small Birdes.
                        78
                        Lime helpeth rotten sores.
                        70
                        Liuers of Beastes.
                        32
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        M
                        Monseare is good for the fallyng sicknes.
                        2
                        Monseare helpeth the throate.
                        Ibidem
                        Michell ye 
                           Chirurgian of New castel.
                        Ibid.
                        Maister Roger Straunges medicine brought from Uenice, written by a Learned Italian Doctor, for runnyng of the raynes.
                        13
                        Markes of strypes in the skin▪
                        
                        15
                        Mercurie helpeth conception.
                        19
                        Maister Luke of London.
                        26
                        Many good Medicines made of Hempe Seede.
                        Ibidem
                        Meale and Waxe, hath made greate Marchaunts at Rome.
                        29
                        Many good Medicines made of House 
                              •
                           eke.
                        35
                        Mandrake is mutch like a man, or a Woman by craft, for nature giueth no mans shape to a beast, mu
                              •
                           ch lesse to an herb.
                        41
                        Mandrake was called Circaeū, and also Anthropomorphos.
                        
                        42
                        Madder with red rootes, agaynst the Pestilence.
                        47
                        Many good vertues of Germāder.
                        Ibidem
                        Many good vertues of Aristolochia, longa & rotunda.
                        
                        49
                        Mis
                              •
                           en healeth many perilous sores.
                        50
                        Missel
                              •
                           owe or M
                              •
                           s
                              •
                           en, wyll make a good ripyng plaster, to heale the cornes in the feete.
                        Ibidem
                        Misseltow is not natural in kynde but a bastard braunch, growing vpon some other tree.
                        51
                        Misseltow is lyke to a straunger, that increaseth and florisheth by the 
                              •
                           urt & losse of a 
                              •
                           ree borne man, of his owne naturall Countrey or City.
                        51
                        Mannes nature subiect to many Euilles, for want of perfect temperament.
                        57
                        March and April are the best times to heale the Poxe.
                        58
                        Mirrhe preserueth the Body from putrifaction or rottyng.
                        59
                        Mirtes haue vertue to restrayne
                        63
                        Manna of the Ashe trees in Italie.
                        68
                        Medicines made of the Osspraie.
                        76
                        M
                              •
                           ddie fish not holsome.
                        78
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        N
                        Nettle seedes wil serue in the place of Peper.
                        35
                        Note that the blacke Thistle roote wyth Swines Grease and Brimstone, wyll heale Scabbes and itche.
                        44
                        Note, Quid pro quo, was giuen to ye Lorde Wharton in his potage of ignoraunce, to his great peril of Lyfe.
                        45
                        Nutmegge, or Muske nutte, hath many singuler vertues against cold.
                        64
                        Nutmegges, not good for hoat complexioned men.
                        65
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        O
                        Onions prouoke sleepe.
                        5
                        Oyle of Oliues best.
                        17
                        Olde sores.
                        18
                        Oyle of Roses,
                        Ibidem
                        Old Rushes, and old Courtiers bee past pleasure.
                        21
                        Of the healing comfortable Herbe so named:
                        24
                        Of Popie wylde and tame.
                        25
                        Otes do clense the Lunges▪
                        
                        29
                        Orpin healeth the Morphue.
                        38
                        Oyle of Spike doth warme.
                        41
                        Of sundry kindes of Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogges grasse.
                        42
                        Of the little Beast called Chamelion.
                        44
                        Of Rumex the Docke, called Monkes Rubarbe, or bastard Mercurie.
                        47
                        Of the great Docke, how it purgeth.
                        Ibid.
                        Of the herb called Atriplex, or Arige.
                        Ibid.
                        
                           Orthopnaea is difficultie of Winde.
                        48
                        Of the wood of Life called Guaicum.
                        57
                        Oppoponax doeth resolue.
                        61
                        Oyle of Roses for the head.
                        69
                        Of the flesh of Oxen, Steeres, Bulles and Calfes.
                        74
                        Oxe gaule clenseth the eyes.
                        Ibidem
                        Oxe milte stoppeth the flixe.
                        Ibidem
                        Osspraies oyle, good to put in water, to gather fish ready to be taken.
                        76
                        Of house Cockes, Capons, Chickens, their flesh mutch commended.
                        77
                        Of Dragons, whych helpeth agaynst the pestilence.
                        6
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        P
                        Pouerty is better among the common people, than aboundaunce of riches.
                        20
                        Perilous practicioners be here discribed.
                        26
                        P
                              ••
                           san made of Barly, wil quēch choller.
                        27
                        Pichagoras sayd this Faba abstineto that is abstaine from Beaues, Plinie and Tullie saye, because of the ingendryng of grosse humours, he forbad them.
                        28
                        Plutarcus sayth, it was to beware, to bee in office in a common wealth, because it is so perillous.
                        Ibidem
                        Pease came first from Piso in Greece.
                        Ibid.
                        Pe
                              •
                           se gr
                              •
                           wi
                              •
                           g on the owne accord, without Sowing, where no Earth but Stones b
                              •
                           .
                        29
                        Plenty of Otes in North humberlād.
                        Ibid.
                        Pimpinella is good against ye Pestilēce.
                        33
                        Poore mens Peper.
                        35
                        
                           Paeonia is called the chast herbe·
                        36
                        Paralises, or Palsey.
                        37
                        
                           Persicaria, or Peache leaues, growing in marrice ground.
                        40
                        Parietarie that groweth vppon Stone Walles.
                        45
                        Perfect hearts rest, and true quietnesse of minde.
                        46
                        
                           Psyllium called Fleewort.
                        47
                        Purple fingers.
                        48
                        Pellitorie hath vertue to helpe the teeth.
                        50
                        Pellitorie wil take away a cold Feuer.
                        ibi
                        
                           Ph
                                 •
                              lanthropos, Aper
                                 •
                              ne, commonly called Gosegrasse, and Hareweade.
                        Ibidem
                        Pistacia, a nutte of Siria, or Italia
                        62
                        Peper dissolueth, and consumeth moyste humours.
                        
                           67
                        
                        
                           Pyrites lapis, agaynst proude flesh.
                        73
                        Porke the commendacion thereof.
                        74
                        Pigges.
                        Ibidem
                        Peacockes flesh is hoat and moyste in the first degree.
                        77
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Q
                        QUinces are holsome.
                        
                           
                              •
                           4
                        Quinces rawe hurte.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Quercula minor, the little Oke, or Germā
                           der.
                        47
                        Quailes vnholsome.
                        78
                        Quicksiluer or Mercurie.
                        69
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        R
                        RAwe herbes.
                        9
                        Red wine corrupteth bloud.
                        10
                        Rotten sores helped.
                        36
                        Bellises of Iarrow in the Bishopricke of Durisme.
                        37
                        Roida healeth the head.
                        
                           
                              ••
                           
                        
                        Rose water and whyte wyne, for all ho
                              •
                           te causes.
                        5
                              •
                           
                        
                        R
                              •
                           ach a Heathen Kyng, found fyrst Camphire.
                        68
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        S
                        SOre eares to helpe them.
                        2
                        Serpigo to helpe it.
                        3
                        Sweete breathes.
                        6
                        Stinking fleume,
                        7
                        S
                              •
                           oppyng of the liuer.
                        8
                        Sowe Thistle the vertue.
                        10
                        Sroppyng of vomites.
                        Ibidem
                        Sickenesse in the Lunges.
                        Ibidem
                        Salt water healeth scabbes.
                        11
                        Sodden bread not holsome.
                        1
                              •
                           
                        
                        Sarfettes of Ale and Be
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           .
                        12
                        Swellynges to helpe them.
                        14
                        Sweete Prunes be laxatiue, but tarte bee bindyng.
                        Ibidem
                        Scabious for scabbes, it taketh the name of the propertie, the ryght name is S
                              •
                           oebe or Psora, there be two kindes of it.
                        60
                        Seede augmented.
                        70
                        Sweete Calamus odoratus.
                        Ibidem
                        Sir Thomas Rushe Knyght.
                        20
                        Sundry names of Woodbinde, as Periclimenon, because it wyndeth aboute the next 
                              •
                           rees and bushes, that it groweth vnto.
                        21
                        Satyrus is a beast, hauyng a head lyke a man, and body lyke a Goate, and these are named Gods of the Wooddes, and they first found this herbe of U
                              •
                           nus, to stirre vp carnall lust.
                        Ibidem
                        Sanicle healeth wounds.
                        23
                        Sanicle is good for horse and kyen.
                        Ibid.
                        Staphis Agria Pedicularis, a seede that wyll kill Lice in Chyldren, & Haukes.
                        30
                        
                           Solanum, Nyghtshade, or the sleepynge D
                              •
                           ale.
                        Ibidem
                        Swallow dunge wyll make blynd, example of Tobias.
                        
                           32
                        
                        Sheperdes purse, to stop bloud.
                        
                           33
                        
                        Stica
                              •
                           os good for the spleene.
                        34
                        Scaldyng and burnyng helped.
                        36
                        Stichwort will heale the stone, and heale wounds.
                        37
                        Sauen of two kyndes.
                        Ibidem
                        Sene helpeth the head, wyth all the senses.
                        38
                        Sir Richard Alie, his pocion, Mathiolus vseth the same in Dioscoridem.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Saintie Iames woort, called Fellon weede.
                        38
                        Spatula wyll kill Lice.
                        Ibidem
                        Sweete Botris.
                        
                           41
                        
                        Saffron hath many vertues.
                        44
                        Sundry kindes of Spurge, but yet very perillous, the great Spurge and the second excepted, for they be good.
                        46
                        Shifte water oftentymes, when Atriplex is sodden.
                        47
                        Saueri
                              •
                            the vertue.
                        48
                        Sweete Muske is pleasaunt.
                        
                           55
                        
                        Sweete thinges bee good for Mankynde, but yet abused of 
                              •
                           outhfull wantons, are not to be suffred in them
                        Ibidem
                        Sweete Gloues their profite.
                        6
                        Scepters for kinges, and the Heathen Idols of E
                              •
                           enus.
                        Ibidem
                        Sagapen, or Serapinum, a goodly gum.
                        60
                        Sagapen wyll helpe the Lunges, and Spleene.
                        Ibidem
                        Scammonie is perillous, except it bee first prepared.
                        62
                        Suber the Corke, will stop Bloude and flixe.
                        Ibidem
                        Sinamon.
                        65
                        Sebesten wyll helpe struma.
                        66
                        Sanders do coole the head, and reconcyle sleepe, and helpe the Goute,
                        67
                        Suger the Cane.
                        68
                        Spycknard of Spayn helpeth ye brain.
                        Ibid
                        Sundry opinions of Camphire.
                        Ibidem
                        Sulpher, or Brimstone.
                        69
                        Sundry kindes of Roses, all of great vertue.
                        Ibidem
                        Smigma, or Sope.
                        
                           70
                        
                        Sope wyl kyl Tetters,
                        Ibidem
                        Spodium stoppeth bloud.
                        
                           71
                        
                        Salt, what it is in vertue.
                        Ibidem
                        Salt hath vertue to warme and dry.
                        Ibid.
                        Salt not good for leane persones.
                        Ibidem
                        Sir Ihon Delauall, a good knyght.
                        71
                        Sal Gemmae.
                        Ibidem
                        Sal Armoniac.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Sal Ammoniac. doth clense the skin.
                        76
                        Salt of Inde.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Sal niter, or Peter, for gun pouder.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Spuma nitri or Barach.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        Salt of Mare mortuum, where as Sodome was.
                        Ibidem
                        Spuma maris.
                        72
                        
                           Spuma maris doth make cleane ye teeth
                        ibi.
                        Spunge of the sea.
                        Ibidem
                        Spunge good for wounds.
                        Ibidem
                        Spunges new are good, but old are eu
                              •
                           l.
                        ibi.
                        Spunge stones doe breake the stone in the raynes.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Saphyrus resisteth poyson.
                        73
                        Swines bloud.
                        74
                        Swine of Inde haue hornes.
                        Ibidem
                        Swannes flesh cholerik
                              •
                           .
                        78
                        Swannes s
                              •
                           nge.
                        Ibidem
                        Sutch meate, sutch complexion.
                        Ibidem
                        Sea fish holsomer, than that of the fresh water.
                        78
                        Shell fishes.
                        79
                        Sundry kindes of Cheese.
                        80
                        Stones of the Oxe bladder.
                        82
                        Scorpion breaketh the stone.
                        84
                        Sna
                              •
                           les helpe a
                              •
                           he.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        T.
                        THe Arabians call that Nill, whych wee name Viscum, or Misseltow.
                        
                           1
                        
                        The splenaticke loue.
                        Ibidem
                        To increase haire.
                        3
                        To cure Serpigo.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense the face.
                        Ibidem
                        The propertie of a good huswyfe.
                        4
                        The kyng of Bees, and his army.
                        Ibidem
                        The iuice of Sage, helpeth conception. An Example.
                        
                           5
                        
                        To stop bloud runnyng at ye mouth how,
                        ibi.
                        To kyll the Canker, and quench Robin good felowes Feuer.
                        
                           5
                        
                        To clense the stomacke.
                        Ibidem
                        To breake the stone.
                        6
                        To wash feete,
                        Ibidem
                        Two kyndes of Fenell.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe a moyst reume▪
                        
                        7
                        To helpe the sight.
                        8
                        To helpe the kinges euyll.
                        Ibidem
                        To make fat.
                        Ibidem.
                        To kill wormes,
                        Ibidem
                        To gargarise the head.
                        Ibidem
                        To help the eyes.
                        
                           9
                        
                        To prouoke vryne.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense Leprosy.
                        Ibidem
                        To increase m
                              •
                           lke.
                        10
                        To abate the lust.
                        Ibidem
                        To kil wormes.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe the chollike.
                        Ibidem
                        To make sweete Breath.
                        Ibidem
                        To purge the head.
                        Ibidem
                        To lose the belly.
                        Ibidem
                        To help the sple
                              ••
                           
                        
                        Ibidem
                        
                           The goodly vertues of common water.
                        11
                        The cause 
                              •
                           hy Nilus doth flow.
                        Ibidem
                        The cause of Barnacles▪
                        
                        12
                        The cause of Christal.
                        Ibidem
                        The effectes of the ba
                              •
                           hes at the towne of Bathe
                        Ibidem
                        The dead sea.
                        Ibidem
                        The meane b
                              •
                           ked breade the best.
                        13
                        The operacion of Peares
                        Ibidem
                        The operacion of Ap
                              •
                           es.
                        Ibidem
                        The operacion of Peaches,
                        Ibidem
                        The operacion of Quinces.
                        14.
                        The operacion of Cheryes
                        Ibidem
                        To comfort digestion.
                        Ibidem
                        Two kindes of Al
                              •
                           es,
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe watry eyes,
                        Ibidem
                        To clense choller and f
                              ••
                           ume,
                        15
                        To comfort the heart.
                        16
                        The property of Uinegar.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe the Goute.
                        
                           17
                        
                        Theophrastus of Setwall.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe the spleene.
                        Ibidem
                        Tyme can not be called again.
                        17
                        To wast winde in the body.
                        Ibidem
                        To digest cold herbes.
                        18
                        The brayne comforted.
                        Ibidem
                        To neese,
                        Ibidem
                        The 
                              •
                           elle Woodbinde, Smylax.
                        
                        19
                        The vertue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Perselle, is to open 
                              •
                            places, whych stoppe Urine, and wynde.
                        20
                        The vertues of Perselies.
                        Ibidem
                        To heale a bruse or a fall.
                        24
                        To heale Ringwormes, and Te
                              •
                           ters.
                        25
                        To mo
                              ••
                            swea
                              •
                           e.
                        Ibidem
                        The vertue of Lint oyle.
                        26
                        The miserie of vnthrifts seemeth pleasant. but shame and pain is the end.
                        Ibidem
                        The innocent sometime dieth in the eyes of men, miserable.
                        27
                        The consideracion of Hempe in Phisick.
                        ibi
                        To helpe the Lung
                              •
                           s▪
                        
                        Ibidem
                        The bread and drynke of the poore, bee the lyfe of the needy: and he that take it away from them, is as a murderer.
                        Ibidem
                        The ol
                              •
                           e Romaines were more humble than the new Romains, and late Popes, in kepyng names of base titles.
                        28
                        The time 
                              •
                           f Cicero.
                        Ibidem
                        The best Pease potage.
                        Ibidem
                        Ta
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           .
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Triticum, Wheate▪ or out bread.
                        29
                        To feede on Bran, maketh a man leaue, but flower bryngeth fatnesse.
                        Ibidem
                        The very Diuines and Dunsmen dyd neuer agree generally.
                        Ibidem
                        The sundry kyndes and Natures of Wheate.
                        Ibidem
                        To kill Wormes with Lupines.
                        30
                        Three kyndes of Henbane.
                        31
                        The whyte Henbane is vsed in medicine.
                        31
                        The most cold herbe, and a poyson.
                        Ibidem
                        The death of Socrates was wyth Wyne, and the iuice of Humlocke.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe him whych hath drunke Humlocke.
                        Ibidem
                        Two kyndes of Triple grasse.
                        32
                        Triple grasse hath many vertues, and excelleth against poison.
                        Ibidem
                        To heale wounds and sores.
                        33
                        Tormentill doth grow, and diminish wych the Uine.
                        34
                        Tormentil kepeth sheepe from the rot.
                        ibi
                        To make the vrine sweete.
                        36
                        To clense the Morphew.
                        38
                        To kill Lyce.
                        39
                        To heale wounds.
                        Ibidem
                        To gather Iuie Gum.
                        Ibidem
                        To draw teeth without payne.
                        Ibidem
                        To kyll brode wormes, in the Chest or belly.
                        40
                        The d
                              •
                           ad Nettle,
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe the flixe.
                        41
                        To helpe t
                              •
                           e Guttes.
                        Ibidem
                        To stop the termes of Women.
                        Ibidem
                        This place proueth not, that Mandrake wil helpe conception, but Mandrake wyll clense the Matrix, or cast forth the deade child from the same; also it will kyll the lyuing seede.
                        42
                        The vertues of Mandrake, is to make one sleepe.
                        Ibidem
                        To poyson wolues and Foxes.
                        Ibidem
                        The best Saffron of thys World, where it is.
                        44
                        The sea Thistle, called Eringus, whych is so called, because if the Root
                              •
                            bee sodden, and conserued wyth Honye and cloues, it wyll preserue Nature, or lyft 
                              •
                           ym vp, whych is decayed, it maye come of erigo, gis, eroxi, to lyft vp, or repaire.
                        Ibidem
                        The Bore or carle Thystle, called Chamelaeon.
                        
                        
                           44
                        The Thistle healeth the Pestilence.
                        Ibid.
                        To vomite.
                        45
                        
                           Tithimalus Charatias, or Lathyris is good in medicine, to purge Melancholie, choller, and Fleume.
                        46
                        The greatest Treasure of this Worlde is a quiet minde.
                        Ibidem
                        They which call Rumex with the Golden Sande Mercurie, do greatly erre.
                        47
                        The Kyngs Euyll.
                        Ibidem
                        To dye the haire.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense the stomacke.
                        48
                        The oyle of Calamintes, doeth warme the body, and is good against ye Sciatica.
                        ibi.
                        To heale sores with Brionia.
                        
                        49
                        To clense the Face with Brionia.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        To cause vrine to passe plentifully.
                        52
                        The difference betweene Rubarbe, and Rapontike.
                        54
                        The cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burn the Spice trees and plantes.
                        Ibidem
                        To comfort the spirites.
                        55
                        The Beast, whych giueth Muske is lyke a Goate: that which bryngeth zinet, is lyke a Cat.
                        Ibidem
                        The blaunching of Muske.
                        Ibidem
                        Two Witches in Suffolke, charmed with Ebenie Beades.
                        56
                        The poxe of Fraunce.
                        57
                        Three kindes of Guaicum, but the whyte is most excellent.
                        Ibidem
                        The consideracion of Guaicum.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        Three most notable and best Instruments of the common wealth the Deuyne, the Lawer, and the Phisicion.
                        58
                        The most excellent and best maner to seeth Guaicum in composicions, with other Simples, to clense the Poxe, from all the members of the body.
                        59
                        The Dia
                              •
                           e for the Poxe▪ shortlye declared.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tartar, made of Wyne Lies.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Terra sigillata stoppeth bloud.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Thus called Frankinsence, or Olibanū.
                        ibid
                        To clense Galbanom.
                        60
                        To helpe the prickyng of sinewes.
                        Ibidem
                        Three glewes, that is of Beastes skinnes of fish, and of Cor
                              •
                           e.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Terebinthus, or Terebintine, hath greate vertue to heale.
                        61
                        The vertue of Terebintine.
                        Ibidem
                        The euill craft of subtil Apothicaries, doth mu
                              •
                           ch harme.
                        Ibidem
                        To know good Diagridion.
                        Ibidem
                        To seeme younge, how to do it.
                        62
                        To purge tender persones.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense sore ey
                              •
                           n.
                        Ibidem
                        The Que
                              ••
                           e, or Oke tree, wyll stoppe the bloudy flixe, or bloud, so wyl the Barke, Akorns, or Leaues, wyth ye cups.
                        Ibid.
                        The Beech tree wyth 
                              •
                           is fru
                              •
                           cte, wyll stop flixes.
                        Ibidem
                        To stop the flixe, called Dysenteria, and Tenasmus wyth Mirtes.
                        63
                        To kill wormes in the belly, wyth Coloquintida.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe the teeth, wyth Coloquintida.
                        ibi
                        Turpit, whych purgeth flegme.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tamarinds, or Tamardactylis.
                        
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe Emeroides.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tamariscus is a little tree lyke Quyckbene.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tamarix doth help the Spleene.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           Tamarix against the flixe.
                        64
                        The vertue of the Pistac
                              •
                            Nuts.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe broken bones.
                        65
                        To helpe the Spleene.
                        Ibidem
                        To kyll Lyce.
                        Ibidem
                        To resolue.
                        67
                        To couer a bone wyth flesh.
                        67
                        Three kyndes of Sanders.
                        67
                        The great vertue of Manna, for Mankynde.
                        68
                        To cause sleepe.
                        Ibidem
                        To stop the whytes, and runnyng of the raynes.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense scabbes.
                        ibi.
                        The Rose a friend to the Brayne, and eyen.
                        Ibidem
                        The best Roses be in Italy.
                        Ibidem
                        To dry Salt.
                        71
                        The flowing of Salt at Nilus.
                        Ibidem
                        To clense sore eyen▪
                        
                        72
                        To stop Bloud.
                        Ibidem
                        The Magarite or Pear
                              •
                           e, 'good in Cordials.
                        Ibidem
                        The Magnet stone.
                        73
                        Tripes.
                        74
                        The Winter Dear, better than the Sommer.
                        75
                        The Lunges of the Deare.
                        Ibidem
                        The Pouder of the Hare, for the stone.
                        Ibidem
                        The Urchin, or Hedghog.
                        76
                        
                           The Weesel good agaynst the falling sicknesse, and Struma, Angina, or swellyng of the throate.
                        Ibidem
                        The Foxe.
                        Ibidem
                        To helpe baldnesse.
                        Ibidem

                              The Barnacle of Scotland, neuer layth Egs, but are bred only of the Ocean Sea: read Gesnerus de Auibus lib. ii
                                       •
                                    .
                              
                              67
                           
                        
                        Three thyngs considered in Fish.
                        68
                        Tallow of male beastes, are hoater than 
                              〈◊〉
                            Female.
                        
                           71
                        
                        To preserue fat,
                        72
                        The prouidence of God.
                        85
                        T
                              •
                           ooble hath so hindred mee, that I am constrayned presently to stay in this lyttle worke.
                        Ibidem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        V
                        Uiolets be great colours, and to colde for the heart.
                        6
                        Uomits strayn the body
                        
                           17
                        
                        Ualerian ma
                              •
                           eth salues of greate goodnesse.
                        32
                        
                           Vrtica the Nettle.
                        35
                        
                           Viola Lutea the yellow Uiolet, the wall Gilloflower.
                        46
                        Uery Gentlemen, springe not by extortion, but by true seruyng theyr prynces, and lyuing of theyr owne, hurtyng not their poore neighbours, preferring the fauour of the countrey, before lucre, whych is their chiefe treasure.
                        50
                        Uirgill.
                        
                           51
                        
                        
                           Vngula Caballina, Hor shoue.
                        Ibidem
                        Vnguentum Aegiptyacum.
                        70
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VV
                        Wormewood hath many vertues.
                        2
                        Welshmennes drynke.
                        
                           3
                        
                        Where plenty of Onions do grow.
                        6
                        UUounds kept from corruption.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        UUhyte UUyne.
                        10
                        UUine is an enemy to chyldren.
                        Ibidem
                        UUine imoderately vsed, comforteth.
                        11
                        UUhat kinde of UUater is best,
                        Ibidem
                        UUhyte Popie is the best.
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                        UUhen Uenice first began.
                        28
                        UUheat wil degenerate out of kinde, that is, from UUheat to Darnell.
                        29
                        Walwort maketh medicine for the Goute, and paynes in the ioynctes,
                        
                           51
                        
                        When Ebenus came first to Rome.
                        56
                        What euyll hath hapned, through the abusing of Guaicum amonge the Emperikes.
                        57
                        Walnuts agaynst poyson, as Mithridates reporteth.
                        64
                        Why hogges are diseased.
                        74
                        William Hilton, letted William Bulleine to finish his booke of healthfull Medycines.
                        79
                        Whaie the vertue thereof.
                        80
                        Wine Oyle, and Bread, Gods gifts.
                        85
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        X
                        XXX. Leaues of Azarabaccha doe serue in infusion, but other wayes three, foure, or fiue, do suffice.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Y
                        Yellow and Purple fingers.
                        4
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        HEREAFTER ensueth a litle dialogue betweene two men, the one called Sorenes, and the other Chirurgi, Concerning Apostumations, & woundes their causes, and also theire Cures, gathered by VVilliam Bulleine the Aucthour and Collectoure of all these.
                        Dialogues, contayned wythin this Booke Uery profitable for euery Reader, and true obseruer of them.
                        And fyrst beginneth the Sore Manne to speake, as Followeth,
                        (:)
                        1579:
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A LITTLE DIALOGVE BEtweene Soarenes, and Chirurgi.
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        
                           NOw our old Freindes haue done all their long talke. very profitable to each other, & also to as many as haue heard them▪ I trust we shal spende the tyme to the like effect, with no lesse profite, thā 
                        Marcellus and Hilarius, which had comfort in seeking forth the sweete flowers of sundry shapes in the fyeld, to their no small delyte, all this last Sommer. But now the horie, stormy, darke Winter weather approacheth nere, as Persius sayth: Admouit iam bruma foco te Basse Sabino. Bassus, cold Winter doth draw thee to the fyre, in the Mountayne called Sabinus, sayth he. Cold weather sayth he, draweth nere, Flora is fledd, Boreas, perceth, and causeth al beastes to tremble, bereuinge theym of their pleasant Sōmer shroudes, vnder the sweete leaues of greene Trees. The Earth is new couered with whyte Snowes, hard craking Ice,
                           Sabius a famous Mountayne in Italy Flora a Goddes of Flowers a harlot of Rome. Borias the Northeast wynde and horye frostes. Byrdes do quiuer and quake, lurking in the holes of Rockes and olde Barnes, for their reliefe. The Beastes with slender empty bellies and cold tremblyng Carkasses, doe cluster in flockes, or shroud them selues vnder the naked Bushes, with their faces from the fierce wyndes. These short Dayes, and long nightes, cause both man and beast to draw togeather in warme places, and close houses, now the pore Bees, if they laboured wel in Sommer, haue their close sweete delytes in warme Hyues in winter. Thus doth Nature geue prouidence to sondry creatures, to foresee daungers to come, as honger, cold, storme. Furthermore, God & Nature, haue from the beginning, taught both man and beast, not onelye to relieue themselues in health, but in the tyme of sicknes, and Soarnes: each of thē are taught how to correct, stop, & purge such humours, as do offend nature.
                     Thus man artificially, and beastes naturally, haue a wonderful prouidence, wherby the glory of our Lord, and God doth appear of no smal Maiesty, and deuyne power: which prepared his incensible creatures, as Man, Beast, Fysh, Foule, Serpentes. &c. And one of them to be both meate and medecine for an other. His name be praysed therfore. Amen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        HOw beit good brother you haue reuerently spoken, of the Diuine prouidence. I perceiue you did heare and marke wel, what end our good frend Hilarius made, Praysing God with the holye Prophete Dauid. Psal ciii.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        YE forsooth, although I be sore in body, yet I trust to beginne with good comfort, with a pleasaunt Comodye, and not end in a fearful Tragidye,Tragedies begin euer euil & end the same. For I haue hard say in the wrytyng of the holy Euangell, which reporteth from the mouth of God, saying: before al thinges seeke the kingdome of God, and then shall all thinges be geuen vnto

you. If al thynges shalbe geuen vnto them, which pray vnto God, than shal comfort be geuen to the Careful,First seeke Gods kyngdome. Breade to the Hungrye, lyberty to the thrall. And fynallye health to the Sicke, and Soare. &c. As example, Christe gaue health vnto the Lepors, Lame, Blynde, &c. Euen so I trust, beyng a soare Body, to be relieued at the mighty hands of God, or through him, by his cunning ministers, among whom you are one, whiche haue done many happy Cures, as I haue hearde. Wel, say furder, we haue present occasyon, and tyme conueniente giuen vnto bothe: you, to warne you labour continually, and I agayn for health, pacientlye to suffer and learne some wholsome doctrine, for my reliefe. For if the Builders of Houses, wherein our Bodyes be shrouded, be not to be sorborne: much lesse the repayrers of the Bodyes of men, wherin the Soule remaineth, can be spared when eyther Wounde, Soare, Botche, or such lyke assaulteth our mortall mantion of the body. To conclude with you I wil, followyng all this short Winters day, in the warme house, to demaund questions as wel as I can, for my health and learning.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     Say on your mynde a Gods blessyng.
                  
                  
                     Soarnes
                     
                        FOr that I neuer did Drynke vppon the sweete Fludde, or Well Spryng of Philosophy, in my tender yeares: neyther haue sleapte vnder the noble Mountayne, and sweete two topped Hill, called Pernasus, Further, I did neuer slumber, or forgotte my selfe, throughe Golden Sleapes vppon Helycon that Noble highe Hyll, and pleasaunt place, where somtyme the nine Muses, gaue foorth theire Sacred gyftes. But rather I haue Drunke and Bybbed vppon the cold seuerus flood of the pale Water called Perenne:Ignoraunce. and washed my selfe in the Darke Streames, of the forgetfull Hellish Broke Lethe in Cleane forgetfulnes. Therefore to saye the truth of my selfe, my sore Body and dol
                           •
                        ish Brayne, can receiue but smal health, & Comforte, except it shal please thee, gently to heare mee: For curtesye is a goodly Schole maistres,Curtas
                              •
                           e. and Comfortable are sweete Cordials, and wholsome salues: and bytter▪ woordes, are byting corosiues, to feeble Myndes.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YOu say the truth. Euen so, soft Chirurgians make foule soares▪ sweete woordes are pleasaunt to Women and yonge Children:Soft Chirurgians make foule sores. but playne true tales, oughte to bee amonge Men of knowledge, without curious Cyrcumstaūce, or Rhetoricall coloures.
                     Therefore goe to your matter, the daye is cold and short, the tyme passeth spedely away, and can neuer come agayne.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        FOrsooth that is most certayne: therfore let vs spend the tyme wel. For my part I would know how to heale my soares which you do se here present before and behynde.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     I see them very wel, and I trust by Gods grace t to teache you those thinges, which I haue learned my selfe of others▪ for cure
                  
                  
                     
                        Soarn
                              ••
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        WHat men of credite, both olde, and new, haue written of this most worthy Arte, of the hand craft of Chirurgi, or meanes thereunto, shewe mee some of theyr names, for to encourage mee to loue thys sayde Arte.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        I Shall call to mynde, and note with Pen, a nomber of worthy men, both old and new, Heathen and Christians, straungers, and Englishmen although a great nomber whom I know not in this realme, which be worthye Persones, and cunninge men, profitable to our common wealthe. As the most worthy Fraternity of the Chirurgians, of the moste aunciente and famous Citty of London: wheras through learned Lectours, and the Secrete Anothomies, by, and through the learned doctor, M. Iohn Kaius, reueiling vnto this Fraternity, the hidden iewels,Doctor Turner. and precious treasures of CL. Galenus shewing himself to be the .2. Linacer, whose steps he foloweth.
                     Who shal forget the most worthy Doctor William Turner?Doctor Kaiu
                              •
                           . whose learned actes, I leaue to the witty commendations, and immortall prayse of Conradus Gesnerus. Yet his Booke of Herbes, wil alwayes grow greene, & neuer wither, as long as Dioscorides is had in Mynde, among vs mortall wightes. The noble estate of knightes, among the English or Brytish nation, which of them did euer in ra
                           •
                        e, geue a trippe, out runne, or winne ye victory of syr Thomas Eliot knight? who hath planted such fruitful trees that his graftes do grow in each place in this our common wealth, and his Castel of health, cannot decay.Sir Thomas Eliot knighte
                     
                     Thomas Fayre Doctor of Phisicke is not deade but is transformed and chaunged into a new nature immortal:Thomas Faire Doctor he hath left a peece of darke earth behynd him, and gone ouer Lethes fludd
                           •
                        , forgettinge this world, and wyth pleasure spendeth the tyme among the heauenly Muses vnder the two topped Hil of Pernassus. Ful wel he knew Plini which taught ye goodnes of cleane creatures, and also the pestiferous venome of deadly Melā
                        choly Serpentes, and their present remedy by the vertues of herbes of sō
                        dry kyndes.
                     Doctor Androw Borde, wrote also wel of Phisicke, to profit the common wealth withal.Doctor Androwe Borde did see at Rome, no order, gnashing of teeth, dw
                              •
                           llyng in wretchednes Thomas Pannel. This man declared how he was in a great city wher he did see three hellish Tragedies: the one was Nullus ordo, the second was Stridor Dentium, the thirde was Horror inhabitans, & yet this Borde was a bird of this nest or Cage, called Rome, wherof he maketh this reporte. I wil not forget M. Thomas Paguinellus, or Pannel, who hath playd ye good seruant, to the comon wealth▪ in translating good bookes of Phisicke.
                     Doctor William Kunyngham hath wel trauailed, like a good souldiour agaynst the ignoraun
                           •
                         ennemy: setting forth the commendacion, prayse▪ & profite of Astronomy, Cosmography, and Geographye, &c.
                     How wel was he▪ seene in tongues, learned in Artes and in Sciences, Natural and moral. A father in Phisicke,Doctor william Kuninghā
                         whose Learninge gaue liberty to the ignoraunt, with his VVhetstone of wit, Castle of knowledge and fynally geuing place to sliding nature, dyed himself in bondage, or prison.

By which death he was deliuered and made free, & yet liueth in the happye land among the Laureat learned, his name was Doctor Recorde, wyth many other, which I must geue place to time. For their vertues be not vnknowē in Phisick, & Chirurgi, although I name thē not. Yet if thou do further delyte. without disdayn to know the names of them which haue bene execellent in the worthy art of Chirurgi, Phisicke. &c. I wil declare theire names in order as I haue noted and knowen. As following herafter by letters.

                           
                              Achilles.
                           
                           
                              Aesculapius.
                           
                           
                              Aetius.
                           
                           
                              Aggregator.
                           
                           
                              Augustinus Doct. Medic.
                           
                           
                              Albucasis Mahumetan.
                           
                           
                              Alexander Aphrodisiensis.
                           
                           
                              Alexander Benedictus Veronensis
                           
                           
                              Alphonsus Seruius Neopolitanus.
                           
                           
                              Amatus Lusitanus.
                           
                           
                              Antonius Fumanellus.
                           
                           
                              Aristoteles Philos. Princeps.
                           
                           
                              Arcagathus Peloponensis.
                           
                           
                              Auicenna. lib. iiij. Fen. vij.
                           
                           
                              Arnoldus de Villa Noua Comen.
                           
                           
                              Aurelius Cornelius Celsus.
                           
                           
                              Albertus magnus.
                           
                        
                        
                           B.
                           
                              Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum.
                           
                           
                              Bartholomeus Montognan.
                           
                           
                              Bartleus Doc. Medi.
                           
                           
                              Bunus Doc. Medi. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Buttus Doct. Medi.
                           
                        
                        
                           C.
                           
                              C. Plinius secundus.
                           
                           
                              Cassius Iatrosophista.
                           
                           
                              Chyron.
                           
                           
                              CL. Galenus.
                           
                           
                              Conradus Gesnerus.
                           
                           
                              Constantius Cataplasmatis.
                           
                           
                              Carrus Doct Medic.
                           
                           
                              Clemens. Doct. Medic.
                           
                           
                              Calduellus Medicus Doct. Oxo.
                           
                           
                              Chamberus Doct. Medic.
                           
                        
                        
                           D.
                           
                              Damocrates.
                           
                           
                              Damoxine.
                           
                           
                              Diocles.
                           
                        
                        
                           E.
                           
                              Eucharius.
                           
                           
                              Euelpistus.
                           
                           
                              Euonimus.
                           
                           
                              Edwardus Medicus Doct. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Edmundus Chirurgus Ebor.
                           
                        
                        
                           G.
                           
                              Gariopontius.
                           
                           
                              Gorgias.
                           
                           
                              Genus Medic. Doct Oxo.
                           
                           
                              Guido Caliacus.
                           
                           
                              Gulielmus Placentius.
                           
                           
                              Gulielmus Turnerus Medic. Doc. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Gulielmus Variginanus.
                           
                           
                              Gulielmus Kunynghamus Medic. Doct.
                           
                           
                              Galus Chirurg. Lon.
                           
                        
                        
                           H.
                           
                              Hatcherus. Medic. Doct. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Helyodorus.
                           
                           
                              Heraclides Laurentius.
                           
                           
                              Heraclius.
                           
                           
                              Hera Cappedoc.
                           
                           
                              Hyeron.
                           
                           
                              Hyeronimus Bruns.
                           
                           
                              Hieronimus Cardanus.
                           
                           
                              Hyppocrates. Cous. Princ. Medicorum.
                           
                           
                              Hugo.
                           
                           
                              Huycus Medic. Doc.
                           
                        
                        
                           I.
                           
                              Iacobus Hollerius.
                           
                           
                              Iacobus Ruffius.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Kayus Medic. Doct. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Almanner.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Bauerius
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Barnardus.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Frerus Doct. Medic. Cant.
                           
                           
                              Ioannus Manardus.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Tagaultius
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Vigo Genuensis.
                           
                           
                              Ioannes Porterus Norwic.
                           
                           
                              Hilius. id. est Albanus. Montanus Doc. me.
                           
                        
                        
                           L.
                           
                              Lucas Euangel. Medic.
                           
                           
                              
                              Linacrus Doctor medic.
                           
                           
                              Lanfrancus Mediolanensis.
                           
                           
                              Leonardus Bareapalia.
                           
                           
                              Leonardus Fuchsius
                           
                           
                              Ludouicus Bonaciolus▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Ludouicus Caelius.
                           
                           
                              Langtonus Doct. Medic. Canta.
                           
                           
                              Lorkinus Doct. Medic. Can.
                           
                        
                        
                           M
                           
                              Machaon.
                           
                           
                              Mantias.
                           
                           
                              Martianus Corinbekus Docto. Medic.
                           
                           
                              Marianus Chirurgus.
                           
                           
                              Meges Chirurgus.
                           
                           
                              Michael Angelus Blōdus.
                           
                           
                              Masterus Doct. Medic.
                           
                           
                              Montanus
                           
                        
                        
                           N.
                           
                              Nicolaus Massa.
                           
                           
                              Nicolaus Myrepsi.
                           
                           
                              Nicolaus Pol.
                           
                        
                        
                           O.
                           
                              Oribasius
                           
                           
                              Otho Brunfelsius.
                           
                        
                        
                           P.
                           
                              Podalyrius.
                           
                           
                              Paulus Aegineta
                           
                           
                              Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus.
                           
                           
                              Petrus Tolenus.
                           
                           
                              Philopenus.
                           
                        
                        
                           Q.
                           
                              Querenus.
                           
                        
                        
                           R
                           
                              Rasis.
                           
                           
                              Rogerus.
                           
                           
                              Rolandus Capellatus.
                           
                           
                              Robertus Balthropus Chirurgus.
                           
                        
                        
                           S.
                           
                              Sebastianus Aquilanus.
                           
                           
                              Socrates Chirurgus.
                           
                           
                              Soranus.
                           
                           
                              Sostratus.
                           
                           
                              Symon Ludfordus Doct. Medic. Oxo.
                           
                        
                        
                           T
                           
                              Tertius Damianus.
                           
                           
                              Theodorus Epist.
                           
                           
                              Theodorus Priscianus.
                           
                           
                              Theophrastus Paraselsus.
                           
                           
                              Thomas Eliota Eques Angl.
                           
                           
                              Thomas Philologus Rauen.
                           
                           
                              Thomas Colphus Pharmacopulus Ang.
                           
                           
                              Tryphon.
                           
                        
                        
                           V
                           
                              Vidus Vidius Florent.
                           
                           
                              Wendius Medic. Doct. Cant
                           
                           
                              Vickarius Chirurgus Lon.
                           
                        
And thus I do end of the names of many men, besydes no small nomber of them, which haue, and do professe this worthy Art, both of Phisicke, & Chirurgi, to the great profite of ech common wealth.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     Why do you rather cal Surgery an Arte, then a Science? which I take it to be.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        BBecause it taketh the name of a Greeke Nowne, cal-Chir, an hand in English, and 
                           
                              •
                           rgon ministerye,What is called Chirurgia.
                         and although both togeather called Chirurgia or hand mistery should be rather hand craft, and not a Science: and this is my probation of this difinition. For ther be two kyndes of Chirurgi, the fyrst is Theorica, which is the mother Scholemistres, nourish, and Learner of this profitable Arte, without the which the workers therof, haue but one eye, and see this Arte But throughe a darke payre of Spectacles.
                     
                        The second and last part is called Practica, which is to put in vre, that which Theorica hath learned him,Two kyndes of Chirurgia.
                         although Practica be very aunciente, and to some men fortunate, for healyng is the synguler gift of God, as the Apostle saith. Yet the former called Theorica, is reckoned a sciēce, how be it vnprofitably, and by tyme vsurped. Also the last named Practica, I meane not as the common people do terme euery tryfeler, or light does, to be a practicioner, that is able to seperate the qualityes of oyntmentes, and to decerne perfectlye of Herbes, Gummes, stones, trees, fruits &c. And to compound symples togeather, through knowledge, iudgement, and quicke inuention. For compounded oyntmentes make plasters, and aleie Cerotes, accordyng as it is seene in the worthy workes of Nicolaus, Valerius Cordus, Leonardus Fuchsius. &c And when the bodyes of their pacientes, be sore or sycke, then the practicioner must minister, and the medicine must take his effect, with nature, and God to geeue the healthe, throughe his good instrumente, whom the auncient Learned Men do tearme, the artificiall Chirurgian to whom great reuerence was geuen, and suche Men were in great estimation somtyme, but now not very muche.
                  
                  
                     Soarnes
                     
                        WHat is then the cause, that so many Chirurgians now a daies be despysed, and liue so basely and are coumpted the abiectes of the common people if the Chirurgians shoulde so be honoured, as thou fayste they should be, beyng repayrers of decayed men?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        REpayrers? No, rather destroyers, marrers, and manglers of the bodyes of men, women, and children: and these mē lacke not onely learning,An ignoraunt Surgean is a man 
                              •
                           lear. and knowledge, but also witte, & honesty, through whose wickednes, the auncient practicioners and sober doers in Chirurgi, bee greatly abused among the common people: as commonly we see the good men are despysed, through the light behauiour of the wicked. For vnder ye name of Chirurgi, many yong men, lyue in the Saintuarie of Idlenes, forsaking their owne handy craft:Chirurgi is become a Sā
                           tuary. and many crafty varlets, committing sondry crymes, eftsones they do flee into straung countryes, wandryng vp and down. And what be their shiftes? Mary, to buy some grosse stuffe, with a boxe of Salue, and cases of tooles, to sette forth their slender market with all: For Dogleeches and Tinkers shal haue worke in euery Uillage. Then fall they to Palmestry,Of Uacabond Chirurgians worse then theeues. Linx can serue best of a
                              •
                           y creatur
                              •
                           , and his vryne. wil turne into a stone H
                              •
                           im. and telling of Fortunes, dayly deceiuyng the symple: lyke vnto the swarmes of the vagabound Egiptians, and some that call themselues Iewes, whose eyes were so sharpe as Lynx, for they see all the people with theyr knackes, straung lookes, prickes, domifying and figuring with such lyke fantasyes fayning that they haue familiers & Glasses, where by they may fynd thinges that be lost, and besydes them are infinite of old doltish witches, with blessinges for ye Fayre and coniuring of cattel: And yt is the cause yt so much idlenes & infidelity is practised, in this euil, estate.

Of land leapers, and many symple inhabitours, worse than the subtil Limetours and beggyng Freers, which deceiued many thorow Ipocrisye: & more hurtful then the crafty Pardoners,The souldier is hurt more by an euil Surgion, thā by his ennemies wepons often it is so proued. which preached remission of sins in euery Parishe church, with belles and Pardons from Rome. These bee worse then vagabounde Beggers, robbinge the people, and more hurtfull than priuate murderers, in kyllyng men, for lacke of knowledge, and in warres oftentymes, the good Souldioure is cast awaye sooner, throughe the villayny of such Chirurgians, than by the weapon, and hand of the Ennemy. And this is a lamentable, and most pittiful case, and hurtful to the common wealth: but forasmuch as mankind beyng the principal Creature of Amighty god the Aungels excepted,The miseries of man, when he is hurt in body. which doo dailye behold the presence of his maiesty is so excellent a thing, yet this mankynd, through dayly casualtyes and missehappes, eftsoones is hurt with faules, brused with strypes, pricked with Speare or Dagger, wounded with Weapon, burnte wyth fyre, bytten with madde Dogges,Many god medecines are made of the Playne people, to helpe in the absence of the Chirurgians. wherby his body standeth in dayly daunger and peryl of Death. Therfore poore brother Soarenes, lyke as I doe here discouer these rabelment of Mineruas Seruantes, which liue only by thefte, yet God forfend, but in the absence of the learned Chirurgian, the wholsome medicines, prepared of good people, and charitable neigbours, should be greatly preferred, to helpe in such cases, when tyme, place, and danger dooe requyre, or els a great nomber shoulde be cast away for lack of help. Wher as many for lacke of wit and welth, of these Dogge leaches,Dogge Leeches. whiche neuer knew letter of booke, behaue themselues dayly as followeth, with their cō
                        sorted fellowes as, I haue wrytten in playn grosse woordes followynge,

                           
                              SOme men in misery straunge shiftes wil make,
                           Spending tyme vainly, and labour forsake:
                           To liue lyke Lurchers, what force they of shame,
                           Preferring knauish knackes before a g
                                 •
                              od name.
                           In countenaunces haut, and netnesse of clothes,
                           Roysting lyke Ruffians, thundring forth othes:
                           Furderers of Frayes, with longe Dagger or Sworde,
                           Sowing of dissention, at eche mannes borde.
                           Caryers of newes, proclaimers of lies,
                           Liuers by Lechery, blood sucker, and spyes.
                           Braynlesse as brute beastes, and Furious fell,
                           Lyke Plutoes whelpes, trained vp in Hell.
                                 The discription of an vnchrist, or a U
                                       ••
                                    
                                    layn of natu
                                       ••
                                     stryuing agaynst grace▪ and vertue, vnprofitable for 
                                       •
                                     common wealth.
                              
                           
                           Murcia doth teach them, no la
                                 •
                              our to vse,
                           But slouthful to liue, and vertue refuse.
                           Lauernia theeues Gods, al dayes of their liues
                           Arme them with horned thumbes, and fine sharp kniues
                           In Churche, Play, or Market, they hunt for the purse,
                           And Preach oft on Pillory, their Eares are the worse
                           Their thumbes be blaunched, with a. T from the fire,
                           Such wooke as the vse, so payed is theire hire.
                           Dame Paena with Palenes, that Lady of neede,
                           Bringeth men into misery, and euil for to speede.
                           
                              Then are they make shiftes, deceiuers of other,
                           Smal forcing to robbe, frend, father, or brother.
                           To each wynde that bloweth, the thiefe sets his saile,
                           As carelesse as the Foxe, which waggeth his taile.
                           Not forcing who see him, in runninge to his borough,
                           Though houndes him hunteth al the couert throughe,
                           VVhen he hath most curses, then fareth he best,
                           VVhen spent is his spoyle, he taketh his rest.
                           Thē eftsones he sercheth, holtes, felles, woods & fēnes,
                           For rauening of Lambes, and stealyng of Hennes.
                           Thus lurketh wyly Raynerd, with out any care,
                           But thend of his progresse, is the gallow and snare▪
                           
                           Such Foxely feats are vsed, among a great nomber.
                           To the publike weale, much losse and comber.
                           More hurtles then fat Monkes, & Friers of disceit,
                           VVhich liued in Idolatry, but had plenty of meat.
                           To geue to the pore, that had honger and neede,
                           But the Ruffen wil robbe, meate, money, and weede.
                           And vnder long cloke lurketh, wt
                               tucke & sharp knife
                           For goldes sake the gitles, to reaue them of life.
                           Thus hurting the innocent that trauel with truthe,
                           To suffer such villaines, it is a great ruth.
                           No more then Thistel, which choketh the Corne.
                           Great pity if it please God, such wretches were borne.
                           
                              
                                 Euil parentes what fruites they brynge forth, and to what end they come.
                              Their parentes do fansie them, like relikes & halowes
                           And wil neuer correct thē, til thei climbe the gallous
                           To no learning nor art▪ they train them vp in youth,
                           But in idlenes and picking, with tales of vntrouth,
                           In horehunting, beastlines, and belly ioy of life,
                           In backbiting and baudrye, defiling mayd, and wyfe.
                           Yet parētes your tēder brāches, easelie you may twist,
                           But whē it hath great strength, you cānot whē you list.
                           Then in stryuing for victorye, it is no greate wonder
                           Old boughes wil not bend, but first cracke asunder.
                           Yet instruct your childrē so, while youthful daies do last
                           That thei may serue the comō weale, whē you are gon & past
                           Then shal they be no brokers, to vsurers hāds,
                           VVherby many oft do lose their goods and landes.
                           Neither to be petty Foggers, in cases of the Law,
                           To make mountaynes of Molhils, & trees of a straw.
                           Or oppressours of poremen, with writs in their bags,
                           Cloth themselues like Prīces, when other lurk in rags▪
                           
                           Then shal they not be Parasites, in tyme of prosperity,
                           But succour the helples, in the stormes of aduersitye.
                           
                              
                                 For counterfayt Chirurgians.
                              Neither shal the ignorant, counterfet Chirurgy,
                           Seming to ye simple nōber they are seen in Astronomi.
                           
                              VVyth flattring wordes, and trim tales, glosinges they can tell,
                           As though in naturall Philosophy, they were seene ful well.
                           VVyth retrogradation, and Lord of the ascendent,
                           Plasters, Oyles, Pouders, Salues, and matter defendent.
                           In seeming to be skilful, in euery euil malady,
                           VVhether it be moyst, colde, burning, hoat and dry.
                           Yet neyther reade Tagaltius, Marianus, Guido, nor Galen,
                           Olde Hyppocrates, Dioscorides, Rasis, nor Auicen.
                           Latine nor Englishe, little or none, do they reede,
                           Small is their knowledge, mutch lesse is their speede.
                           Yet lacke they no Brimstone, Quicksiluer, or Litarge,
                           Oyles grosse and lothsome, to beare out the charge.
                           They haue Palmestry, and Charmes, at eche wyghtes desire,
                           Good store of blessinges, for tothache, and saynct Antonies fire.
                           If yong Babes through Feuers, wyth cold be shaken,
                           Then they say an euill spirite, the childe hath taken.
                           A bad Angell of the ayre, an Elfe, or a witch,
                           VVhen in deede, deere frende, there be few sitch
                           To molest the faythfull, to bryng them to confusion,
                           But to the infidel and faythlesse, it is Sathans delusion,
                           VVrought by his instruments, Loyterers, and Lyers,
                           VVorse then the valiaunt beggers, and mendicant Fryers.
                           Murderers of mankinde, in knowing of no arte,
                           Banishe them from Chirurgi, commende them to the Carte,
                           To the flayle and the rake, the trace and the tog,
                           To the doung Forke, & Mattocke, to the Sheephoke & the dog,
                           To the Naule and the Lingel, the Bristel, and the Shoe,
                           VVhat should the Shomaker, wyth the Chirurgians workes doe?
                           For it is the noblest worke, wrought by cunning hande,
                           Excelling al other artes, in eche Citty, and Land.
                           If Prynces be wounded, when noble men are sore,
                                 The vertue of Chirurgy.
                              
                           
                           The Chirurgen them helpeth, of Chirurgians what more?
                           VVhen bones are broken, and members displaced,
                           VVhen the features of the face, wyth weapon be disgrased,
                           VVhen bloud is shed, in cutting of the vaynes,
                           The Chirurgian alone, helpeth him from paynes,
                           Repayreth mankinde, and giueth hym rest,
                           So of al knowledge, Chyrurgi is most best.
                           For no treasure or arte, can helpe the wounded man,
                           VVhen the Chirurgian, by his cunning onely can.
                           Now let this rime passe, Gond send vs of his grace,
                           Aske an other question, I will aunswere to that place.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     GOD gieue me grace, to beware of sutch fellowes, as you haue spoken of before, which are an euill company: and that I myght learne what a very Chirurgian should bee, whych in your conclusion, you haue commended, and what thynges he should do in his office.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        HEe must begin first in youth with good learning, and exercise in thys noble arte,Eight things or propertyes of a good Chirurgian. he also must be clenly, nimble handed, sharpe sighted, pregnant witted, bolde sprited, clenly apparayled, pytefull harted, but not Womanly affectionated to weepe or trimble, when he seeeth broken Bones, or blouddy Woundes, neyther must hee gieue place to the cry of hys soare Pacient, for soft Chirurgians maketh fowle soares. Of the other syde, he may not play the partes of a Butcher to cut, rend, or teare the body of man kinde. For although it be frayle, soare, and weake, yet it is the pleasure of God, to call it hys Temple, hys Instrument, and dwelling place, & the Philosopher doth call it Orbiculus, that is, a little world. Therefore seeing euery craftes man doth take great care, both day and nyght in hys vocation, to help and amend dead things, whych be insensible, as Shyppes, houses, Walles, Brydges, and an infinite number of thynges, whych mankynde doth make, and when it is olde, doth renewe it, and preserue it from ruine, and vtter destruction, although it be not perdurable: Shoulde not therefore mankinde hymselfe,The Chirurgian is ye best hand crafte in the world. for his rewarde, be diligently cured, amended and renued, when eyther through falle, wounde, or stripe he is decayed, and that wyth wysedome, and diligence? for when a house is fallen downe ye Carpenter may builde it vp agayne. But when mankynde departeth, desolueth, and dyeth, he cannot be reuiued agayne, by the pollicy or cunning of mankynde,Iob. 14. because one mankinde, cannot make an other, but rather thorough art, when they be decayed, help to amend them, through the worke of nature,The Chirurgian, is natures seruaunt. and the ministration of the Phisicion: for Claudius Galen sayth, that Natura est ope
                              •
                           atrix, Medicus vero eius minister. That is, nature is ye worker the Phisicion is but hir minister. Therefore the Chirurgicall Physicion, is Natures seruaunt.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     What then doth Nature worke in Chirurgj?
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        Nature worketh three wayes to help her selfe.
                        NAture worketh three maner of wayes, by the reason that conuenient instruments and meanes are applied in the time of neede, to help her. For fyrst she deuideth the thynges that are contayned, or vnnaturally knit together. Secondly, shee vniteth, knitteth, and ioyneth together,The strength of nature. the seperated partes. Thyrdly, she expulseth, purgeth, and clenseth superfluous matter, that doth abounde, or offende nature.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Then it should appeere, that nature needes no Chirurgj?
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        Nature must be releeued by sundry meanes in ye tyme of daunger.
                        YEs. Nature in the tyme of Soarenesse, can no more be without ye 
                        Chirurgian, than the Smith can be without hys hammer, or the Tayler wythout his Sheeres: and as I haue sayde before, although you seeme to be forgetfull, yet let the Chirurgian bee dyligent, if he loue to be clothed wyth honesty, to lyue vertuously, and to doe

thinges artificially, and not to geeue quid, pro quo, Chalke for Cheese, or Dirt for Drinke: for if they so do, if it springeth of ignorance, then they are worthy to be punished, and after to bee reformed. But if they bee Men of knowledge, & thus abuse their Pacients, they are worthy to bee punished, as malicious murtherers: but heere I stop and lay a straw, I wyll meddell with no matters of the Lawe, I am no Iudge, although it be good and the chiefe Regiment, of our common wealth, yet I haue receyued as small profit by Lawers, and vnquiet men, as wounded men get perfyte health, by ignoraunt Chirurgians, or quiet Men, leade happy lyues with angrie Wyues, for whom there is no remedy, but pacience perforce, quod Socrares, to Xantippa.
                     
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     IS your name Chirurgj? Me thinke by your talke, you haue a domesticall grife, how helpe yee your selfe, when your Feuer taketh you, you beare out the matter as well as you can.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     IF I be diseased of any sutch Feuer, I do not intend to seeke counsell at your hands, neyther of Hippocrates, nor Galen. &c. But only of Diogines, whych loued to be alone, & Socrates was taught pacience: but to conclude, no man knoweth the griefe of a strayght shooe, but the Wearer thereof: but for asmutch as many Handes make lyght Worke, and many shoulders passe small of greate burdens, I care the lesser, hauing so many parteners. The remedy is this, when stormes bee past, faire Weather commeth at laste.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        WEll, well, seeke a salue for that sore, I can no skyll of your disease, God wote, mutch lesse to helpe myne owne griefe. I pray thee therefore help vs both, yet by your leaue although you be called Chirugj, or Sanitas, yet I do consider, that there is no continual sanite of body, or perfect quietnesse of mynde, during thys Lyfe of mortall men For if a man would discend downe into his owne conscience, and see himselfe wythin, he shall easely perceyue, the wordes written of saynct Iob the .18. Chapiter in hys most lamentable and pityfull Booke: sayth hee, a man that is borne of a Woman, lyueth but a short time, and is filled ful of mysery, and commeth vp and falleth away lyke a Floure,Man is but myserable, & yet is quickly gone. and in the ende passeth away lyke a shadowe, and neuer continueth in one estate. For truly we dayly see, aduersity followeth Prosperity, bondage after liberty, pouerty after riches, sicknes after health, beside an infynite number of the passions, & afflictions of the mynde. As zeale, strife, Ielousy, loue, Ioye, care. &c. And as the wyse man sayth, Omnia tempus habent, al things haue their time. And God hath geuen affliction to the children of men, to be exercised in thē among whom, I for my synnes am plagued wyth thys kynde of malady, as thou seest me haue: I beseech God of hys mercy, send mee health, and as many as are soare.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     Thou hast spoken wysely, for al thing is in vayne, where God doth not put to his helping hand, and by hys Prophet he sayth,Psalme. 50. call vpon mee in the tyme of trouble, and I wyll help thee, make thee whole, and delyuer thee. Behold, how many Lepers, sycke of Palsyes, bloudy Flixes,Matth. 11. blyndnesse,

deafenesse, possessed of euill spirites, yea. & death it selfe, all these hath God helped, restored, and made perfect: for there is Tempus occidendi, and Tempus sanandi wyth God,Eccle. 3 for hee is euer occupied, eyther in punishing the wycked, or comforting of his elected.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        WOuld GOD, there were sutch myracles now a dayes, as was then. It were a great comfort to an infinite number of sutch as I am,Chryst is not couetous. neyther should it be paynfull, nor costly, for Chryst coueteth no money, although Simon magus delighted in nothing els.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                           SOarenesse, Soarenesse, Thou sayst not well, for it is rather a tempting of GOD,A faythfull man belieueth wythout myracle, for fayth is not seene, but miracles are seene. then a beleeuinge in GOD, to looke or wyshe for Myracles, for faythfull Men neede none. And I trust thou arte faythfull, therefore thou needest no Myracle: but rather consider thys, Chryste healed the bodies of sycke men, two maner of wayes: the one by vertue of his Heauenly word, whereby we be taught that he is GOD. The second, he healed somtyme wyth Clay, with spittle. &c. wherein we be learned, and he also hath learned vs, in the tyme of our soarenesse, prudently to vse Gods Instruments,Two manner of healinges. and meanes, yea, not wyth Clay, or Spittle, yet wyth pretious Herbes, Fruictes, Gummes. &c. For GOD hath ordayned them onely to help his people, to this ende, that hys people myght serue hym. Tobias healed hys fathers Eyes, wyth the Gaule of a Fyshe, an Aungell prepared the Medicine. Ezechias the Kynge in the tyme of hys Pestilence, was healed wyth a cluster of Figges,Esay. 38.4. Regum. 20 The great Prophet Esay, gaue hym thys Medicine. Eliseus dyd clense through the vertue of a sweete tree, the foule stinckyng Waters. Christe in the Gospell, commaundeth the Apostles to cary Oyle wyth theym, to heale the sicke. S. Luke the holy Euangelist was a Physicion,Luke. and some of the antiquityes of hys Physicke, remayne vnto thys day. It is sayd also that holy Esdras made a goodly Medycine, when the people were in captiuity in Babilon, to clense them from their Melancholy, and heauinesse of mynde, which Medicine is called after hys name vnto thys day: These and sutch lyke examples Soarenesse, shoulde mooue thee to vse these meanes to help thee.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        I Heartely thank you, I shall by Gods grace, obserue your sayings. and vse Gods Instruments reuerently, by whose meanes wee poore Men be healed. And sometyme the rych Infidels, still tormented wyth soares. &c.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     EUen so be ryche also, for Sycknesse, as we do dayly see, doth not perticulerly dwell in poore men, but rather generally in all, although the kyndes of sicknes be variable, & the Complexions diuers, & the causes many, and euery sicknesse, and soarenesse, haue his proper name, although

men, eyther through ignoraunce, shame, or craft do abuse their names,Men doe vse prety tearmes for soule 
                              •
                           ores and call theim by one name, when thei are an other, although the effect do still remayne, as in clenly termes by your lycence, they will call it nothing els, but a sausy flemed Face, red or hygh coloured, when many tymes in deede, it is not only so, but the very Leprosy wyth all. It is nothing say they, but breaking out, or paynes of the body, weakenesse of Lymbes, or a greene sicknes, through the obstruction of ye Lyuer. &c. with sutch nicke names, whose very sure name is, the Buttens of Naples, Gallicus morbus, commonly called the French poxe.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        HEtherto yet stande I in doubt, although I bee payned, howe to name truly my desease I cannot, although of it selfe it bee definable, felt of me, and seene to vs both, & known onely to thee, what think you it is, I pray you tell mee?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     It is none other then apostumation, as it doth playnly appeare to me.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Then I pray you, gieue me a difinicion, and deuision, of an apostumation.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        APostumacion is a very euill disease, compounded of .iij. kyndes of maladyes, gathered,Apostumatiō is compounded of three sundry euils. and growing together in one quantity, fyrste of an euyll Complexion: Secondly a naughty composicion: And thirdely, the continuaunce of tyme. These three make an apostumation, or swelling wtin or without the body, notwithstanding, as Galen sayth, not all kynde of swellinges make apostumations, but sutch onely as anoy the body, and the roote thereof is the corruption of the foure temperamentes, when they be altered, and chaunged into Fleume, Bloud, Choller, & Melancholy, through them the shape of a member is altered,Breache of contynuaunce is, when the whole partes are cut, or broken. when it is chaū
                        ged from his naturall forme, into any straunge, or deformed figure. Also the breache of continuaunce, is caused through incitions, corosians, breaking, or strecching, as Galen sayth, in the second de arte medendi, neuerthelesse the chiefe cause is through stretching, whereby the partes of the body bee seuered one from an other, and this is my conclusion of this diffinicion.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     How many kyndes of apostumations be there?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        THere be two, the one is hoat, and the other colde,Three kindes of Apostumacions, hoat, and colde. for euery apostumation is hoat or cold, touching their humour: but accidentally they be diuersly hoat, as Galen sayth the hoate haue their proper signes, to be knowen by, euen so haue the cold, whereby he perceyued. Apostumations, wherein is boyling, and burning, wyth continuall heate, are iudged to come of bloude, or Cholericke humour, euen so iudge them of Melancholy, or Fleume, when they seeme to be colde, Pale,Howe to know Apostumation. deaddishe, or partly not felt, and thus thou shalt perceyue their kindes, and although

they be named a like, yet they differ one frō another in cure, as they do in complexion. Moreouer, the apostumation of bloude, hath great swelling and heat ouer all the body, and is seldom seene without some Feuer, & ye colour is a dim dark red, also hardnes, if you presse it with your finger, because so mutch matter, is gathered grossely in the place. The pulses wyll beat very soare, the matter being ouer laden, will kepe downe the artery, & therefore nature attempting to rease and lift vp the same, will cause great beating in the vaynes, wherefore the more arteryes be kept downe, ye greater is the laboure, and beating of the Pulses, after whych, sometyme followeth sutch dolour and payne, that all the partes of the body come to destruction,The aboundance of bloud in the apostumation. as oftentimes in hoat euill complexions, where euill matter is heaped together in apostumation. That in fyne, replecion, and tencion, of all the course of the vaynes doe come, for all the vaynes in the sayde apostumation, by the meanes of the aboundance of bloud, will swell and become great, although before, they were ryght, strayte, cleane, yea, & some as small as hayres, and these bee the apostumations of bloud.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     What sayest thou then, of them that be Chollerike?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        The cruelty of the Chollerike apostumacion, but ye bloudy apostumation is gentler.
                        APostumacions Chollerike, be gentler as touching their swelling, but they doe excell more in payne, and be farre crueller, because of sharpnesse, and byting of the humour, wyth bitternesse, & drynesse of Choller, whereas bloudy apostumations, although they do swel through moystnesse, yet the same humidite or moystnesse, causeth ye soare to be more gentler, and of lesser payne than the Chollerike, for they be two contraries, as Aristotle sayth in his Booke of generation, and corruption, Ignis qui est in vltimo continentis, non est in fine ebullitionis, and in another place he sayth,Of cōtraryes of elementes. 
                        Elementa omnia adinuicem contrarietatem habent, and that is wel sayd, for heat is an extreme contrary to colde, so is moystnesse to drynesse, & m
                           •
                        re payne in the one apostumation, than in the other.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     What be apostumations in quantity, whych of them be greatest, and which of them be least, I would fayne know, good Chirurgj?
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        The quant
                              •
                           ty of the apostumations.
                        AS touching their quantityes, know you, that ye Chollerike, is lesse then any other, by the reason of hys drynesse, and heat, whych restrayneth extencion, but the accident of the payne, is most cruel and sharp, and these be destroying qualityes in this quātity, what time they are come to ye extreme degree of heat: but apostumacions, depending of cold humours, sutch wyll bring their owne proper signes, beating of arteries, notwithstanding they bee not comparable to the beating of a Chollerike, or a bloudy apostumatiō but more duller, colder, paler. &c. You must also note, that apostumations that spring of bloud,Sundry names of apostumations, but in effect are but apostumations. or Choller, be diuersly termed by sundry names, as Botches, Shingelles, Fellones, Pushes, Uncomes,

saynct Anthonies fyre, blaynes, Bladders, or Blisters, crustes Carbuncles, Pestilent soares. &c. euē so on ye other side, apostumatiōs of Fleume, or Melancholy, haue ioyned vnto thē these names, as vndimies, knots, woūdes, Carnelles, Wrates, Cankers, Esthachelles, wyth sutch lyke euills of mortifycation, in their beginning, and bee all called apostumacions, but when they be growen to a ripenes, and do breake forth, then call them vlcers, specially if the matter proceede to the breach of continuaunce. Also apostumacions are soares compounded, and stande not in one humour alone, yet oftentimes we say simply, that euery one of them, spryngeth of one humour, heat, cold, moyst, or dry, of whom in deed they do take their names, as Aristotle iudgeth in hys Naturalles, as where bloud is excessyue,Soares compounded. it is called a Bubo, or a Sanguine botch, and where as Choller doth abounde, it is called a Chollericke malady. And so of the Flegmatike, and Melancholy the lyke, according to their natures.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     HItherto I haue heard, but only the diffinitions of ye names, or natures of apostumacions, but me thincke to talke of the cures, were more profitable, for only vnto that end, do I mooue these questions vnto you?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        I Wyl speake somwhat of their cures, but or I enter any further in this matter, I thynke it rather necessary, to speake a little of thinges that be comen, and would bee prudently obserued in theyr cures, for asmutch as euery apostumacion, dependeth of some cause, and may not well be cured, except, cause, sygne, iudgement of the same wyth effectes, be perfectly knowen.Blynde Bayard is bolde. Therefore seeing there is nothing bolder then blynde bayarde, whych falleth oft in the Mire, nor none so hurtfull to ye health of mankynde, as ignoraunt Chirurgians, setting the carte before the horse, and the rootes of the trees vpward, whych shote at the marke lyke blynd men, somtyme hitting by chaunce, more than by knowledge, these thynges considered, Soarenesse: thynke therefore no tyme lost, to heare me speake of the causes of apostumacions, for thereby the sooner, they may be healed, therefore I wyll speake a little more of the causes.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Why? Be there any more causes of apostumacions, whereof should they ryse? I pray you shortly shewe me.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YEs, Sayth hee, whych is the Prynce of all Physicke called Hippocrates, there bee three kinde of causes, whereof apostumacions doe rise, the fyrst is the Primatiue, the second the Antecedent the thyrd the Coniunctiue. The Primatiue, where maladies happē by misfortune to the body, from the outward parts, as incicion, breakyng smiting, fallyng, vlceracion of the hands and feete, or any other part. wherof insueth apostumacion. For when great dolour is caused in anye parte,

soone after followeth, that the part anoyed cryeth vppon nature for helpe, (for sutch is hys goodnes and prouidence) who sendeth out of hand some succour, to the impouerished, and soare partes But it chaunceth ofttimes, that this succour, or nourishement, resteth there or some where by ye way, in the vacant and weake partes, and so groweth it at length to an apostumation, in case the vertue degestiue, or expulsiue be not able to mayster, and dispatch it. The Antecedent is diuersly named, and by diuers termes, as replecionall, humorall, complexionall, and composicionall, it is called replecionall, when the humours increase beyond their due measure. Albeit al these haue respecte to the quality of humours, yet for all that, when all the humours grow beyond measure, it is termed replecionall: humorall, is whē one humour alone, groweth to apostumation, as the shingles commeth of pure Choller, and an hoat botch of pure and laudable bloud. Also they call it complexional, if the sayd humours be distempered from their firste state or qualities, I say from their fyrst qualities as if their forme in a body were limited,Composition. Replecion, Complexion, what they are. within the quantity of .ij. inches, and then if they had gotten them iij. inches more, thereof would spring diuers diseases, taking their names of the qualityes, that haue dominion and preheminence ouer them. It wyll be named compositionall, where one humour exceedeth the rest, in degree of his quality, geuen him of nature in composicion▪ and hereof it commeth to passe, that the whole body compounded, goeth to ruine, through Feuers, and other kynde of maladies. Wherefore no man may doubt, that ye complexion should be holden for a cause Antecedent. Some number dolour wt the same causes, whereunto may be added weaknesse of a Member, as watrishnesse, and windinesse. &c. Also a cause Coniuncte, is nothing els but the Antecedent, when it commeth to a place vlcerated, or well nighe vlcerating, Here may not we passe ouer this wyth silence, that any apostumation as touching riping▪ or to speake playner, rotting, and breeding of matter, hath property four tymes appropriate to it, that is to weete beginning, augmē
                        tyng, state, and fall. The beginning is, when the causes Coniunct, begin presently to appeare.Four notes in an apostumatiō, beginning, augmē
                           ting, state, & declining. Augmenting is known in that it largeth, and groweth to bignesse, and the accidentes increase: the matter gathered, and heaped togeather, wythout further increasinge, sheweth playnely the state. Fynally, the fall is knowen (if it bee well looked on) by a certayne softnesse, & faynting in the place. And these tymes must be aswell obserued, I thynke, as the selfe maladies: for Auicenna wyth expresse wordes, geueth thys admonition, saying it is not possible thou shouldst cure a disease, if thou know not, what the disease is. Mee thynck he doth inferre, and conclude, where the tymes be vnknowen, the cure also wyll be vnknowen, for why? In as mutch as the tyme in the apostumation is dyuers, the disease is dyuers, & the cure wyll be dyuers.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        ALthough you seeme to speake somwhat obscurely, & darkly, yet by oftētimes reading, I trust to get some more knowledge, for it is sayd of a very wise man, Omnes homines naturaliter scire desyderat. And I also being a mā, am desirous of knowledg to help my selfe, wtout the which I am ye worst kynd of beast, & most vnprofitable vpon ye
                        
earth: but hether vnto, you haue spoken, but of the beginninge of apostumations, as seemeth to me, but how be they ended & finished? I pray you let me know the way?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                           GALEN, the best that euer was, and the greatest learned next to Hippocrates, and one to whom chief credence must be giuen as vnto a prudēt Ship mayster, which through running, wysely doth set his course in the raging Seas, defending his Ship from Rocke, Storme, and Tempest, to the end, to arriue at the porte, and end of his trauayle, so doth Galen, like to a worthy mayster, defende his Pacientes from shipwrackes, both soarenesse, and sicknesse, and sayth, if apostumations tourne not back agayne, then they do ende by insensible resolution, or els by rotting out, and they be ended foure maner of wayes:Of resolutiō. fyrst by resolution, as is aforesayd, whych is vnbynding, remoouing, or vndoing of the matter: secondly, to conuert, chaūge, and tourne the apostumation into a thing called matter, or waire. The thirde is by rotting. The fourth, is putrifaction, and of thys speaketh Auicen, whych is one of the chyefe Prynces of Phisicions, in th'ende of hys chapter, concerning a hoat apostumation, and in this cure there is two thinges principally to be obserued. The one is, whether the thing be yet a doing, the other is, whether it be ful done, or ended. I meane by doing, that is, whether the matter be yet running, or fleting to the place of apostumation, and by the thing that is don, that is, whether the matter be past, and come already into the place of Apostumation or not: and note also, that in all sutch cures, you may not prolong, or abuse the tyme, but diligently goe about your businesse, for a little lost tyme, putteth the Pacient to great payne, and the Chirurgian to greate dishonesty.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     THerefore I pray you to spend no more tyme any longer in definitions, names, causes, and signes, of Apostumations, but rather I pray you, begin the maner of their proper cures, and helpes, for els hetherunto, all is but a laberinth, and a croked way vnto me.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        WEll. If you wyll needes take vppon you to mynister, in your beginning, you must prepare repercussiues, whych wyll greatly cōfort the soare Member: for Auicen sayth in hys first booke, the fourth doctrine, that a strong Member actyuely. doth cast from hym his superfluous humour, vnto the weake passiue or suffering Members, and pulleth it back agayne, and eftsoones doth powre it forth agayne, to the great hurt of the weake part where by the weake Member is oftentymes Choaked, and Strangled wyth the strength of the humour, whereby the whole Body is Ruined, and finally brought to destruction. Therefore, to the intent that the weake parte bee not vtterly Destroyed, Ouerladen, or Choaked, wyth sutch Superfluous humoure, you must, to auoyde the Daunger, make Restraynt wyth repercussiues,

repercussiues, and medicines defendent. And this shalt thou do, apply cold, and binding receipts, as Galen sheweth in the third of the arte, saying: Repellemus a paciente particula si infrigidemus & stiptica apponamus &c. We shal put of from the sycke part, if we coole, and apply bynding thinges. &c.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Do repercussiues help then in thys case generally?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        Of repercussiues, when they are good.
                        NO. But for asmutch, as thys place offereth occasion, to speake of repercussiues, whych I do laude: euen so I shall haue occasion to shew, where repercussiues ought to be abhorred and fled, with no lesse care, than Shipmen doe the rockes in the sea. For it is no lesse pleasure to the Chirurgians, to obtayne their purpose, and finishe their cure, than it is ioy vnto the Mariners, luckely to arriue in theyr owne porte, or restinge place. Therefore Soarenesse, to the ende that we may eschue Shypwrackes, and daungerous places, let vs a little inlarge our course, and call to remē
                        braunce, the wyse wordes, of that learned man and famous clark (maister Ihon Uigo) of Genua, whych wrote a learned Booke vnto Iulius the second, wherein he sayth, that apostumations in vncleane bodyes, do vtterly refuse repercussiues, except they be first clensed by purgations, for mutch matter cannot away wyth repercussion. In case we should fal sodeinly to the cure before purging, then should wee greatly erre, for in driuing it back ward, we rather should couch it vp, in the place so fast, that it could not bee remoued,Foule bodies refuse repercussiues, therefore they must 
                              〈◊〉
                            clensed. whereby occasion should be geuen of euil accidence. And furthermore, if this come to passe, as God forbid it should, then would it playnely import, or threat putrifaction or corruption of the member. Secondly, the emunctory or cleansing places, wyll not desire any repercussiue. Thirdly, take heede how you vse repercussiues, when ye matter is fat and clammy. For Galen sayth in the third booke of the Arte, Corpus existens plenum repercussionem non admittet. Fourthly, thynk it no matter of deliberacion, concerning repercussion, when the cause is venemous, cruell, or furious: but bee occupied wholly, in prouoking of it forth, for if you dryue it backward, after myne opinion, sayth Tagaltius, then do you range farre from the high way, for thys is the cause, why yee shall erre, and not do well in your cure. First, yee shall shut and close vp the matter, wythin your centure, whych of necessity, ought to be dispersed abroade, in the whole circute, and thereof wil follow, by the meanes of the malyce, venim, and poyson assembled togeather, and so taking their force in one place wyll practise no small incouenience or mischyfe,What perill is in the applicatiō of a repercussiue, although in some case it is most best. agaynst the natural vertues: you shall therefore, first vse repercussiues, if the matter be pressed, stopped, thrust, or shut vp together in one place, do thys, for feare of deforming of the member, where ye soare is, whych soone wyll ensue, if it come to putrifaction in that place. Sixtly, if nature cause any apostumation, by reason of crisis. Hoc est Iudicum, that is of iudgement to auoyde, 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or put out matter, superfluous, in thys case, think there will be no meanes founde, to put it backe, wythout great daunger, and hurt to nature.
                  
                  
                     
                     Soarenesse.
                     WHy? Would it hinder any thing in this case, to apply a repercussiue, or medicine, to dryue it backe? shewe me some reason why it should not be? Or what hurt would come thereof, if it were done?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        MAry, this euill might eftsoones ensue, for if it bee put backe,What hurte ensueth of a repercussiue. or retourned in agayne, nature wyll then inuent, and finde out some other by path, from the vncleane, to the cleane places, and were not this a great hurt to nature? Yes surely, it were no small Ieopardy: therefore we must in sutch cases, make euacuatiō of ye matter, putting a helping hand to nature in her crisis, as Galen sayth vpon this Aphorismus: quorum crisis fit, haud facta est. &c. For the cure of all these causes, you must vse mollifications, and softning Medicines.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Yet agayne, I put thys question, why you do vse repercussiues at any tyme?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        WEe vse repercussiues, that wee may apply theym, to the intente that the matter yet fleeting, be kept of, and not that,What goodnesse cōmeth of a repercussiue. whych is already flowing, become stubburne, agaynst vs in our workyng, & therefore, doing according to our rules, we shall order & apply repercussiues in the beginning, and augmenting of apostumations, for why, the matter at that tyme, is chiefly flowing to and fro: and Galen writeth in the thyrd of his arte, that vessels refreshed wyth binding medicines, put of mutch matter from them, howbeit this ought to be done successiuely, by little and little, because the fluxe of the matter, is wyth a continuance, and when it is come where it should be, then must it be resolued, and not driuen backe.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     I pray thee gentle Chirurgi, take in hand the cure of apostumations.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        THE Prynce of the Philosophers, Aristotle sayth, contraries be, & pertayneth to one science, and doubtlesse, the cures of Apostumations differ not, but in distaunce of more and lesse: for thys cause, must I wrastle earnestly, that the knowledge of natures, & simples escape you not, for why, the more yee shall excell herein, the better shall you forme your Medicines, for the Pacientes behooue, who haue ioyned themselues to our company: now to obtayne thys purpose, ye shall aduisedly looke whether the apostumations fal in a body ful of humours,Consider whither apostumations chaūce in bodies replete with humo
                              ••
                            or empty. or voyde of the same. If they happen in an empty body, yee shall recken it long of some cause primatiue, whose cure must bee in drawing forth ye matter, wyth resolutiues, or softning medicines: you shall resolue, if you apply colde and binding thinges together wyth hoat and moyst: with colde you must restrayne, & keepe it of, if any part of choller were approching, by reason of dolour, & with binding, you shal comfort the member, as I sayde before, according to the sentence of Galen, in that hoat things, cause the relenting of the matter: finally, vse moystening of the same, that ye poares harden not, nor be coagulated or stopped, & this speedely must be done at ye beginning,

afterward if it take not place, as I haue sayd: What haue you to say, in any other matter?
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Shew mee some holsome medicine, for Apostumations, I pray you?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        A good medicine for an Apostumation.
                        I Shall compounde this medicine, for an example. R. Iuyce of Houslike, and Lettice, ana. ℥.j. Oyle of Roses, and Camomell. ana. ʒ.j.ss. oyle of Mirtes. ʒ.x. Egges in number .ij. Swynge all these wyth the Yolkes, and Whites, vnto sutch time, as they be well incorporated, and then apply it in linnen. Eyther thus. R Bole Armoniacke, Acacia. ana. ℥.j. oyle of Roses, Mirte, Camomell. ana. ℥.j.ss. Beane meale ℈.j. dust of Mirtelles, and of Cipers nuts. ana. ℥.ss. wyth a little Waxe, all which must be incorporated at the fyre, and applyed to the soare place. Further, for the resoluing, of an hoat apostumacion, of what cause so euer that it come of, ye shall apply this, whych the learned haue greatly cōmended, & in very deed, I euer founde it, as they haue sayd, th'order of it was thus. R. Heades of white Lillies.A more excel
                           
                              •
                           ent way to helpe an apostumacion. ℥.v. rootes of ye Marishe Mallowes. l i.j. Camomel, Mellelot. ana. M.ss. and a handfull of Bran, seathe all these in Water, till they be throughly sodden, and then strayn, and presse theym, as the Cooke doth cōmonly grated bread, when he maketh his potage, putting it into a clene pan, vnto the which, yee shal put oyle of Roses, of Camomill, of Dill, & of Lillyes ana. ℥.ij. of the mary of Calues, or Cowes legges, and of Capōs grease. ana. ℥.j. of whyte Waxe. ℥.ss. of the soft aples, roasted in hoat Embers, if they may be gottē. ℥.iij.ss. Let al these be melted together, wyth yt, whych was searsed at a soft fyre, & bee boyled, by ye space of halfe an houre, wrought alwayes, that it be diligently stirred all the whyle, and this wyll be a Cerote, whereby yee shall get profite, and commendations. Another also in forme of a Cataplasme, more strong for the same purpose. Take the meale of Lyn
                           •
                        seede, & Fenigreeke. ana. ℥.iij. ye meale of Orobus. ℥.i. floures of Chamomill, Mellilote, Elder. ana. P.ss. red Rose leaues. ℥.ii. floures of Dill. ℈.iiij. pouder of Ireos of Florence. ℥.ss. boyle these in Wyne & Hony, or in the Iuyce of Smalledge. Anon adde of the dragges of oyle, and of oyle of Lillyes. ℥.iiij. oyle of Uyolets. ℥.ii. and so frame a Cataplasme. Now if the apostumations, will not be ruled, and geue place to a resolutiue, for so it fareth oftentimes with them, then prepare mollificatiues, or softning medicines, whych may bee made two wayes, wyth Embrocacions, or plasters.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     I pray you tell me, whych is the best way or meanes, to make an Embrocacion?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        AN Embrocation, is made after this maner. R. Of a decoction of Mallowes,Of an Embroche. Uyolets, Barly, Quince seede, Lettice leaues. l.v. of Barly meale. ℥.ii. oyle of Uyolets, and Roses. ana. ℥.i.ss. of Butter. ℥.i. and then seeth them all together, till they be like a broathe,

puttyng therto, at the ende foure yolkes of Egges, and the manner of applying, is with peeces of cloth, dipped in the foresayd decoction being actually hoate, which must be often chaunged one after an other, by the space of one thyrd part of an howre: This wil allay, and abate the payne, and cause resolucion, drawing forth the matter into the Skin. Such decoctions may be also made, of a Wethers Hed or other fleshe, so that the Brothe be 
                           •
                        atte, howbeit, this shal be according to thyne intent, whether thou meane the rypyng, or the resoluyng of it▪ immediatly after the imbrocasion, let this or the lyke plaster follow. R Of Leaues, of Mallowes, Uiolets, and Lettise ana. M.i. and afterward they shalbe sodden, brayed, & s
                           •
                        arsed, make an hard plaster therof at the fyre, with Barly Meale putting therto. ℥ ii.ss, of oyle of Uiolets, and ℥.ss. of Butter, this done, take it of the 
                           •
                        yre, and then incorporate the yolkes of three Egges, and so apply it to the soare, now if he be loth to take so much payne, and thynk plasteryng sufficient appoynte: the Pacientes fryendes to vse this. R. of crummes of breade l.i.ss, let it be steped in a decoction of Mallowes, Uiolettes, and Lettice, or in a Bro
                           •
                        he of Ueale, or Mutton: it may be done to with Ewes or Goats milke, hoate from the dugges. Finally, let it be pressed, and stamped, and drawen round in a morter, and then softe, it with Oyle of Uiolettes, and Roses. ana. ℥.i.ss. and of Butter. ℥.i. with a ℈.i.ss. of Saffron. After let the whole bee thicked at the fyre alittle, and then put the yolkes of twoo Egges to it: or els take the leaues of Mallowes, and Uiolettes, of euery of them, one handfull, & so boile, and stampe them togeather, with Boares grease, and vse these hardly. For one of these I assure youe, shall rype a Cholerycke apostumacyon, which thinge ye shal perceiue by the softnesse in feelyng, and by easyng of the payne, as Auicen sayth, Cum videris lenitatem quandam & sedationē doloris, tunc scias quod scit in via ad maturationem: When thou seest a certain softnes and delaying of payne, then thou mayst know it is in the way of riping: now when the place is ready to be launced, aboue al things s
                           •
                        e the inscision and the opening be made alongest, with the lying of the heares, & sinewes for why, nothing wil be done more better, to cause a Cicatrice.A Cicatrice.
                     
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     This is very wel sayd: Now I pray you tel me how you make an Incision?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        AN Incision must be made in the lowest parte, so that the matter may the better auoyde: in especially, if any humour do vse to fal to that part,Incision, how to make it. from whence issues would most naturally fall from. Oft we conduct them, by their conuenient regions, as sayth deuyne Hippocrates, and thincision must bee made, as it lyketh the learned, after a halfe or croked moone, except, the place be synewes, for if it bee so, then muste it bee made alongest with the course of them. For why if I would open it ouerthwart, I myght cutte some synew a sunder in working: immediatly vppō
                        
the incision, the place must be couered with Lynt, dipped and wette in the whyte of an Egge: Neuerthelesse before yee so dooe, yee shall fyll the hole of the appostumation wyth a Tente, made of the same moysted lin
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        , to thintent the matter gush not out, al at ones, which thing if it were suffred, and the Apostumation, great, the vertue natural, wil bee muche assembled therby, wheras we ought most warely to saue the same, that it be sufficient to feede the place, and worke rightly. For as Mesue following the mynd of Galen, sayth it is nature who worketh health: the Phisition is but hir seruant. This also must be wel remembred, and had in consideration, in a place apostumated,
                           
                              〈…〉
                            a member 
                              〈◊〉
                            the 
                              〈◊〉
                            do rot
                              •
                           e. whether the apostumation, fall in a fleshye or synewye place. For when there doth ryse a knot in a synewy place, there looke to be opened before it be ful rypened, lest any sinew shoulde rotte by meanes of corruption, but in the other, by reason of the freshnesse therof. Wee may a
                        
                           •
                        yde the perfyte riping, sithe we be moued by no inconuenience, to open it 
                           •
                        efore tyme, which thing is not to be permitted in the other without some good cause. Now when ye haue wel fylled and couered the incision, let it alone, and meddle no more with it, for the space of xxiiii. howers, and when that tyme is expyred, ye shal visite the apostumation, with a digestiue made of yolkes of Egges, and Terebinthyne., in continuinge the same, twoo, or 
                           •
                        hree tymes. vntil you see more or lesse, accordinge as necessitye in digestion shal shew you. At the end ye may finish the cure, with an abstersiue mingled of Barly meale Terebintyne, & Rosed Hony. But if it shalbe hollowe as it is often seene) we geue you this abstersiue in that behalfe.An abstersiue. A digestiue. R. of Rosed Hony, strayned. ℥.i.ss. of cleare Terebinthine. ℥.ii.ss. of ye iuyce of smallage ℥.ss. let them boyle, til ye iuice be wasted, afterwards whiles it is yet warme put therto, ii ℥.ss. of Barly flower, and mingle theym togeather, which yee maye kepe, til nede shal requyre, for the cure.
                  
                  
                     Soarnes.
                     What if proude, dedde, or rotten putrifyed fleshe, chaunce to be in the sore, or aposiumation, what remedye then?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        IN dede often times there groweth dead flesh in such places. I haue therfore here to say howe the same must be displaced and remoued,How rebate flesh superfluous. certaynlye my selfe did euer vse in remouing of superfluous, and festered fleshe the mixt oyntmentes, which were compounded of Vnguentum apostolorum and Egiptiacum of lyke portions, and if the part had byn very sensible, I vsed the pouder, whiche ye old auncient Chirurgians did vse to remoue such flesh ouer and vpon that yee shall aply this oyntment, which the old auncient Chirurgians, had in vre It is descrybed after this manner, 
                           •
                        . Oyle of Roses, of Camomell, ana. ℥.iii. of fat Weathers. ℥.iiii. of fat Calues. ℥.iii. of the mary of a Cowes huckel bone. ℥.ii of Lytharge of gold, and syluer, ana. ℥, i ss. of Ceruse: ℥.ss. of Uermilion. ℥ iii. of Terebintyne ℥.iiii. of new Waxe. ℥.ii. mingle al these together according to the arte. And let them boyle fyrst at a soft fyre, encreasinge and

fortefiyng the same after a season, and so boile and ster it withall, and so do it, til it get a very blacke hue, and thus haue you an oyntment to spreade on the soare, lyke a Cerote. But I saw one thing comminge to remēbraunce, that may not wel be forgotten, by reason of ye fearfulnes, of a certayn faint harted man, dwellyng hereby, now this whyte liuered Lad, that I speake of, was excedingly tormented with an apostumation, which needed opening howbeit, he cold abyde any thyng, rather than the openinge thereof, with an instrument. When I perceiued the importunity of the man. and the necessity of the worke. I rotted ye apostumation with a potential cautery which we made after this sorte. I tooke a cuppe ful of the best Sope lye, ye fyrst destilled forth from the stepefat men term it the mother lye, and cast it into a brasen cauldron. with a dragme of Romaine vitriole, which I caused to boyle, til all the lye was clean wasted, and then gathered I the fome, and frothe whiche remayned therof for my purpose, and truely this is so effectually in wryting, that it semeth to worke sodenly the acte,Cautery potentiall. and seeynge the worke began to receiue profit. when as the colour of the place began to bee darke and blacke. This is to be vsed in the tyme, when the paciente is very feble. But or euer it was applyed, I meane the Cautery, the hole apostumation was couered with a peece of Leather, least that the, Cauterie should perse or hurt some other place, than that which I did intend to meddle wt al: And further, that a hole be made in ye middes of ye same leather, And further to annointe ye leather wt som oyntment, & in the same hole, to apply the sayde Cauterye. And then with annother peece of Leather to couer the hoale, and so let it stand by the space of one hower and a halfe. close couered, and then remoue the Cauterie, and then apparell the place wyth a plaster as followeth. R. Leaues of Mallowes, and Uiolets. ana one handful, let them be boyled and stamped, puttynge thereunto. ʒ.ii of Barrowes grease, of Butter. ℥.ss of leauen. ℥ iii. &. ℈.i. of Saffron, mingle all togeather, & plaster wyse, lay it to the place, for this will remoue an hard crust and delay the payne.
                     Another cautery to open a sore, vsed by good Surgions. Take of sower Leauen ℥.ss. onions rosted vnder the Emeres. ℥ ii. pigions dunge, and hempseede. ana. ℥.i. snayles in number, iii. blacke sope, swynes grease as muche as wil suffyce, make hereof a little plaster, as broade as a groat and lay it vpon ye top or heade of the soare, & lay a broader resoluyng plaster ouer it. Chal. Now when the crust shalbe remoued, the vlcer must be cured, as it was afore declared. Hetherto haue we talked of Apostumations, chauncinge in clean bodies, Now because ther goeth one by, by whom I may wel certify my frende of my trauel: I pray you beare with me, for a while and with al speede possible when I haue done, I will retourne to you a-gayn. For I intend to fynish oure communication, and speake of the Appostumations which hurte Bodyes, that bee replete of Humours foule & paynfull. &c.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     SOmetyme an apostumation, is placed in a grosse foule Bodyes, ful of humours, in such a case, what is then to be done, mayster Chirurgian, I pray you?
                  
                  
                     
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        THen aboue al things, my dere frend. you must do your diligence to laboure and trauel,Foure intentions, and sixe vnnaturall thinges to bee obserued. more then youe did in my Primatiue cause. And for the cure therof it is very necessarye, that you set fowre intentions dilligently before your eien, and sixe thinges not naturall.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     Which are they I pray you hartely tel me?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        FIrst, that you order your pacientes lyfe, accordinglye: and to bryng the humour to iust equality.
                     
                        Fyue notable good thinges to be obserued in healingeSecondly, to purge the euil humours which do mainteine the apostumations hurt, or offence.
                     Thirdly, to remoue the cause coniunct or knitte to the same thinges, accordingly.
                     Fourthlye, to correct and amende euil accidentes, if any be in place.
                     Fiuethly, thynges not naturall. as ayre, meate and drinke, sleeping, and wakinge, reste, euacuation, repletion and accidentes of the mynde, as ire care. &c. All these must bee ruled with dilligence accordinge to the ebbinge and flowing of the matter, whether the cure do seeme easy or harde, to that end, yt very spedy worke may be made with wysedome, and the cure quickly fynished. Also, that the belly may be relaxed, and losed of ye humour whiche doth most abounde. Furder, that the appostumation be workmanly launced. And here must you chiefly obserue, that no local medecine bee applyed before the whole body be clensed and well purged of that humour, which doth most offence to nature.No locall medecine applyed before ye body purged. For in so doing, mischiefe wil ensue to the pacient, and reproache to the Chirurgian: whiche may rather be compted a murderer, than a man belper in such cases, wherof I haue spoken in the repercussyue. &c. So note that I geue you warning, to obserue dilligently to losyng of the belly, in al these causes. And furder, kepe of ye matter with repercussyues, as example.
                     R. Oyle of Roses, Bole armoniacke, the three Sanders, with the white and the yolke of an Egge,A goodly repercussyue. or els with this. Take Mallowe leaues, Uiolet leaues ana. M.i. Wormwood, Red Roses ana. M.ss. Barly meale ℥.i. Lint
                           •
                        ll meale, ℥.i.ss. Oyle of Chamomel, seeth such thinges as ought to be sodden▪ and lette them bee strayned, then mingle them togeather, makinge a soft plaster at the fyre according to the art. This is a medecine of that great learned Manne Auicen his owne inuention for resolution, and comforting the member as it may verye easely be perceiued,Auicenes medecine. if you marke well the receyptes. Nowe if these be found sufficiente, feare not to practise, discomfort not at all: But perhaps you shall fynde some matter, very slimye or toughe, to stronge for this in such case doe thus. Take the Leaues of

Mallowes, and Uiolets, ana. M.i. rootes of whyte Lillies. ℥.ii. rootes of Marche Mallowes ℥.iii. boyle al togeather,An excellente plaster to asswage payne in a 
                              •
                           ore. stampe and streine them with a stronge strayner, or Colender, into a Kettle, whereunto put fresh Butter ℥.ii. Swynes grease ℥.i.ss. seeth them and make a plaster in a stone morter: Or els do this, Take rootes of whyte Lillies. ℥.iii. rootes of Marish Mallowes. ℥.ii. and rotes. of Garden Mallowes, and rootes of Uiolets, ana. M.ss. seeth them soft, stamp them and streine them, wherunto put Capons grease ℥.i. fresh Butter ℥.ii. Barowes grease. ℥.i.ss. sower Leauen ℥.iii. Barly meale, as much as shal suffice. ℈.i, of Saffron, and make therof with the former decoction, a conuenient plaster, apply it to the sore place accordinglye.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     What is then to be done, after this busines, I pray you mayster Chirurgian.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        WHen you be come to this poynt, do your feat hardely with aunce in hand, trimble not: discomfort not your selfe▪ neither your paciente, but open thapostumation. Some what in the form of a new Moone croked and when that is done, vse the maner of digestion, and abstertion in maner as I haue said. But as concerning ye makinge sound & the skynning, vse ye medecin which is compounded of Uermiliō. ℥.i. oyle of roses & Mirtes, ana. ℥.i.ss. This is of good effect in causyng of a cicatrice, cut or scar, if ye place be annointed wt water of plā
                        ten, rose water, hony of roses, & a little Allume: it shal be very cōfortable,How to make incision. wt a soft Sponge to moyst the place: and thus haue the old auncient men, euer vsed among their miserable pacientes. Then there is an other intention which is very good: which is to amend euil accidentes, which comber, molest and vexe apostumations often tymes. For if the pacient be longe vexed with such euil accidentes, the vertue naturall will then decaye, and bee quickly ouerthrowen:How to drye humours that do abounde. wherof wil follow incontinently great daunger and much hindraunce to the cure of the same, that in fyne it shall bee scant curable: whiche accidentes bee these two, the one is called extreme dolour or payne, the other is darkenes, and deadly blacke complexion of the same Place: these twoo bee nere hande desperate cures,Dolour and darcknes of complexion. and moste daungerous to bee helped, in all Appostumations: But commonlye these Accidentes, are founde onelye to bee the cause of euill Chirurgians necligences.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     What moueth the Chirurgian thus to doe? I pray you tel me?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        
                        WHen ye matter in the apostumation, was already rype, & flitting and after the same shoulde quickly haue bene expulsed or auoided by inuisible transpiration which is one of the forces,What harme 
                              〈◊〉
                            of an 
                              〈◊〉
                            Chirurgian. or benefytes of nature. Then the ignoraunte Chirurgian: ministreth forth with repercussiues, which draue backwarde, and pressed the water so fast in the place, that these accidentes did ensue of necessity. Wherfore I shal exorte thee my dere frend, seyng thou arte mynded, to enter into the worthy ministery of this worke, which is not onelye profitable to thy selfe, but also beneficial to the common wealth. That thou do vse repercussiues, namely in the paynful places, that may be the occasion of ryping of the matter, for feare that otherwise thou repent thee, for when matter is ones placed, then neede we not but to open the pores, whiche thinge euery man may do very easely, if he do resort to the repercussiues afore discrybed.
                  
                  
                     Soarnes
                     SIr, if in case these accidentes wherof you haue spokē, be in this daū
                        gerous peril, it should seeme then, eyther to be in the fault of the chirurgian, or els in the malice of the humour: what is then to be don?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        YOu shal make a plaster with these medecines following, which the great learned men themselues, haue vsed vnto their pacientes. R, of hulled Beanes, or Beaneflower that is without the branne. l, i. of Mallow leaues. M.ii: Sethe them in lye, til they be wel sodden, and afterwarde, let thē be stamped and incorporated with meale of Lint,A good emplaster. or flaxe, ℥.iiii of Lupyne meale ℥.ii: and forme therof a plaster, with Goats grease, for this openeth the pores auoydeth the matter by transpiration, and comforteth also the member: but if the place after a daye or twoo after the application of the plaster, fall more and more to blacknes, it shalbe necessary to goe further, euen to scarisying and incision of the place, according as it may suffer. Certaynly these are such accidentes, that wil not so-easely be displaced, as I haue talked of, but requyre most prudent and circū
                        spect dilligence, of the Phisitions. Therfore who so wil com vnto this art should dwel no smal whyle with a lerned Chirurgian, to this end, that he may both learne his sayinges and doinges,What the Chirurgian muste doe. and obserue the same, and haue them euer in mynd, that he may euer be able to trauice the ayre. with his owne: propper winges, without the helpe of others. And not be as a blind guyde, neither apt to leade, nor tract the way himselfe, according to profit art,Example. and knowledge. For in so doing he shalbe lyke vnto an vnconning shipmayster, which bryngeth his Ship to ruine, rockes or wrack, so shal he fynish his course with shame, and his pacient with death. Therfore when the place is scarifyed, let it be done both quickly and sodenly, then lay vpon the same scarification bay Salt. After this is done, than applye this folowing in good order.
                     R. Of B
                           •
                        anemeale, and of Orobus. ana. ℥ vi of Lupine meale. ℥.iiii. And boyle them in Oximel vnto such tyme as they shal be plaster thicke, and after

apply them to the place, or els plaster it with beanes and Lupines, boyled in Barbery lye, and afterward strained and stamped in a morter. Now perchaunce, if ye see euil and corrupte fleshe in the place, ye shal nede no further councel in that behalfe.Unguentum Egiptiacum of Auicen To
                              •
                           bate dead fleshe. But incontinent annoynt the place with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, which must be made after the mynd of Auicen.
                     
                     R. Uertdegrece, Roche Alume, Honye, Uineger. ana, 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. that is, as much as wil suffice, sethe them vntil they come into a red coloure, and with this oyntment you shal exasperate, and sharp the place by the space of two or thre dayes, notwithstanding, if you shal nede, you maye iterate or often apply the same, vntil the fame come to an escarous crust or scabb and make seperation▪ which must not be roted vp by any instrument. but rather may be renued with one of the mollificatiues, specially yong hogs grease, as it is aforesayd, and when this is fallen of, the same vlcer must bee cured, as all other vlcers are, wherof I shal geue you furder vnderstandinge hereafter Now you do perceiue how putrifaction ought and must bee handled, but in the meane whyle, foresee with wisdome, that this euil be preuented, & auoyde the same, for when a cure is not wel handled, or is cast awaye, thē it is to late to call againe yesterday. Prayer or weping in this case wil scant preuayle in the Chirurgians behalfe. Now consequently, after I haue spoken of the asswaging or mittigating of the doloure and payn of apostumacion, which oppresseth nature, as the prince of Philossophy called Aristotle,
                        A Chirurgiā must haue prouidence to foresee cure. affyrmeth saying: doloure and payne be the euils, that do dissolue, and vtterly destroy the humayne nature of Mankynd: ie semeth necessarye that in due order, som wholsom way be taken, to helpe this daungerous matter, and to auoyde the doloure.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     What is best to auoyde the doloure.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        NOthing truely, but artificially to alter and chaunge an euill complexion, so that it come not by stoppinge of the matter or by the breach of continuance, or corrosion, for then such griefe would aske other succours, for where as dolour is fallen, there doth plainly appeare a soden alteration of complexion in that part, as Galen affyrmeth.To alter complexion in a sore.
                     
                     Therfore if you wil make any alteration in nature, inuent some apte proper medecine, for the same purpose: as for example. Take Oile of Roses. ℥.ii the yolke and whites of .ii. Egges new laied, beate them al togeather, and apply thē to ye place, then the next day following in the morning, applye this in place or steade of the former. Take crummes of whyte bread, sodden in Goates or sheepes milke: or els breade sodden in the brothe of a Chicken: or els you may take a weathers head sodden frō the bones, which you must presse through a cotten cloth from the same sodden flesh, saue halfe a pynte of the decoction, vnto which decoction, then adde Hony of Roses, and oile of Camomel, ana. ℥, i.ss. wt yolkes of new layed Egges. Al these must be beatē together & recocted, or sodden againe. vppon a soft fyre vntil such tyme as it be somwhat stiffe, when this is don, aply it warme to the dolours pained

place, accordingly. This also that followeth is vsed to the same purpose. Take rootes of Holioke ℥.ii Mallowes, violets, ana. M.ss. Chamomil, redde rose leaues. ana. p.ss. boyle them wel, and slampe them togeather. Adde vnto these when they be so stamped, of fresh Butter. ℥.ii. oile of roses, & violets ana. ℥.iii. make therof a Cataplasme, and apply it as warme as may be suffred.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        WHat if this medecines preuayle not, what shal I do then good maister Chirurgian:Choise of medecine is good For I haue hard say, that one medecine woorketh not health in euery complexion, but choise is good.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        THen you shal vse this which followeth. For often tymes extreame doloure and paynes of very necessitye, shall require mollifications, without daunger, wherein there may be put such cooling thinges, as wil not hynder mollification: thus Prince Auicen sheweth in his Chapiter de flegmone, therefore do thus.
                     Take Mallowes, Uiolets. ana M.i. seeth them, and bray them, and put in them ℥ ii. of Barly meale, of Oyle of Roses, ℥.iiii. and eftsoones seeth thē agayne vntil they be in the forme of plaster thicke, which in case serue not yet the purpose, note this other.
                     Take of Fenicreke, meale of Lintseedes, of flowers of Camomel, of hens fatte melted, of Rosed Oyle. ana. ℥.iii. let al these. (the Oyles and fattes only excepted) be mingled and sodden togeather with the decoctions of Mallowes, and violets, vnto such tyme, as they be thickned, to make a plaster. This done, warme the oyle and fat, and incorporate the same, with a little oyle of Camomel, and of Dil, and so make it to a plaster. This will open the pores, and hard pressed matter, which causeth the payne. Now if it bee in the augmēting of a malady: in this case, ye shal make it after this 
                           •
                        orme.
                     Take oyle of Roses, and of Camomil, ana. ℥.i ss. the yolkes of twoo Egges. ℥.ss. of Barly meale or more, which yee shal shake wel togeather, and so laye it to the place. This suppose I sufficient for the appeasyng of doloure: if not you of your owne head, by these may inuent new and other confections, to the behofe of your pacientes, and your owne contentation. Sith I haue dispatched this, I wil retourn to an hardened apostumation, which truly myght haue bin omitted wel ynough, ye matter being so manifest & playne.
                     Neuertheles, I will recite here, what ye learned haue vsed in this case, because I woulde not mayme my communication
                           •
                        . Certaynlye this inuention shal Minyster, diuers fetches and causes, wherein Menne may employ there wittes. Howbeit (according as Mesue wryteth de lassitudine post purgationem, we wyll conuert our intent, to the cause of hardnes to ye intent we may cut it of. For as he saith, this is the right way in cures, & ye foresight in working Wherfore, if it appeare yt the place tend to hardnes, or euer it come to that poynct, & be fixed, it may be redressed thus. Take .x. fat Figges, of rootes of Marish Mallowes smally chopped. ℥.vi. Seeth them well, and then Bray them wyth. ℥.ii. of Barrows grease, putting thereto a lyttle Saffron, wherewyth couer the place, whych yee woulde soften.

and ye shal not fayle of the purpose. But if it were so,A softninge Plaster. that the pray escaped your wittes, or miste your fyngers, you may be sure to entrap it with this.
                     Take of Terebyntin medled and wel incorporated with Butter and this doutles shal serue your purpose. But or euer it be applyed, the place must be prepared and often made moyst, for ryping of the matter, with bloud warm water. Now when it commeth in rotting, open the place with a potentiall Cautery, or with some other fetch or meane, forseyng alway that it be done according to the rules aboue mentioned.A potentiall Cautery. In fyne when it is opened proceed in the cure, as in other.
                     These be the thinges, which I had this day, to say, which though they be not so fynely vttered, ne liuely declared, as happely ye Looked for: ye shall beare with my simplicity, in that behalfe, For I neuer bestowed laboure in Oratorye (as I thinke ye perceiue right well) to attein vnto eloquence. And so wher I am simple and playn my selfe, I haue handled such things, as I had to say wt semblable simplicity & plaines: which if it like you also I shal right gladly recite vnto you after the same order & maner, such things as we haue to vtter of woundes. Now if I haue stombled or missed anye where. I pray you correct it, so if it bee worthy of correction▪
                        Of God beginning and ending of all thinges. And on the other side, if any thinge praise worthy, be com to light, offer and ascribe that to the liuing God (as I said in the beginning of our communication.) That we may in our selfe, verify the saying of the Poet: Ab Ioue principium, nam sunt Iouis omnia plena. Of God take thinges their beginning, for by him are al replenished, whose name be blessed for euer, Amen
                     
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        You haue handled your selfe very eloquently & freshly inough to day, also you haue geuen vs cuppes of knowledge, able to quench the thurst of better men then we are. And I assure you no man maye greatly wonder at it, seyng we are enuirōned on euery syde, with such gentle humanity, and brotherly loue of each others. Wherefore we pray vnto God that for this your gift, he wil prosper you and your cures and long preserue you in health, to the behoue of youre countrye, and frendes. For you haue quenched our thirst▪ aboue expectation, with worthy communication, and medicines. But to geue you warning, I pray you hast hither to morow with as greate and quicke speede, as ye canne passe, after yee haue visited your cures, to the entent ye may paye vs your promise at full not without many thankes. Now therefore syth then of your part time moueth you, to tend your cures, departe in good time, & remember vs, For wee sore people minde to repayre hether agayn tomorow, to heare you, althoughe the weather be very colde.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     GOe yee on in the name of God, & doubt not, but that I am yours, and all theirs, whych be eyther sicke, or soare, to help them, to my power.
                  
                  
                     Soarnes
                     
                        IT be falleth oftētymes if any good or euil hang ouer mens heads: the deuine mynd of man, hath an inkling, & a smattering therof,Mans secrete prouidence. or euer it come to effect, whych thing is verefyed in our selfe this day.

For where we feared losse of tyme, we haue vaynly spent all the day in loking hether and thether, for you mayster Chirurgian. And al this togeather is done for you, wherfore to say trueth we charged you with the matter, and spake liberally of you, Now therfore if ye recompence it not with dilligence. we wil lay al the burthen in your necke, because we haue taried so long for you this daye.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        DOe you herein as you thinke good For I am all togeather yours, and would that you al were helped, specially, because ye begin playnly to shew your grieues. And this will I doe gladlye, omittyng the definition, in as much, as it lyketh you so wel: notwithstandyng, that al auncient Authors in wrytyng of matters, thought it beste to begyn at the difinition But yet they as I thinke, were of that mynde, and opinion, wher the matter was straunge and darke, and where it could not be wel perceiued, but by ye difinition only, which gaue some light to it. And of truth so ought they to doe, wher cloudy darknesse, and crabbish knottes, require light and opening by the difinition, which thinge, as I trust, shal not happen in my plain woordes. For I intende to speake of woundes, whiche to all menne be as playne as a packstaffe.Of woundes. For it is geuen men of nature, warely to auoyde all noyance, and as much it feareth them also to be hurte. I say that woundes be manifest to all men. And if it were otherwyse with them, I mighte well ynoughe begin my communication, at this diffinition of woundes. For it were easely sayd,The definitiō of a woūde. that a wounde is a breach of continuance, newlye made, in an harde or softe part of the body, being without putrifaction and corruption. Now therfore, syth there appeareth no commodity curatyue to ryse therof, I Thinke it best to passe it with silence: notwithstanding, if you bee desyrous of it, the saying, which is rehersed may serue the purpose. And now to begin the matter playnly, I suppose. I may laye the foundacion best in the deuision of woundes.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        YOu haue rightly iudged. But sir my desyre is, that ye wil begyn whereas I may heare one long profitable tale, of the whole matter, and I wil occupy myne eares and kepe silence.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     I was mynded the same my selfe also.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        WEl, go on then, and speake to the purpose▪ without interrupting of your talke, vnlesse where necessitye shal cause you to pause, or breath your selfe good mayster Chirurgian,.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                        I Heard my frendes and bretheren say, that there were two kyndes of woundes which doo no lesse differ in name, than in their cures,Two kyndes of Woundes. the one simple and the other double or compound. The one Men call a symple wounde, the other double or compounded. The symple is where no substaunce is lost, and is ensounded & cured with one intencion alone. And of this, wee shall make no further adoe, because of the facillity therof. For why? Coblers, Carters, and women bee able to cure such woundes. Now that which is properly called a cōpounded▪woūd is where some substaunce is lost, and necessarily requyreth dyuers intentions in the cure, as thus. To vnite that which was seperated, to restore that was lost, and to displace an apostumation, if it bee concurraunt with the same. But here note, that amonges woundes, some be vncurable. And it is not inconuenient to begin at the harte, as the cheefe Forte and principal part of the body,
                     Then we say, that euery wounde, annoying and perishing the substance of the harte, it is deadly and vncurable. For why as Auicen sayth the harte duryng the natural lyfe, may not suffer any breache of continuance. And therfore to knit vp much in one knot, such woundes as geue let,What woūds be mortall and impeachment, to the vertue, which is necessary to lyfe, take mankynd away, without remedy. As woundes in the substaunce of the Brayn: of the wind pype. of the wessand: of the Lunges: of the Liuer: of the Gaule, of the Midryfte, of the Maw: of the Spleen: of the smal guttes: of the kidneis, and bladder: and generally all such woundes, which perce through the bulk and inward partes, be very daungerous. Because the inward parts be altered by mouyng of the ayre from out forth. and the spirites be offended within,Partes moste daungerous to be hurte. and the vertu natural, which maynteineth lyfe, is destroyed. And the reason why, is that, when these partes be wounded, they be most hardly helped by reason of their continual mouinge and labourynge. And when this may not be made whole, they be notable, ne sufficient to do their offices, requisite to nature.
                     Now must we speake somwhat of woundes, that happen in muskelles, and lacertes. For they may be thought as daungerous, as the foresayd,Woundes in the Muskels. For as in the one, be manifest tokens of death, so in ye other be Prognosticable signes, for men enflamed with high and diuine foresight.Example. For a wound in a Muscle doth much lyke a woode Snake, which lyeth in wayt for men out of their way, lurkyng vnder the greene flowers, where he putteth them yt go by in doubt or hasard of their lyfe. Therfore my frends let vs reasō somwhat of them also, yt they leade vs not forth wt vayne hope, and oppresse vs amonge other, as careles, & ydle heads. Wherfore we suppose that woūds chauncing .3. fingers aboue and beneath,Of conuultiō mortall. the heads of ye Muskels or lacertes nigh vnto the ioints, be exceding daungerous: and that pricking of synewes do often cause conuultions, by reason of the great fealyng and felowshippe yt thei haue wt the brain. Wherin ye saying of Hippocrates
                        ▪ apeareth true who saith, yt a spasme or cōuulsiō chaūcing vpō a woūd, is mortal for ye most part

Wherefore the woundes in such partes must be handled warely, and wyth aduysed deliberation. For why, they wil to notablye hynder the Chirurgian his estimation, if he prognosticate warely of the same to them that stād by: which thing truly had befallen to my selfe, when I promised a man his life, had not I bene admonished by mayster Rasis, who secretly and wittely, vnknowen to al the family, pluckt me by the elbow, and warned mee, wyth these or lyke wordes in effect. And then the pacientes strength was agreable to health, and no apostumation rysen, but he slept as he ayled nothing at all. Consider with thy selfe, sayth he, as thou dost lightly alway, the signes whiche induce conuultion in woundes. Whereas there appeareth no swellinge in the soare, in good fayth, I conceiue an euil opinion in, the patientes life, which I haue gotten me, with long obseruation. For the matter which should come forth, to the payned place, is supped vp of the synewes. Wherfore I se a conuultion euen at hand, For if the matter, thoughe it were lyttle (for in much it fareth lyke) had issued and gathered to ye place it would geue me occasion to thinke wel of him. For it shoulde signify, that the matter did relinquish the synewes, and draw outwarde.
                     
                        A goodly note to be obserued when death is hande.Now in asmuch as it remayneth, as a sleepe within, surely I thynke euil of it: and truly, it was marueilously sayd of him. For, or euer the fifth daye came, the man gaue vp the breath, by reason of a spasme or Crampe, wher at I was greatly abashed▪ reseruyng the sygnes in memorye, and mynde hereafter as I also aduyse you to doe. Yea, and if there bee any other els, worthy of obseruation, marke the veyne also diligently, that it may stand youe for steede, when neede shall requyre. For this wil require a vigilante Eye of the Chirurgian. Wherefore I appeale here to youre secrete hartes, and bid you beware, that ye disgrace not your selues thorow rashnes, but be rype in Prognostications, and circumspect in obseruinge of the tymes of your workinges, Both for one helpe and others.
                     Now all other woundes, these only excepted, which I haue recited, no doubt be curable, And as for the helpe of these that are curable. there are two principall found, the one by the fyrst intention, the other by the second. The latter is, wher deuyded partes are ioyned togeather through a portion of an other kynd of matter. As for an example
                     Bones are ioined, togeather, with a certayn hard matter, much lyke a bone but not a bone which is muche lyke to Alasarte. The other, when partes are ioyned togeather, with their lyke in kynd, as flesh with flesh. And these wayes, we must needes haue before our eyes, to the intent we minister not any thing in wounds, which we might afterward repent. Wherfore to auoyde these euils I iudge it best to begyn with suche thynges as may bee vsed generally, in all kynd of woundes, to helpe mankynde.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     For Gods sake shew mee the best manner of woundes,
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                        WHen ye haue determined, to take any sutch wound in hand, incontinent remember to obserue these thyngs: that is to say, an order of the Lyfe, locall medicines, and amendment of euill accidentes. The fyrst, ye shal obtayne by due administracion of the sixe thynges, called not naturall. If the Chirurgian be ignoraunt therein, the Phisicians may rule the matter. For it belōgeth to them, to giue an order of lyuing, to bryng humours to a quality▪ to try out inward causes, of variable ebbyng and flowyng. And fynally to giue iust redresse of ye same:What the 
                              〈◊〉
                            must obserue▪
                         which thyng for the most part, Chirurgians labour not to attain to, because the matter is so secretly hyd, as it were amonges stones, but onely by meanes of couetousnes, and gready desyre of Chirurgians. For when they haue gotten onely a lyttle taste, without all excercise, vnder their maister, whych thing is mother to Artes, as Aristotle sayth: They take money hungerly, they seeke in hand, and rent theyr skin wyth theyr teeth, makyng no conscience at the matter at all. Now as touchyng the second, in applying of locall medicines: ye shall not play, make or marre, ne go at all aduenture, as ye sought blyndfield. But perswade your self earnestly, that you made Argus, to bee your companion in the matter. For in case ye misse but a little, or negligently omit any necessary thing in the cure, ye shal fyrst bring your self into a peck of troubles, and after wyll ensue many inconueniences▪ as sayeth Aristotle: graunt one absurditie, and many inconueniences wyl follow. Wherefore, least thys do chaunce, it is good that ye loke narrowly on the matter, with aduised circumspection. Now therefore, when ye stand before the wounded, fyrst ponder wyth your selfe, how the wound was giuen, of what sorte it is, and how large a gash? For be the wound small and in a fleshy part, without losing of substaunce, it may be cured onely with conuenable bindyng.Who so doth graunt to one absurditie, many one wil eftsones follow. But if it be great and deepe, first staunch the bloud, if any bee, wyth some medycine conuenient, as I shall declare hereafter, in the place of bleedyng and Ulcers. whereunto I referre thee at thys present. For there I entende to giue medicines, and meanes for that purpose. When the Bloud is stanched, ye shall sew the wound, with a fyne thred, well twisted and waxed,A small wound. betwene your fyngers. But or I speake of sewyng. I wyl recite certayn causes where sewing is daungerous, and therefore forbidden as vnprofytable. And then wyl I to my purpose again in order for your sake.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     I pray you shew me that order?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YOu shall fyrst remember, that wounds made, with any longe and round weapen, as an arrow or dart: must not for a few dayes, bee cured by the first intencion, notwithstanding they be cured partly by the fyrst. Some do say they be not cured, by the first, for why?Example. We keepe thē open, least the matter be imprisoned here. For if it were so, wounds myghte incurre extreame dolour, by reason of alliance, wyth cordes and sinewes. And therefore we say plainly, they ought not to be shut vp in the first daies.

For my selfe sawe thys in a valyaunt Captaine, at Barwicke, who had a wound in the Necke. And a certayn Phisicion toke the man in hand, and wylling to hast the helpyng of the wound, which ought to haue ben kepte open,Pate Hardie the Scotte a good Chirurgian. he closed it vp wyth a seame: whereupon, the pacient fell into extreme paine, and as it were, into a continuall conuulsion, insomutch, that if a cunning Chirurgian, called Pate Hardie, a Skot, had not put to hys Hand the soner, he had borne his owne message to ye dead. But to our purpose, where I sayd, notwithstanding, they be cured by the fyrst intencion, this is vnderstanded, that is where there is no lost substaunce, newly produced in them. For if there were,Of the fyrst and second intention. the cured should be after the secōd intencion. And where any substaunce is lost, and ought newly be produced, sewing shal be righte straunge and vntoward. For why, it can not otherwyse be well cured, but by the second.Matter doth couet digestiō
                         For nature seeketh euer restitucion of the lost part, wyth no lesse carefulnesse, than the mother her onely lost Sonne. Wherefore, if wee minde to restore that, we may not sowe vp the wound, or it be recouered. If the wound be deepe, and greatlie altered, by the receipt of the ayre, think of no sewyng.His name was Iue, of Swasa in Cambrigeshyre. For matter is now secretly caused, by reasō of the ayre, which cryeth out for digestion, and abstersion. And if the impericke, whome yee know of, had thus handeled the matter, the honest man ye wote of, had ben yet a liue. For when he had taken a large gash in his Legge, and long had left it open to the ayre, thynking to be notablye well cured: caused a Chirurgian to be sent for, which immediatly in all the hast (a Gods name) seweth vp the wound. What wyll ye more? Immediatly after the sewyng, importable dolours did arise,A wound of a bruse. and on the thyrd day, the legge was so feastred, that in the .vii, the man would needes take his Vltimum Vale, and say farewell to the lyuing. Now if the imperike had fyrst vsed digestion with abstersion, and then sewing of the wound: perchaunce the matter had not growen, to that extremitie of death. And in case the wound come by meanes of a bruse then attempt not to sew it. For without doubt, ye shal shortly perceiue, that ye labour in vayne.
                     Whereof Galen giueth vs a warning word, sayinge: that it foloweth of necessity,It is peryllous to sew a wound commyng of the biting, or rendyng of some beastes. that a bruse should putrifie, and tourne to corruption. I adde, & vnderstand it, if it be an extreame bruse: for in a meane, it taketh no place. Therefore, if it be sewed, the seame wyll soone be corrupted. As wee sawe our selfe, a lusty young man, who came to see a Bull baityng in Parisse Garden, and fallen before the same, I wote not how, the Bull gaue hym in the thygh a rent, wyth the hornes. Now when a Chirurgian had taken hym in hand, incontinente he sewed the wound, whych putryfied ryght soone. And certainly, vnlesse maister Backter had helped it, I thinke assuredly, the man had dyed of it. Further we say, that sewyng is not good in a wound, caused by bityng of some beast. For a bytten place, is hollow and abated, or otherwise, somwhat sauoreth of the nature of a bruse. Howbeit, wee leaue this case to the good Chirurgians Iudgement. For partes seuered by bytyng may well bee ioyned wyth a threede, in some cases. Sewynge is to no purpose, where a Wounde vncouereth a Bone broken, or whole,

for it wyl not haue adoe with ensoundyng through sewyng: except the discouered be fyrst clad, and the second vnyted together agayn naturally.
                     Also a wound in a musculous place, specyally ouerthwart the Muskell,Of wound
                              •
                            of the muscles vtterly refuseth sewyng, as Auicen sayth in ye chapiter of bynding of woūds in Lacertes and Muskelles. Or be it a Lacert, whych is rent in latitude, it is not drawen together, but rather some thyng is put betweene, leaste the skinne grow together. &c. Wherefore he would the wound went at large, whiles the cure is after the second intencion. The same do sinewie places desyre also, for if they be sewed, the Lyppes wyll grow to one, and the Synewes vnder couerte, wyl caste reumetike matter, and shortly cause apostumacion, so that ye shalbe driuen, whether ye wyl or no, to louse the seame or make a new incision. Therefore to auoyd this inconuenience, wee shall suffre sutch wounds, to run at large for a season: and so ye shall haue them, more tractable in handlyng. How bee it, here is a tedious disputacion moued. whether a cut sinewe should be sewed, or not. For there bee sundry opinions, and aucthorityes of the learned, of the one side, and of the other. And verely, if I should dispute the matter, I would mayntayne both the opinyons, although at this present, I assente wyth maister Ihon de Uigo, not for that I haue sworne, to say as he sayth, but because his words, seeme moste consonaunt to reason.
                     And to Auicen, where he sayeth, if the sinewes be broken in latitude, then it is necessary to sewe the wound: and if it be not sewed,Of sinewes the Wound wyll not grow together. Howbeit, I wyll omit the prosecution of this question sith it is not necessary vnto this treatise. But yet by the way, marke well the saying of Auicen, where he commaundeth to sew the wound of necessitye Certes, I, after Marianus would let it go open. But he meaneth of a large. wound, whych would cause great deformitye, if it be vnsewed. And lykewyse, if it bee sewed, that there bee a great distaunce betwene stitch & stitch And on the other side, where I said, I would suffre it to be louse. I ment of a small wound, whych experience shall teach you to be true. Moreouer, many dolorous and apostumated wounds, wyll none of sewing, which, what for the facilitie, and manifest apparance, needeth no further declaracion. For the cause is open to them, that wyll diligently consider the matter. These be the causes, where wee vse not to sewe Woundes,How to sewe a wound, and how not. and bee worthy to be put in memory. Now wyl I retourne, from whence I degressed. Now these cases excepted, sewe the wound, wt a wel twisted thred, drawen through Waxe, as we sayd before, alwayes remembred that ye leaue some place open in the lowest part, where matter may haue issue forth. When yee haue so done, ye must apply this medicine, whych is mingled of the whyte of an Egge, and a lyttle Oile of Roses. Thys is done, because the Paciente should not greatly bee troubled, at the remouing. For ofttime is caused so great payne, namely in hearye places,The Chirurgian must looke pleasauntly vpon his pacient. that the pacyent seemeth to bee cramped, or 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        kt with conuulsiō
                        ▪ And let this remain .xxiiii. howers in ye woūd if ye fear any bledīg. And whē this time is expired, visite your paciēt again, with a gladsome countenaūce, and whiles ye be merely talking wyth hym

take of all the coueryngs, and then enbaulme it, with a degestiue of yolkes of Egges, and cleare Terebintine, layed in a cloth. But if the wound bee in the head, or any place of mutch feelyng, take Oile of Roses, in steede of Terebintine, wherewyth proceede in the cure, tyl matter be caused in the place. And when that is done, set the degestiue a part. For if ye proceede further, it were but to put putrifaction, to putrifaction. Neuertheles, the brinkes of the wound, must be oyled wyth Rosed omphacine, that is Oile of Water Lyllies. After ye haue so visyted the wound, ye shall spred this defensiue, one hand bread from it.
                     
                        A defensiue.Take of Rosed Oyle. ℥, ii.ss. of all the Saunders ana. ʒ.ii. of Bole Armoniack 
                        ʒ.ii.ss. the white of an Egge, and a lyttle Uineger, if the wound be distaunt from a sinewie place, if not Wyne of Pomegarnettes, in steede of Uineger. All whych, cause to be drawen in a morter that it be at hand, when neede shall requyre. When ye haue thus proceeded fower or fyue dayes, thē must you gyue ouer the degestiue, and vse a mundyfication, which is thus myngled Take of Rosed Hony, ℥.ii. of Terebintine. ℥.iii. let them seeth a lytle, puttyng thereto .i.ss. of Barly meale, with. ℈.i. of Saffron. All which must be incorporated at the fyre, and vsed the space of .viii. dayes, or there about, as is expedient. And as for the sounding, vse the oyntment, that I descrybed in apostumacions, wherewyth I ensound or make whole, almost all kynde o
                           •
                         breaches, as our fryend can wytnesse, whych (because hee would haue the certayntye) would needes be present, when we cured a sore man of an apostumacion vnder the arme hole, whych Albenzoar Rasis reckoned for vncurable. If any fattysh flesh grow, at the inclosyng thereof, ye shall remoue it with Vnguentum Mixtum, myngled of Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Vnguentum Apostolorum, of ech lyke quantity, or els take this pouder, whych my self dyd mtuch vse. Take of Citrine Mirabolanes. 
                        ʒ.ss. of Terra Sigilla
                              •
                           a. 
                        ʒ.i. of burnte roch Alume. ʒ.ii. let them be stamped small, and the pouder vsed for a corosiue, wherewyth ye shall get the victory and triumphe ouer the Maladye.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     Thus haue ye spoken of a symple deepe fleshie wound: now I praye you, proceede to the double wound, and the cure thereof.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        REstitucion is made, with a matter of an other kinde▪ as in bones and sinewes. Howbeit, some aucthors affyrme, that broken and displaced bones in young chyldren, be vnited againe, wyth matter of the same kinde, For why members▪ which Phisicians call sparma
                           •
                        icall, beyng once loosed, wyl not be ioyned againe, with Poros sarcoides
                        ▪ whych is of an other kynd. Now therefore, here haue we to declare, how this, meanes may be obtained, in a double wound, of the elbow or hand. For of all woundes, they be most hard and daungerous, and specially of the hand for the multytude of sinewes and cordes, and otherwise, scarcity of nutratiue humoures▪ Therefore let vs take in hād, euen as it were now newly come to our c
                           •
                        re▪
                     
                     Now then my fryend, when ye be called to any sutch chaunce, remember ye loke seriously, that no shiuer nor gobet of bone be left in the wound,

whych might sharpen and anger the vertue naturall, through some dolour and prycking.Captaine 
                              〈◊〉
                           , Reede of the holy Iland. As it hath chaunced in a famous worthy Gentleman and Souldiour, called Captain Rede, whose arme was broken at Lith, in war, Anno. 1559. and many bones remayned, to his hurt for a tyme. For if these accydentes a rise, they shew an apostumacion at hand: the affect and commyng whereof we ought by al meanes, wayes, and pollycies to imbarre,To clense the wound▪ and draw forth broken bones. l
                           •
                        ast it creepe to the wounded place. And ye shal obtain thys, if ye obserue this order, whych I wyl giue you. First clense the Woundes of all sheuers of bones, and then if any bones be fully cut of, place them in theyr roumes as orderly as ye can. When ye haue done, haue a table at hand, wel couched and couered with soft lint, that the hand or member may be placed to rest thereon. And forthwith sewe vp the wound, in case it be large, For a small wound as we sayd before, must be left open, to the intent reumeticke matters may haue free liberty and issue, to come forth. But take heede in sewing that ye pryck no sinewe, and that passage be left in the lowest part, for sanious matter, which shall growe, or be caused there, to issue forth When the wound is sewed, and the hand layed on the table, then must you apparell the same with fyne lynt, dipped in the whites of Egges: and so leaue it gētly enrolled, for the space of xxiiij, howers, geuing the pacient a conuenient regiment of lyfe in dyet according to his nature.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     What shall we do then, when this is doen. as you haue commaunded, in this most goodly wholsome order?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        AS sone as that tyme shalbe expyred, retourne agayn to the pacyent, taking a Barbour with you, to make a conuenient bloud letting, on ye other contrary part: & this is done,When to let bloud on the contrary side of the body. that the matter ready to cause apostumacion, fall not to the place, which is made weake by meanes of the wound. And the veine must be opened for bledyng the second day, for sauing of good bloud. For if the vein were opened the first day▪ then good bloud might be drawen, aswell as euyll. Now when ye haue done wyth the bloud lettyng, open the wound▪ and apply these Medicines, for the cure therof, as follow in order. R. of most cleare Terebintine. ℥.ii. of oyle of Hipericon. ℥.iii. mingle them at the fyre, powre them warme into the wound. For if it bee applyed colde, inconuenyence myghte insue therof, as Hippocrates sayth: cold is an enemy to the sinewes, teeth, bones, brayne,Cold is an euyll enemy to the sinewes. and nuke of the necke, but heat is profytable and friendly. Therefore it is ryghte conuenient, that in all your workes, about double wounds, ye eschew medicines, whych shall be actually cold, and see yee kepe the member warme, as a Woman delyuered of her burthen. Moreouer, in the brinkes and circuite of the wound, ye shal apply pieces of cloth, throughly weated in Rosed oile, wherin Anglet witches, or earth wormes haue ben sodden. For this wil comfort the part, & also cause euaporacions of humours, if any should approch. Againe, anoynt this defensiue about the cubite or Elbow, to defende the Wound from fletyng matters. For thys doe thus. R▪ oyle of Roses.

and of Mirtille oyle, ana. ℥.i.ss. of Bole Armoniacke, Terra sigillata, Dragons bloud,Abūerflue to clense and dry. ana. ʒ.i.ss. of all the Saunders. ana. ʒ.i ss. of white Waxe. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. and let it be made to a soft defensiue, in maner of a liniment. And when ye haue thus proceded in the cure .6. or 7. dayes or more, as vnto the time the sinewes cast some reumaticke matter, then it shalbe time to goe to abstersiue, or drying. The fyrst, whereof is thus made. Take of Terebintine. ℥.i.ss. & of Syruppe of Roses. ℥.i seeth them a lyttle, and whiles they be seething, put thereto 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. of Barly meal,A god abstersiue. 
                              q
                              quarter
                           .ss. is as mutch to say as wyl suffise and of Sarcocole, and Frankinsence, ana. ʒ.ss. of Saffron. ℈.ss. and stirre them wel, tyl they be incorporated, and mingled together. Thys is a gētle abstersiue, without biting or nypping, which is necessary in sutch Woundes.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     All this shall I gladly do to my selfe and others, but a Gods name, what shall I then take in hand, to proceede any further?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YE shall minister this oyntment, as the learned Chirurgians did order it, which is. R. Of Calues and Cowes fat l.ss. of oyle of Roses, of Rosel ana. ℥.ss. of litharge of syluer. ℥.iii.ss. of fresh odorant Wine. ℈.i. of Anglet wiches or yerth wormes ℥.ii. of Hony, S. Ihons Wort, Madder, and flowers of Rose Marie, an. M.ss. Let all these be boyled together, the Terebintine and Litharge only excepted, vntyl such time, as the Wine be wasted, and then strayn the foresayd decoction, and boyle it in a new together with the Litarge, tyll it haue gotten a very blacke colour, and lastly put the sayd Terebintine to it,A good ointment for wounds. with 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. of whyte Waxe. And so this wyll be a soft ointment, most conuenient for wounding of sinewes. And this kynd of ministracion, must bee continued, vnto the tyme of sealyng and ensounding: for which purpose, ye may vse this decoction folowing, or that, whych was discriued before, in apostumacions. But yee shall fynd this decoction folowyng better because it doeth ensound and comfort the member withall: and therefore ye may boldly vse it in this place.
                     Take of Roses, Mirtilles, UUormewood, flowers of Pomegarnetes ana. M.i. ten Cipres Nuts, and boyle them in red Wine, vnto the wastynge of the thyrd part, whych vse, and apply with a Spunge well pressed, for the repayre of the member.To ende a double woūd and begin accidents. And this was myne order, my friēd, whych in good faith, gat me both honestie and profyt. This I suppose sufficient, as far as it appertaineth to the help of a double wound. Now is it tyme, to come to the accidents, whereof we mentioned a litle before: which thing, yet neuerthelesse, I would haue omitted, had I not perceiued, that ye were so desyrous of it, and doubtlesse, not without good cause. For why, the greatest part and feat of curyng of wounds or vlcers (whereof by Gods helpe, wee shal reason to morow) standeth in the remouing of the euill accidents. And therefore,Nature subiect to many calamities. least I should be seene to defraude you, of your desyre, I wyll once venter my selfe for your sake, vnder thys Burthen, heauye thoughe it bee. Uerely I can not but mutch maruell, how it should bee, that our

nature is subiect to so many chaunces, and so great ieopardies: when I consyder the accydentes, in sewyng UUounds, whych when they be fallen, they bryng not onely the slender wytted and learned, but trouble wittye and farre castyng men also.when the Chirurgiā is put to shame. UUhat thynke you the common sort of Chirurgians wyll doe when they see learned to seeke, to be vncertayne, and to run from medicine, to medicine, thynk ye not, but they wyll make Lyght of the matter: if they see a man, to be tormented, wyth payne, burst wyth apostumacion▪ vexed wyth euyll complexion, to burne in Feuers, to be rackt wyth crampes, to haue Apoplexes, yea, and to be distracte of their wyttes to? Therefore least we be reckened of theyr number, and charged wyth ye crime of vnmerci
                           •
                        ulnes: let vs endeuour our selues, to the vttermost of our possibility. that wee maister euery of them with many medicines, when they befal. For if they be not wel handled, they wyl robbe vs of our honest name health and profit, and all the pacients of theyr liues, whych is theyr chief Iewell. Wherefore, we must besterre vs in the matter diligently when Nature is extreamly vexed wyth dolour: and way with our selues, whether it come of the breach of continnaunce, or drying of the wound, or else by reason of gathering of some humerall matter. And it it come by breach of continuaunce, or drying of the wound, then shall a molificatiue be best, for the openyng thereof. But if it come by heapyng of humerall matter, then dryinge medicines shal be best against the payn, without any respect of time, which be mingled of Oiles, meale and other drying simples. These thynges well considered, first if the wound be pained, through lacke of digestion, it maye be eased with this.
                     Take of soft bread sodden .M.i. Goates mylke. ℥, vi. of oyle of Roses, and Camomell. ana. ℥.ij. and yolkes of three Egges, all whych dooe myngle together in a pot, the yolkes reserued, and boyle it, tyll the oyles be well drunken vp of the Bread, and then take it from the fier, and mingle the yolkes wythal. Thus shall you haue, if ye boile it accordingly, an hard Plaster, to be applied warme to the place.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     But what if this your medicine serue not to the purpose, haue ye no more plenty of medicines then in store?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YEs forsooth, that I haue a medicine of great vertue folowing. Take a quarter of a pynte of ye decoction of Mallowes, and Uiolets, or Mutton broth of the Weader, or els of anye beast that men vse to eate, and let bread be wel steeped therewith, and afterward boyle it, as it was sayed before. But remember to put a litle Saffron in this, as it may in the former also, if it please the Chirurgian.. But if it come of heaping of matter, vse these medicines that follow.
                     Take of small ground Branne .M.iii. of Barly and Beane meale ana. ℥.ii.

of Camomell, Melilote, and Worme wood, finely shorne, ana M.ss. of Odorant Wine, three cupfulles, boyling them at the fyre, with sufficient Sape, and in the end put thereto oile of Camomell, and of Roses ana ℥.ij.ss. oyle of Dill. ℥.ss. with a litle Saffron, and make hereof a soft plaster, after the maner of a Cerote. I warrant you, with these ye shall asswage the dolour, whych for the most part draweth matter to the place, as a cuppyng Glasse
                           •
                        , namely if it be cold. And if it come of heat, then alter the hoat receiptes, according to the necessity. And when the dolour is once appeased, ye shall easely win the Bulwarke as touching the rest of the cure. Now ye shall represse apostumacion, if ye apply the defensiue aboue described, when ye haue let the pacyent bleede, with a diuersiue bloud lettyng a clyster going before: But if there appeare swart rednesse about the Wound, the cause is an euyll complexion,To correcte a smart wound. for correcting whereof, ye may vse these receiptes. Take Oyle of Roses. ℥ iii. and mingle the same with the yolkes and whites of two Egges, which apply, being wel shaken together in linnen. Or thus. Take. ℥ ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum, oile of Roses. ℥.i. and put them in a Leaden morter, casting thereto of iuice of Lettice. ℥ i.ss. of Litharge. ʒ.ss. of Terra sigillata. 
                        ʒ.i. and draw this, till it be as a fyne liniment, whereby ye shal fully remoue, and correcte the euil complexion. But if the pacient shal be vexed wyth any feuer, conuulsion, palsy, alienaciō of mynd, swonyng, or sutch like, by reason of mouing of the humours, take a Phisicion to you, and he wyl amend these accidents. For if I should now order Siruppes, and Pocions (albeit that I entend also at more leisure, to speake more of them in that place, but not nowe) I might seeme to put my sithe in an other mans corne. For why, here we talke not of Phisicke, but of Chirurgi, which is somewhat contented with Oyntments, Fomentacions, Plasters, and Linaments. Thys is the Money, whych I had to coyne thys day, to ye intent I myght be able to pay you, wt
                        out further suite in the Law. For ye bound me so strayghtly, with an oblygation of an oth. Albeit in thys case, euery honest man wyl wyllingly kepe touch to discharge his credence to his power.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     
                        OH, how ryghtly iudge you? But now gentle Chirurgi, in as mutch as you haue yelded vs the vse of this day, let vs depart for the tyme. Howbeit, let vs repayre hither agayne, I praye you to morowe, to the intent the rest, if any be, may be payd: and so we receiue the whole summe in assurance, whereof ye haue gyuen vs, sore people, thys earnest penny. And in the mean
                           •
                         tyme, we Sore and Lame, gyue thankes to the lyuing God, for his deare benefyts, whych of his mercy, he hath plentyfully bestowed vppon vs to relieue vs with his giftes,God giueth health. and by his meanes, that we haue learned, to helpe and heale ourselues when we are lame and sore, whereby we may be profitable to our common wealth, I therefore desyre you, when you bee at leasure, to treat somewhat of vlcers,
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                        NOWE, an vlcer is a breach of continuaunce, with putrifaction and rottennesse, caused in processe of tyme.What an Ulcer is. And theyr breedyng or ingenderyng▪ commonly (as Auicen taketh it) is of vlcerated breakyngs foorth of pushes, and of woundes euyll handled. Wherefore, woundes) as our chyeftayn and graund mayster, affyrmeth in the fyrst treatise of vlcers) as soone as theyr due tyme of digestion, and abstersion is expyred, and yet neuertheles, they remaine foule and full of corruption, must be called Ulcers properlye, and not woundes: whereof it is a consequent,All sores voiding virulent matter are called Ulcers. that euery breach of continuaunce, whych voydeth matter, or virulencie, shall vndoubtedly be called an Ulcer. Whereof some bee fathered of an hoat, and some of a cold humour. The vlcers▪ which be found with rednesse, and itchyng in the edges, come of the hoat the other, whych bee wythout great rednesse and itch, and haue also wyde rootes, are fed and nouryshed of colde. Agayne, among Ulcers, some be of small importaunce, and some be ryght daungerous. All bee daungerous, whych breede no sanious matter▪ when the tyme is to breede it: or when some apostumacion is cōcurrant, whych shalbe hydden secretly, without euydent cause. For if the apostumacion vanysh, by reason of some medycine, hauyng power to worke that effect, it were no matter, but if it vanish wythout cause, and lye secretly a lurkyng: Certes, it importeth no good, but euyll, as spasmes, destractions and alienacion of mynd. Howbeit, there bee also Ulcers, as Auicen sayth, whych properly, and as it were of theyr owne nature, produce theyr effectes now and then, as vlcers of the backe, of synewes, of the knees, of the hanche, and all sutch as haue great aliaunce with the Nuke, whereof, some bee tractable, and some repine vtterly agaynste Chirurgj, in theyr cure.
                     All kynd of Ulcers be most hard of cure, whych succeede any syckenesse▪ and end the same, by the way of euacuacion:Ulcers bee hard to cure that follow a sickenesse. For nature vseth to vnburden her self, at that place, from thenceforth, of her euyl and vnprofytable superfluities. Lykewyse bodyes, whych be accidentall, moistye, or dry, wyll not easely be cured of theyr Ulcers: as women wyth Chylde, and folke sycke of the dropsy: which is the caused in the one through aboundaunce of accydentall moysture: in the other, by reason of retayned superfluities. Agayn, dry and ethicall members, may not easely be ensounded, for want of good bloud: We see the lyke effect in old selie bodyes (whych, what for lacke of digestyon of theyr meates, theyr naturall heate beyng almost extinguished▪ and what for lacke of good bloud) be contynually eaten vp of Ulcers. Oft tyme an euyll Complexion, is cause why, an Ulcer is not healed and ensounded. Wherefore in especyall, haue the Complexion in consyderation, and neuer reste tyll yee haue corrected the same. For why, otherwyse the nourishment, whych creepeth thither, wyll be turned into an euyll matter when it is not ruled and maistred of nature. For what is an euill matter else but corrupted Nutryment, whych Nature could not order▪ ne was able to conuert into the second Humidyties? And to the entent ye may atchieue this well, ye shall bestowe a lyttle Labour, to know the Natures of simples, and Signes of Complexions, whych yee maie learne of Galen, in hys Booke,

                        de arte medendi. And spend not your tyme in trifles and woordes, that passe wyth the wynd,Chirurgians do not agree. neyther in croked & distorted arguments. For what good shall you do to your pacyents, when they cry for your helpe, when yee haue made a great sorte of subtyll arguments. Whether there may be a neutralitye, or meane betwene sycknes and health, in any body. Again sith wee see that they, whych haue made mencion in their bookes, be all at square, and none wholy of others opinion. Why doe we embrace sutch losyng of tyme? Therefore I wyl aduise you, to follow with all diligence, Mayster Ihon Tagaltius, who groundedly and pythlye in his doynges, seeketh oute fruictfull matters, omytting trifles.
                     On the other side, the Ulcers, whych may be easely cured, are those that chaūce in bodies of good complexions, and bee nouryshed with good bloud, without affluence of many superfluities.Ulcers in good complexions, 
                              •
                           r sone cured. Amongest whych some abyde in theyr newly caused continuaunce, and some fall to discontinuaunce agayn. The Ulcers whych fall againe to discontinuaunce, b
                           •
                        e (as Auicen teacheth) where flesh is caused and generated or euer the mundification be complete. For in as mutch as vncleane superfluities, be there secretly hydden, it followeth of necessity, that the continuaunce be loosed and broken vp agayne. And for this cause, sutch breaches of continuaūce and sores, bee reckened for fistulaes, with the learned Phisicians.
                     
                        Fiue kyndes of Ulcers.Further note here, that there be fiue kindes of vlcers in generall an vlcer virulēt, fylthie, hollow, rotten & corosiue. But me thinketh it is meete fyrst, or euer we meddle with the cure of these generalles, that we recite ye accydents of vlcers, whych cumber and hinder vs, in the cure: And when wee haue so done, then shal we recite, and treat of theyr cures. For in case wee correct not the accydents, which make most for the knowledge quod quid est rei, as Aristotle sayth in his bookes, De Anima, we shall neuer winne the victory of the vlcers, though we striue right stoutly in the cause, because the accidents hold of the sore, and be of part against the cure,
                     Now the accidents which happen in vlcers, be these, bleedyng superfluous flesh,Accidents in vlcers, their names. euyll in sauour, Lippes, dolour: apostumacion, hardnes, corrupted bones, swellyng veines, and roundnesse, and euery of these require properlye a cure by them self, whych if it be denayed them, when they call for it, either we shalbe conuented before A Iudge, to giue euery man his owne, or the debt not payed, there may be no confederacion in amity with men. Therefore least we be troubled in the law or charged with tiranny, let vs see how we can discharge our handes, of these accidentes, and fyrst of bledyng.
                     Euery fluxe of bloud, deare brother Soarenes, commonly proceadeth from a primitiue cause▪
                        The fluxe of bloud proceeding of a prymitiue cause. For the antecedente, wee wyll omitte at this present, least happely, whiles we passe ouer our owne, and rush rashely into other mens doores, we myght anon be thrust forth by the head for theeues. Therefore, to auoyd this dishonestie, we wyll onely speake of bleding, comming of a cause primitiue. Now therefore a moresage or bleeding, commeth of late diuision of the cont
                           •
                        nuaunce▪
                        Distilling of Bloud from the veines. or by reason of putrifaction of the same, In wounds we fynd swe
                           ••
                        ng of bloud, from a veine, and sometyme swellynge and 
                           •
                        le
                           •
                        yng of bloud, by lyttle and lyttle. A veine sweateth bloud, when he

is berefte of his proper couering. Wherefore in this case, we iudge it necessary, that the Phisicion hast to repayre wyth gentle medicine, that, which was wasted with cruell weapon. This is don by couenable sewyng of ye wound, but in case the vesselles be broken, and the bloud run at liberty: it is to be cō
                        sidered, whether the bloud run gently,Of woun
                              •••
                            d
                              •
                           epe, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            deepe. or els spryng and amount fierslye in his streame. If it fleete myldlie, then it is playn, that it commeth of veines, and is somwhat grosse, and dimmysh red: but if it mount on heyght, bee red, fomyng and cleare, it is an arterie, But as touching the cure, these thynges must fyrst bee considered, whether the whole veine be cut, obserue the order, which shall be declared anon, Next consyder, whether the wounde bee deepe, or superfyciall. If it be superficiall, apply incarnatyues to it, which shal be sutch as follow.
                     Take Sarcocoll, Mirrhe, Aloes Epatike, Dragons bloud: Mastike, ana, as ye shall thynke conuenient. For so of euery of them, may bee ordered by your self, accordyng to the pacyents complexion.Repercussiues And wyth this ye shall withstand thys kynd of bledyng, which is wont to comber men very much Afterward, when this medicine is cast into the Wound, ye shall rolle small quisettes of lynte, and weate the same in the whytes of Egges, wel shaken and beaten wyth dust of Bole Armoniack, and lay them orderly in the wound. These also must be couered wyth a lynnen Cloth, well weate in the same whyte of Egges, and afterwards be bound, obseruyng alway, that the bindyng be handsomely done, that it cause no dolour. But if the Wounde bee deepe, ye shall consyder wyth dilygent heede, whether the gappe may be suffyciently stopped, if it be deepely stytched, and if reason allow, that yee shall not in any wyse omitte the sewyng: that done, immediatly lette follow a linnen cloth, infused in the same whytes of Egges, and dust aforesayd. If yee see that sewyng wyll not serue. follow the order, whych I my self followed, and had euer good Successe, as my Pacyents can tell and wytnesse them selues.
                     And fyrst ye shall wash the wound, wyth red or bynding wyne, and that for two causes. The one is to cōfort the place: the other to wash of ye bloude that none may hynder the syght,To stop a bleding vein. to see where the medicine ought to bee applyed. Agayn, that no bloud be left, to cause corruption. For ye shall shortlye after, feele wyth your Instrument, what watrysh and fylthy sauour it wyll cause, if ye let any remayne. Now, when ye are at poincte wyth these matters, a new 
                           •
                        abour and care wyl take handfast on you, that ye shall not bee idle. Then ye shall lute the gappe, or mouth of the veines, whych spout loute bloud with this medicine, R. The dust or pouder of Galles, Beane meale, and Mill dust. ana. ℈.ii. Ihon Uigos pouder called Praecipetatum. 
                        ʒ.i. & mingle them with sufficient white of an Egge, and apply it to the gap of the veine,When to incarnate, and when to seperate a sor
                              •
                           . as I sayd. Now if it shall come of putrefaction, lay all incarnatiues aparte, and set your mynde to the separacion thereof: whych ye shall doe wyth Vnguentum AEgyptiacum, if the putrifaction bee but small, and betweene twoo partes of the flesh. And AEgyptiacum must bee made, after the description of Auicen
                        ▪ euen at home, Uert grece. Roche Alome, in quantity partes a lyke

if it be deeper then so, then apply the Trochiskes, whych I wyll descrybe in the end of the booke: whych wyll remoue the rotten flesh, from the good wt
                        out great paine. But this can no man ryghtly mynister, except he haue seene it ministred before: therefore if ye set your mindes to attayne to this, choose some exper
                           •
                         
                        Chirurgian for the purpose, which can distinct these thynges unpractice. And in good fayth, if trouble dyd not withdraw me from practycing, I would shew you this poinct my self.
                     On the other side, when the veine is but partly opened, incontinent yee must remember these twoo poinctes, to wete, that the veine must fullye bee cut of, or bee bounden and knit. The one poinct we call incision of a veine, the other bindyng of a veine.Of incision of small veines. Incision is made and vsed, where the thynges before mencioned, did not serue, as some, where they doe not in deede. And thys is practised for this purpose, because the endes of the veine beyng cut of, should runne backe, and be hid within the flesh, and so be couered, whereof wyll insue stoppyng of the veine. Howbeit▪ this may not be practised indifferently in all veines, but onely when they appeare small. For when they be great and grosse, then shall you vse one other fetch, not mutch vnlike the former. Marke then, before yee make the incision, whether if a small drawyng of the flesh be made, it were possible to knyt the veine in the vpper part, whych thyng were mutch tolorable in thys worke. If that may not bee, cut of the veine wyth an hoat Iron, or Instrument, made fyt to that, or to the like purpose. But take heede, that ye make not the incision to deepe, lest ye cut the arterie, whych accompaneth the veine: for there be few veynes, which haue not arteries associated with them. Now one cunning Man when he was called to one, who had bled two dayes, and many right skilfull in the matter, had ben in a pecke of troubles, about staunchyng of the bloud: perceiuyng by questionyng wyth them, that were present, that they had omitted nothing:Deepe incision hurteth the arteires. that men commonly vse in sutch cases, least hee should seeme a Dorre amongest labouring Bees: and agayn, least hee should haue fayled them who had sayd mutch vpon his head, vsed this feat, wherewyth he procured hym selfe profyt, and his pacyents saue
                           •
                        ie, though men dispayred of his life. For some of them that were pres
                           •
                        nt, remembred the saying of Auicen,
                        Euyll accydents follow bledyng. who sayth, that euyll accydents, are wont to follow bleding as conuulsions, through emptines, yexing proceedyng of drying of the villes of the stomacke, and alteracion of mynd, with other symptomes whych in thys case are arguments and signes of cold Death, For these bee th
                           •
                         accidentes that follow bledyng,Signes of death. and when they appeare, they sygnify death to bee at hand, but to my purpose He perced the lip of the wound▪ in the vpper parte, euen vnto the cut veyne, and left the same vntouched of the needle, on the one part: then conueighed he his needle vnderneath the veine: to the other part, and perced agayn the lip, from the lower to the vpper part, in such wise that he altered the vein,A good practise. knitting the ends of the threde together, and fastning it to the lippes of the wound, and thus deliuered he the pacyent, euen from Deathes doore, and present daunger. But I say my Friendes, one thynge more, remember that about all youre Woorkes, of staunchyng of

bloud (when▪ yee haue filled the wounde wyth quisets) lay some peece of cloth vpon the same, well weate in water, and Rosed Uinegar,To staunche bloude. so that the peece may compasse the whole member, where the bleeding is. Now with sutch f
                           •
                        ates and engines, shall you triumph ouer al vnbridled bloud flowinges, with mutch prayse, & erect vp worthy Monuments of your actes. We haue now, as it may be thought, spoken inough, and inough of bleading: wherefore least the time fayle vs, being so swiftly measured, by ye firste mouable, let vs now take the cures of vlcers in hand, where we shal brydle the rest of the accidents belonging to vlcers. For if we would treat properly of euery of them, it should be a long matter, and displeasaunt. For why? the same thynges should needes be iterated, and repeated agayne, and yet agayne in dyuerse cures.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     BUt yet my brother, me thinketh it were not superfluous, in our communication, if you dyd shortly declare, or euer you entred thys matter, whereof vlcers take their name in especiall, sithen we haue founde in wryting, that they are here and there named, of their causes, as of a matter that went before, or els of their accidentes, by reason of their causes.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        THey be named sanguine, chollerike, flegmatike, & melancholike, according as any of these humours, shall excessiuely abound in thē.Sanguine. Chollorike, Apostumacions. Or of their accidentes, they call them hard, cauy, fistulous, rottē, cancrous, corrosiue, dolorous, apostumated, euill lipped, & so forth, as any accident shall cumber the vlcer. Howbeit the true causes, where of vlcers take their names, essence and being, be but two, euen the antecedēt, and coniunct: the antecedent, is, where is corruption wyth an excessiue quality of euill humours, proceeding of an inordinate regiment of lyfe, hauing power to fret, viciate, and corrupt the partes of the bodies. The cause coniunct, is nothing els but a malicious complexion, caused of Woundes breaking forth, and opened pushes,Anticedent, & Coniunc
                              ••
                           . namely when they be euill handled of Chirurgians, and Phisicians, as wee see dayly in our time: wee can also devide vlcers otherwise. For some bee playne, some deepe, and of the same some hard, some soft: Agayne some standing, some running or creeping. And lykewise, some of them be corrosiue, some putrified: but because sutch definicions, make better for the dulling of the wit, than quickning: I purpose not to make any speciall mencion of them in cures. Yee may note, yt oft tyme, they bee turned after some property or quality of the matter, or Sanies, whych shalbe in them. For our Doctors, and chiefe Phisicions say,
                           Sanies is matter comming of corrupted bloud▪ or els putrifaction, and somtime it is taken for poyson. there be four kindes of matter, or Sanies, whych the Latines thus terme, & cannot well be Englished, Sanies, Pus, Virus, Sordities whereof they surname them▪ wyth lyke deriued termes. And according to these nomber & termes. I mynde to speake of vlcers here consequently in theyr order. But fyrst of a sanious vlcer.
                     And thus shall we do, if God so wil, when we haue sayd somwhat of Sanies. For in as mutch, as we entend to speak of a sanious vlcer, it is reason that we know fyrst, what Sanies is, whereof it springeth, and what be hys

causes. And by the reason of thys, we shall easely know the correction of vlcers, whych thyng (as we take it) consisteth in knowledge of the causes, rectification of complexions, and comforting of members. Now Sanies is nothing els, but corrupted foode or nourishment whych nature was not able to digest, neyther turne into the second humours, which they cal glew, D
                           •
                        we, and the humour vnnamed: Sanies is caused and generated, when nutrityue matter, comming or all ready come to a member, may not be cō
                        uerted into the nature of a member, by reason of the weaknes of ye same, or superfluityes of other members approching together.Stronge mē
                           bers doe oppresse the weake. For as Galen writeth, the strong members doe oppresse the weake, and put of theyr superfluities to them, whych be turned into Sanies, or virulency Wherefore, whē we purpose to cure any weake mēber, we must endeuour our selues wyth all possibility, to strēgthen it wyth some Medicine cōfortatiue, that it may put of straūge superfluities. And verely bynding medicines, being of sutch heat, as shall not exceede the naturall heat of the weake part, shall comfort greatly, as Galen sayth in the thyrde De arte medendi. The same effect haue defensiues also, if they be lykewise qualified. And after what sort this must be don, the nature of simples it selfe, wyll informe you. Therefore▪ bestowe some labour, in the search of simples, to the intent ye may fetch them readily, as it were from a store house, and not seeke at al aduenture by chaūce medly, as they grope for a pin in the darke. The lyke mischiefe is committed in administracions of Oyntmentes, whych be hoat, or moysty of complexion, and both the qualityes do promote a soare to putrifaction. For in heat and moysture, if heat rule not the same, then they are causes at fyrste dashe, to cause putrifaction, as Aristotle Prince of Philosophers affyrmeth▪ Therefore, who so euer purposeth, to exercise Chirurgj, must labour wi
                           •
                        h all industry, to know the nature of oyntmentes, at hys fingers ende. I speake not of the names of Oyntments, as the imperickes, and some of our Men do,Chirurgians must know Simples. whych professe Chirurgj, as soone as they can name & recite Vnguentum Basilicum, Nigrum, Aureum, Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, Rosarum, Album Camphoratum, Lithargicum, Ceracinum. &c. whereof they bragge, and spreade a Peacockes tayle agaynst the simple. But I meane the qualities of oyntments, whych must be diuers, in diuers maladies, according to our entencion curatiue, in the malady. For somtime we comfort, somtyme we moyst, somewhere we dry, as also oftentimes we coole, or heat. Therefore, it is not to be marueyled, that sutch venterlinges and younglinges stumble so ofte at a Straw. For why, these men be vtterly lost in their bookes, and wyll not vary from them one finger breadth, whereof spring many errours, specially when they vnderstand not, whych one learned man recordeth, cōsidering he spared not to try out in the matter,Fooles wyth bookes, bee worse than vnlearned practicioners. in hys Aphorismes, saying, to woorke after Bookes, wythout perfite knowledge, and a fyne wit, is a ryght comberous thyng. Wherefore I exhort you, most deere Brethren, yt you order your medicines, according to the complexion of the member, and your intencion in the cure. And if it be possible, make your medicines your selfe, and trust not so mutch the Apothecaries, least ye be deceyued wyth ye
                        
blessed termes, I wyll not say cursed, intituled quid pro quo, because hee is dead that made it. For as men haue dyuers Phisiognomyes, dyuers qualities, and quantities, wyth sundry Complexions geuen them partly by influences, & partly by tractes, & dyuers Regions, so haue the simples: also as great variaunce amongst themselues,Uariety o
                              •
                            Simples. in as mutch as they be of sundry shapes, places, and countryes, from whence they acquire proper natures, qualityes and powers in working. Wherefore Auicen cryeth out in ye Chanon of vlcers, saying: Medicamen quidem vnum, secundum quaedam corpora facit nasci carnem, secundum quaedam est corrosiuum: whych is thus mutch to say: One medicine in dyuers bodyes, hath dyuers effectes and operacions. In one, by reason of the property of ye Body, it causeth flesh to grow: the same in some other is wastyng, and ryght abstersyue, specially, if the body be soft and fyne. Wherefore thys is inferred, that oyntments should be made,
                           Auicen.
                         according as the Complexion of the member shal requyre. And this sentence toucheth the fyne speached Cornelius Celsus, our dearling, saying: Ignorari non oportet quod non omnibus aegris eadem auxilia conferunt: Wherefore, be you wise and circumspect in your confections, least it be your chaunce, to fall into the Noddyes had I wist. Now as touchinge the Iudgement of Sanies, that Sanies shall bee called good, as Auicen sayth, whych is whyte, smoothe,C▪ Celsus. and lyke in euery part: whych sentence he borowed of Hippocrates the Diuyne Physicion. in hys booke of Prognosticacions, where he saith, Ea putredo laudatur. &c. Whyte Sanies is praysed, whych is lyke ouer all, egall in the vtter face, and not ill fauoured, the contrary is most euill. Now if ye wyl know why Sanies should haue these properties, reade Auicen in the Chap. concerning the iudgement of Sanies, where ye fynde euen your fill, of causes shewed of the sayd property, whych ye may seeke at hys handes, and not now at myne, for it would draw vs farder from our purpose. Yee may also haue respect to Galen, vppon the fyrst of the Prognosticacions: where yee shall reade certayne diuine thyngs, for the perfite attaynment of thys matter.Sanious matter. Yee haue now sufficiently heard what Sanies is, whereof it commeth, and of what sort it is. Now we wil ioyne hereunto, the cure of a sanious vlcer.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Speake now of vlcers, I pray you, that I and my soare brethren, may perceyue them playnly.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        WHerefore, for your better vnderstanding, yee shall note, that there be two sortes of vlcers:Two sundry sortes of Ulcers. Whereof some bee simple, and some be compounde. I meane not, that they be simple absolutely, but simple, after some maner of simplicity. For why, their being is of an euill Complexion, breach of cōtinuance, & somtyme composicion, also with a concourse of euil qualities. But I say, they be simple, so farforth as they be opposite to vlcers, where accidēts be founde, letting the true ensounding of vlcers. For here we call them cō
                        pounde, whych haue sutch accidents. Wherefore, when I name a sanious vlcer, as we recken the matter, ye shal vnderstand it, of that whych is fully voyde & cleere of the sayd accidents, not wythstanding it be tangled, wyth

some doublenes and composicion. Therefore we wyll speake fyrst of a simple vlcer, which is in the playne: and then of a simple deprest, or hollowed, whych done, wee shall in lyke maner and order treate of the compounded, from whych kynde, the almyghty and mercifull God, preserue vs all.
                     
                        Ulcers hoat colde, and byting.And fyrst we note, that all vlcers in that and as farforth as they be Ulcers, require drying in theyr cure: whereof there be two kyndes, the one hoat, and the other colde. Agayne, some be wyth mordicacion and 
                           •
                        yting, and some wythout. All be byting, whych in a certayne degree of heate, be dry of complexion, which is because heate is yoked, and coupled felowshipped wyth drought, as Aristotle most learnedly fyrst taught, as ye may reade in hys bookes of Generacion,
                           Aristotle a good note of Elements. and Corrupcion. And he sayth thus, concerning the mixture of elementes: If the coldnesse of the earth, were chaunged to heate, it might no longer be named earth, but fyre. He sayth furder, if the drought of the same, were chaunged to moysture, it should lose ye name of earth, and be called water. Whereof it followeth, that thinges so dryed, in case they be found wyth lyke Qualityes, they wyll not only waste and gnawe, but also burne, when they be applyed. And thys do the qualities of the fyre, and Mercury Sublimated apartly shewe. Neuerthelesse the one shall be so mutch the lesse of mordicacion or freting, as hys qualityes shall more be oppressed in it, than in the other. And therefore, be you somewhat the wyser,Of exiccatiues. in choosing of your simples, least ye take one for an other. Now to the intent ye may the rather eschue thys foule errour, I wyll gyue you the difference of exiccatiues, or drying Simples, whych we vse in Ulcers. For by the knowledge of them, ye shall soone come to the cure of Ulcers. These exiccatiues be colde: The three kyndes of Saūders, Mirabolanes, Terra sigillata, Dragons bloude, Bole Armoniacke, Tutia, Camphire, Ceruse, Litharge, Uermilion, Sinaper, red Corall, Gum Arabicke: these bee hoat, and wythout byting or gnawing: Aloes epatik, Mirrhe, Sarcocol vnholed Galles. &c. Hoat wyth byting and mordicacion: Uerdigreace, Alum. &c. Of these ye may make Medicines to the purpose, for all kynde of, vlcers,To knowe whether vlcers be hoat or colde. so ye know perfitly ye property and working of them: ye shall know, whether the vlcer be hoat or no, by hys edges. For if he be reddish in ye edges, it declareth heate: as also, if the flesh be remisse red, and hoat in feeling, whych may be rectified wt 
                        Vnguentum Album, made after this maner.
                     R. Oyle of Roses. ℥.vj. Weathers fat. ℥.iiij. Marow of the hucclebones of Kyne. ℥.ij. whyte Waxe. ℥.i.ss. Cerusse. ℥.iij.ss. Camphory. ℥.iij. making it to an oyntment, according to the arte, whych ye shall apply vpon ye vlcers, when ye haue first cast in thys pouder,
                           Vnguentum Album.
                         in the soare. R. Of all the Mirabolans, of Terra sigillata, of red Corall. ana. ʒ.j. of Cerusse. ʒ.ij. of Roch Alum brent. ʒ.j. of Creuishe shelles. ʒ.j. stampe all these togeather as small as Sand, whych couer, as I sayde wyth the oyntment aboue described. But if the flesh be so mutch ouergrowne, yt the lyppes do appeare vpon it, ye shal vse Vnguentum Apostolorum for ye correction thereof, obseruing alway warely, that the vlcer be not inflamed agayne. For some complexions be so tender & soft, that they wyll be altered almost at ye name thereof, as I saw my selfe in a Citizen of London, whose name I omit, because he hath bin vnkynde to our Arte. When I perceyue any sutch cōplexion as he was of, I

order my rectificatiue, with sutch cautell, that it shall both comfort & rectify. After thys sort. R. of Oyle Rosed. ℥.iiij. of Oyle Myrtine. ℥.i.ss. of Beane flower. ʒ.iij. of pouder of Roses, Myrtils▪ and Cypresse Nuts, ana. ʒ.ij. of Acatia. 
                        ʒ.ij. of Bole Armoniacke, of Terra sigillata. ana. ʒ.i. of newe Waxe. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. and so make thereof a defensiue, betwene hard and softe. And thys at two applicacions, wyth Vnguentum Apostolorum wyll rectify the member,To make the skin whole. and make the Ulcer ready to a Cicatrice. Thus cured Ihon Backter, the learned Chirurgian, sutch vlcers in a moneth, where other, whom yee know, had them in hand a yeare and more. Now when the fleshe is suppressed, & ye purpose to skin the vlcer, it is most expedient, ye vse thys Lotion. R. Of good cleere Wyne, one cup full, of red Roses .M.ss. of Rosed Hony strayned. ℥.ss. of roche Alum. ʒ.iij. and as mutch Saffron, as shalbe able to colour the Wyne, and seeth all these togeather, till the Alum be melted, and then moyst the Ulcer wyth this Lyquore, being luke warme: And mayntayne it, as soone as it may be, dry the vlcer agayne, wyth a fyne Linnen cloth, that none of the lyquore remayne there. For it will cause matter and corruption, as it befell vnder hys handes, who is my sworne Enemy. For whyles he laboured to skyn the soare, as I did, euen wyth the same Medicine, he caused hollownesse in an vlcer. Now when ye haue so moysted ye vlcer, as is sayd, lay yet a little cotten in the Ulcer, that the moysture, in case any remayne, be fully dryed vp. Applying vppon the same thys Oyntment, whych is very effectuall in working of a Cicatrice.
                     
                     ℞. of Oyle of Roses,How to make a Cicatrice. and Myrt. ana. ℥.i.ss. of Uermilion. ℥.ij. and seethe them together, till they get a very blacke hugh, and so shall yee fynishe the cure. Lo, heere haue you the cure of a sanious playne vlcer. Now wyll we to the hollowe, whereof yee shall receyue, large gyftes and rewardes, if yee handle your selfe well, in the reformacion of humours, that fall to the place yee knowe that sharpe Humoures, wyll properly freate, and consume the Fleshe newly growen, and let the growinge of the same,Three sundry intencions. Of regiment. Of matter. Of growing. wherewyth the hollownesse of the Ulcer, should be filled and restored. For the reformacion hereof, shall followe three intencions. The fyrst must be to order the lyfe, wyth couenable regiment. The seconde to keepe of matter, whych approcheth thither. And the thyrd, to cause newe Fleshe to growe, wyth the skinning of it. The fyrst is had by ordering of the soare thynges, called not naturall, and chyefly wyth Dyet, whych must bee wholly bent, to the contrary of the humours and qualities, whych feede the soare. The repulse of humours may be wrought two wayes: eyther wyth competent Purgacion, or wyth some vnctions and cataplasmes, whych comfort, and put of, as will the defensiue aboue ordered. Fleshe is caused to growe two wayes, by letting of the contraries, and by applying of dustes and Oyntments, being of lyke qualities. The dust must bee made, by myngling of the exiccatiues aboue rehersed, whych ye must indosate, accordinge to your neede. But if yee delight more in Oyntments, ye may make that, after thys maner.
                     R. Of the clearest Terebintine. ℥.ij. of Hony rosed and strayned. ʒ.i.ss. of Plantayne water. ʒ.iij let them seethe, till the water be wasted,An incarnatiue. and put thereto of Barly and Beane meale. ana. ʒ.ij. of Frankencense. ʒ.i. wyth a

little Saffron. And so thys wyll be an incarnatiue, wyth some sturring, whych ye must couer with Vnguentum Alb
                              •
                           , aboue described. Besides this, the defensiue there ordered, must be noynted about in ye circuite, that it be not inflamed to heate agayne.
                           
                              〈…〉
                            fleshe. Now if the fleshe growe to fast, it wyll bee suppressed wyth Vnguentum Apostolorum, applied once, or twyce, or more if neede requyre. And when that is come to equality wyth the Edges, then finish your cure, as it was sayd aboue, in a plaine vlcer. There be other feates and Engines, whych cannot be wrytten but are left to Chirurgians estimacions. For some whyle one quality, some whiles an other▪ frouneth or flattereth, and must be ru
                           •
                        ed now hether, now thether, as a Sheepe amongest Wolues. Of whych poyncte complayneth Auicen, in the entraunce of his worke,
                           Auicen.
                         saying: The tradicion of Phisicke, contayneth lesse, than is necessary for the Phisicion. For the ouerplus, whych is left to their iudgement & estimation, may not be expressed, and put in wryting. Wherefore, to th'entent yee may get thys Iudgement in thinges, left to Estimacion, yee must not lothe, nor be hygh in the instep, to see other expert Mens Woorke. For there by, wyth dyligent aduertence, yee shall assuredly gather iudgement, & 
                           •
                        e ascertayned in your inuencions. Now for asmutch, as wee haue gieuen you the taste, in a hoat sanious vlcer, we wyll venter (I hope luckely) the cure of the colde, obseruing the same maner and order, whych wee vsed tofore in the hoat Ulcer.
                     Now, when a sanious cold vlcer, cōmeth to our handes (which thing may easely be perceyued by the Eye:Colde Ulcer. for the flesh wyll be remise whyte, or wan, notwithstāding, yt somtime dim palenes cometh to an vlcer, through bloud, running wyth choler: it is also perceyued wyth feeling of the hande) now then when sutch vlcers, I say, come to your hands, ye shall not depart in any poynct from the order, whych before was discribed. Neuerthelesse, wee say for certayne, yt theyr remedies as farre differ one from the other, as the vlcers in heate & colde. And here we wyll begin wyth the defensiue, whych offereth it selfe, fyrst in the cure, where our composicion was thus.
                     R. Of oyle of Camomell, and Mirte, ana. ℥.ii, pouder of Camomell and M
                           •
                        lilot. ana. ʒ·ij. pouder of red Roses,A defensiue. Mirtilles, and Cypresse nuttes. ana. ʒ, i.ss. of Barly and Beane meale. ʒ.ii. of new Waxe. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. and so make the defensiue, betwene hard and soft, wherewyth anoynt the circute of the vlcer. R. Of Aloes, Mirrhe, Sarcocol▪ ana. ʒ.ss. of Frankensence. ʒ, ij. of Dragons bloud, and flowers of Pomegranets, ana. ʒ.iii. of Saffron. ℈.i. and make a pouder of all these, couering it afterwarde wyth thys Oyntment following.
                     R. Of Oyle of Roses. ℥.ij. of oyle of Camomell, and Mirte. ana. ℥.iij. of Weathers fat. ℥.iiij. of Hennes grease. ℥.i. of Marow of the Cowe & Hart. ana. ℥.i.ss. of Litharge. ℥.ii. of Cerusse. ℥.i. seeth them, till they be blacke, & then put thereto of cleere Terebintine.A sanatiue. ℥.i.ss. of Shyp Pytch. ℥.i. of new Wa
                           •
                        e .ij.℥. and let them seeth a little agayne: and when ye haue taken thē of from the fyre, stire them still, vnto sutch tyme, as it be congeled & fyrme, otherwyse, the Minerals wyll fall to the bottome in a residence. Thys

Oyntment is Vnguentum Basilicum, after our descripcion and entent. Now in case the Fleshe appeere foggy and fattishe, then Vnguentum Apostolorum, shalbe necessary to dry it. For that wythout question, will bryng it to equality of ensounding. And then yee may fynishe your cure, and skin the same wyth the lotion aboue ordered.
                     Now in as mutch, as we be at poynct wyth the Simples: or right and congruent, we must lay a foundacion for the Compounde,A good foundation. so that we may lyke workemen, builde in the humayne body, or repayre ruinous and decaied places, and prop vp sutch as are lyke to fall. Wherefore, once agayne remember the accidentes, before mencioned, to the intent we may be able to redresse, and amende them one by one. For where thys may not be obtayned, we shall to our reproch, be kept from the true ensounding of the Ulcer. And therefore we purpose, to prosecute the amendment of them in their order accordyngly. Now when a compounded Ulcer is offered vs, let vs looke what accidentes be concurrant, hindering ye ensounding. For if many maladies or accidentes, were founde in it, we must begin at yt, which doth most comber the vlcer, as Auicen sayth: if we will cure a malady,In healinge a compounde vlcer, marke the accidentes concurrant. where diuers accidents be concurrant, wee must begin at that▪ whych hath one of these three properties, Vna earum est ꝙ alia sanari non potest antequam ipsa sanetur vt apostema, &c. The one is, where the accident is sutch, that if it be not first cured, the vlcer may not be cured, as apostumacion ioyned wyth an vlcer. For in thys case sayth hee, we followe the apostumacion, vnto sutch tyme as the malice of the complexion be displaced, and then we followe the cure of the pryncipall. Wherefore, to followe and obserue the Canons, accordingly: we shall order pryncipally our intencions,Fyrst handle the accidentes in a cure, and note three thynges. so that we fyrst take in hande the accident, whych shall chiefely comber and molest the Paciente and vs in the cure. And the fyrst of these intencions shall be, to order the Pacientes lyfe conueniently. Next to purge the faulty humour, according to the exigente thereof. Thirdly, to amende the maliciousnesse of the quality, in the Ulcer. Thys last shall be deuyded yet agayne, according to the disposicion of the Ulcer, requiring dyuers intencions.Regimente of lyfe. Now as touchinge the order of lyfe, you may by your owne iudgement consider, what is to bee done therein: partly by hys regiment before tyme, and partely in hys syckenesse tyme, turning hys Dyet to the contrary quality. As thus: if he vsed a colde regiment before, vse hym to hoat, so if dry, moysty, but doe it moderately, and by little and little. For nature cannot away wyth sodayne chaunges: Howbeit thys is not seene lyghtly in humours, wythout longe vse of contraryes in Foodes. Wee shall knowe to purge the humours,Of vrine considered, in euery sicke or soare man. by the shewing of the sycke Water, in two poynctes, that is, by the colour & substaunce: whereunto is added the residence, wyth hys qualities mutch or little. And by the sygnification of these well considered, wee may try out all the sycke persons complexion.
                     For if the Uryne shall bee thycke in Substaunce, and red in colour: it meaneth that bloud ruleth ye man. If it be thin of Substaunce, and red of

colour: doubt not, but choler hath the preheminence. But if it bee thicke in substaunce, and whyte of colour, then fleume hath the maistrie: as if ye substaunce be thynne, and colour whyte, melancholy. Now of, and by the resydence, ye shall perceiue the tyme to gyue pocions, and purgacions: for when that begynneth to appeare, it sheweth digestion of the humours to be purged. But there be also refractions of colours, and eleuacions, and depressions of residences, whych signyfy the denominacion and Seruyce, of the Naturall Heate,Of radicall moysture. and wastyng of the radycall Moysture: whych thynges. now are not to bee prosecuted, because thys matter partayneth to a Physicion, whereof if God gyue me Lyfe, I purpose to treate at conuenyent leysure: now let thys be suffycient for the cure of an Ulcer. If yee wyll knowe howe an Humour shall bee purged, reade Leonardus Fuchsius who teacheth to purge, accordyng to the fault of the Humour. Other haue at hand, Mayster Vygoes Booke of Chirurgi, where ye shall finde, euen to the full, how to purge an Humour▪ For if I woulde distemper Pocyons, make Morselles, and myngle pylles, I shoulde bee troublesome vnto you, or yee myght hyt mee in the Teeth wyth the Prouerbe: yee sette the Carte before the Horsse: For my Communication should bee vnsauery, as it fareth wyth a Guest, whych regardeth not delycate Iuncates, beyng fylled before. And therefore, leauyng these thynges to you as knowen, I wyll passe to the amendyng, of ye Malyciousnesse of an Ulcer, when we apply coole to ye hoat, & hoat to ye colde. Likewyse,Apply contraries. if ye Ulcer be moisty applying dry: if dry, applying moysty Medicines. We shall restrayne hys Malyce by digestion, Mundyficacion, corrosyon, incision, and also burnyng and mollifying, as it shall please the Woorke man. But when, and how, these meanes shall bee put in vre, that shall wee shew, when wee goe aboute to displace the accydents of Ulcers. All whych thyngs we doe orderly, omittyng the former matters, for a time, because trouble hath preuented me.
                     UUe haue entreated before suffyciently of bleeding, comming of a cause primatiue, from whence yee must fetch hither, sutch thinges as there were spoken. For it were superfluous, to speake more of the matter in this place. Wherefore, being at poinct with that accident, I wyl make forth to the rest, and speake no more of this. The like would I do with superfluous flesh, if I had rehersed the cause of it, when we speake of a sanious Ulcer. The cause of superfluous fleshe, is to mutch moisture and vncleane mundyficacion, as Auicen thinketh, in the Chapiter of Ulcers. sayinge: In some Ulcers groweth superfluous flesh,The cause of superfluous fleshe. and in some it groweth▪ not. And the Ulcers where it groweth, be they in the which, to mutch haste is made, in the repaire of flesh, before complete mundificacion. Wherefore take you heede, that yee proceede not to farre, in moistyng of the Fleshe. And as for remedyes, the matter is playne, for that we know the cause: but remember that ye quicken or delaie, in drought and corrosion, the medicine, according as the matter shall require, and as the Flesh shall bee more or lesse swelled vp wyth foggie Fat. We haue seene that thys kinde of maladies, hath not felte, nor forsed of other remedies, and hath required an

actually cautery. If this happen vnder your hands, if easy remedies profit not (of whych sort be Vnguentum Apostolorum, & Aegyptiacum, take a corosyue pouder, & brent Alum) feare not to dry it wyth an hoat Iron also. And if ye shal so do, & a blisterous crust be risen: ye may displace it, as we shewed before in our treatise of apostumacions, & then returne to the cure agayne.
                     If hard and discouered lyppes, be found in an vlcer, letting the ensounding, set all your cure, vpon the displacing of that euill: omitting no time or howre. For if we do the contrary, we shal in the hast labour in vayne, & afterward be compelled, to giue ouer the purpose, & take that in hand at latter cast. Therefore to spend no tyme in vayne, begin wyth the shearing or cutting of, of the lippes. Ye shall cut them of by little, and little, wythout causing of great dolour, if ye apply this pouder, here beneath ordered. For Auicen sayth, we should neuer cause dolour in an vlcer,
                           Auicens prouidence. vnlesse we be constrayned to it of necessity, whych is, where gentle medicines serue not, and he did not this wythout foresight. For he was well ware, as a forecasting man, that there would come after hym, whych would bee more lykely, to subuert mankinde, than to preserue: whych would boast themselues of yt, that they would imitate no rules of Phisick in theyr works: but followe rather ye frantike & pestilent saying, of certayne counterfayts of our tyme,Soft Chirurgians make foule soares. yet Butcherly manglers, ma
                              •
                           re all together. whych haue this in theyr mouthes, and haue brought it to a common Prouerb to, saying: that a wounde wyll breede wormes, vnder a gentil Physicions hand. As though ignorāt & Bocherly cruelty of ye Physicion, should be cause of health. I speake of the cruelty, whych blynde boosardes do vse, wyth all counterfayt boldnes, & coloured diligence, in euery little felon, to the intent, they may thereby win the name of learned, and expert Chirurgians: and not a whit of necessary sharpnesse, whereunto wee be induced, both by ye rules, & autenticall counsayle of learned Phisicions, and sweete persuasions of Poets. For thys sayth the fyne wylted, and eloquent Naso, Immedicabile vulnus, est recidendum. &c. Where the woūde is vncurable,
                           Quid, a good u
                              •
                           te. saith he, it must be shorne of, that ye whole be not infected wythal. Agayne Iuuenal wyth his Satyricall tricke, one Grape draweth colour of an other,Example. onely by reason of theyr aspect, as one Measelled Hogge, measelleth the whole Herde. Virgill also is wyth vs at our Elbowe, saying: Culpam ferro compescite. &c. Appease, sayth he, the fault out of hand, wyth the sworde,Good counsayle. or euer ye cursed infection, go farther among the people. Wherefore, when yee shall chaunce vppon sutch cures, do that whych shal appertayn to the preseruacion of the Pacient, wythout all white lyuered womanlyke feeblenes. And if ye so bolde your selfe, & work accordingly, the matter well considered, ye shall not be called vnmylde & cruell, but prouident, & mercifull:
                           How bold the Chirurgian should be in cure.
                           C. Celsus.
                         notwythstanding ye blustering blames of your Aduersaries, because ye haue saued, and not destroyed your Pacient. For doubtlesse, many soares will not be mended, wythout ye Knyfe, as Cankers, & others, as Cornelius Celsus sheweth in hys bookes, of hand working. We haue now run out of our Race, occasioned by blynd Chirurgians, howbeit, we haue found nothing to mutch, theyr desertes well considered. For who could be so pacient to heare them, and would not ware hoat in the cause, namely, being exasperated day by day, of sutch Men? For they cannot see the good lyue in quiete by theym,

but they lye in wayte for them, wyth all indeuoured mischiefe. Well, I relinquishe thys, least I should seeme, to be delighted in reprehension of men, where my mynde is far distant, from that path of wryting. Wherefore, let them go play them: we wyll repayre to our pouder, whych yee shal put on the euill fauoured lyppes of woundes or soares,A good pouder. whych is thys. R. Of Citrine Mirabolaynes. ℥.ss. of red Corall. ʒss. of vnholed Galles. ʒ.j. of Dragons bloud, of Terra sigillata, and Cerusse. ana. ʒ.ij. Uerdigrece. ʒ.ij. of Roch Alum brent. ʒ.i Sarcocoll, Mirrhe, Frankencense, Mastike, ana. ʒ.i.ss. mingle them all, and pouder finely as Alcocoll, vppon the whych, yee shall apply Vnguentum Basilicum, after the description in the cure of a colde vlcer. And thus must you proceede, vntill the accident be remooued, which don, prosecute the cure, as is aboue prescribed. And in case the pouder, by reasō of hys weaknesse, speede not well the matter, yee may go to stronger Medicines. Whereof thys is the fyrste. R Of oyle of Roses. ℥.iij. Weathers fat. ℥.ij. Marrowe of the Huccle bone of a Cowe. ℥.i. water wherein sublimatum hath bene melted. ʒ.i. seeth them softly together, vnto the tyme the water be wasted, and then put thereto. ℥.i. of Cerusse, and seeth them agayne a little, when it is taken from the fire, ye must stir it, till it be thick. Thys must be spread on a peece of cloth, and layd on the soare, and peraduenture, yee shall dispatch the matter wyth thys: If not, take this in hand and wythout doubt, ye shall win the castell. But yet be ye hereof warned before hand, that it be not applyed in any sinuie place, least whyle yee seeke freedome, ye fall into bondage. As it befell in my frend, when hee woulde bicker wyth the lyke vlcer, in a Womans foote where he could neuer win the matter, though he left no stone vnturned. Neuerthelesse, if ye be constrayned thereto, by any necessity, or euer ye apply this, ye shall first vse an vniuersall Purgacion, of the whole Body, and also a comfortatyue to the Nuke, least haply there aryse any Pestilēt fumes, ready to cause a conuulsion, or Spasme: and when ye haue so done, proceede forth to ye locall medicines, whych may be thus, which is most excellent good.
                     R. Cerusse, Uermilion, Sublimatum, ana. ʒ.iij. mingle them, and pouder them fynely, whereof ye shall sprinkle, so mutch in the vlcer, as is able (if I may so speake) falt the part, which shalbe remooued: and incontinent, couer it wyth thys plaster, whych shall make for the appeasing of dolour, & remoouing of the escharous crust.To remooue an escharous scab or crust. R. leaues of Mallowes, Uiolets, and Lettice. ana. M.i. seeth them together in Muttō broath of the Weather, & afterwardes stamp them putting thereto. l i.ss. of Barly meale, of oyle of Roses complet. ℥.ij. of Butter. ℥.iij, and Yolkes of three Egges: wyth whych plaster ye must proceede till the crust be taken of, and then ye may prosecute the cure wyth digestiues, Abstersiues, and Incarnatiues, as yee were informed afore. If ye worke after this sorte, and wyth these remedyes, according as they haue bene declared, ye shall win your Spurres, in sutch cures, and great frendship also. Now in asmutch, as we be wel trained in thys, let vs come neerer the accident of dolorous payne, to see howe wee can rid our handes of that also. For why, thys is now and then so extreme, cruell and sharp, that it doth not only exclude the cure of vlcers, but

vtterly interdite and suspend almost, all the vertues, as well naturall as animall, and spirituall. Wherefore of very ryght wee must put our helping hand to this also.
                     For as mutch then, as dolour is as it were a cupping glasse, in drawing matter vnto the place, the writers haue vsed mutch diligence,Example. in appeasing of it, considering the accidētes, whych may insue thereupon, as ouerthrow of the vertue naturall, fayling of spirites, and contractions of synewes. Al whych accidentes are perilous, & to bee doubted in all maladies. Wherefore, to the intent men may eschue thys by a rule: they learne men knowledge, in their publicated workes, that it proceedeth of two causes, that is, of the breach of continuaunce, and alteration of qualityes. As Galen sayth,Breach of cō
                           tinuaunce or hurting of the whole mēber. dolours where as they be, declare breach of continuaunce, or sodayne alteracion of qualityes: the contynuaunce may be broken four wayes, by incision, corrosion, breaking, and stretching, as in apostumation. Alteracion is by heat and cold, moysture, drought, and other sutch lyke. Note, what dyligence they tooke, to fynde the causes of dolour. Now if dolour aryse,Alteration, what it is, by meanes of incision, as in woūdes: the fyrst way to appease it, is to sewe it, and next to anoynt hoat oyle Omphacine in the edges and circuit of the wounde. And thys must be don, not once or twyce, but continually▪ til it be appeased in a great part. If it come to corrosion, whych accident,Of dolour. properly pertayneth to an vlcer, it must be remooued also, if we entende to cure the vlcer. But here note, that there be two causes of the matter, a proper,Two causes of matter. and a depending: the proper cause is, a certayne malignity, or shreudnesse in the fleshe, whych our men call, proprietas occulta, the secret property. The cause dependinge is nought els, but euill humours, whych fret and eate out the fleshe when they come to the conuinct, as doth Choler, myxt wyth Salt Flegme. And certaynly, thys latter shall haue neede of euacuation wyth Cassia, Manna, Diacatholicon, and other lyke purgations. But as for the former, it shall be ruled after an other order, euen by comforting of the edges of the vlcer, wyth defensiues, able to cherishe and feede the complexion of the flesh, and with the strong pouder, Praecipitatus, cast in the vlcer whose description ye shal finde, at the end of the treatises. If it come by breaking, it is eased by setting of the bones, and competent bynding, and situacion of the member. For albeit, the breach be neuer so wel restored, and set in place: there wyll be yet discontinuaunce, if it be vntowardly set to rest. And as for the setting of Bone, yee shall learne at other Mens handes: For their Bookes are replenished, wyth preceptes & rules for the purpose, specially Galen. &c.
                     
                     But if alteracion come of extension, or stretching,Alteracion of extension. as it is in apostumacions, mollificatiue Medicines shall be best, to prepare the matter to come forth: And Auicen sendeth vs to sutch appeasementes, saying, the vehemē
                        cy also of Dolour, causeth vs of necessity, to vse mollificatiues, or softning Medicines. But of truth my Friende, if it grewe through alteracion of the Substaunce, the matter must be redressed by the contrary Qualities. For Example. If an Ulcer bee dystempered wyth heate (whych is

perceyued by rednesse in the circuite) it is redressed by a colde Oyntment. And if the substaunce be fallen to cold,When to vse contraryes in hea
                              •
                           ing. 
                        Vnguentum Rasum, or some lyke wil qualify the matter soone. If it be engendred with drought, moysture then wyll pacify all the gryefe. Agayne, if it be disquieted wyth to mutch moysture, drought of an oyntment, plaster or dust, wil dispatch it. To be short, if we worke after thys maner, we shall discomfite al maner dolours, caused through excesse of one quality, aboue an other. Thus shall wee wyth proper medicins, succor the humayne lyfe of mankynde, specially when we attayne to the cause of the malady, neyther shall begge remedyes, as doe these Dogleaches,Example. whych would be called Practicians, a Gods name, and wot not what practice is. For they do as chyldren do in their playes, which when they lyst to haue some sporte, apoynct some Marke, and standing a little of, blindfilde, wherle themselues about once or twyce on theyr foote, and then gesse to the Marke at al aduenture, in whych gropyng, they are found at last, when they thynke themselues sure of it, further of then they were, where they stoode at fyrst. Euen so fareth it with these groping practicians: for why? they be not able to distynct, neyther tymes of sicknesse, neyther know the causes of them, or properties of oyntments, as he who bare men in hand, wyth grauity of words, that he was a practician: and when one demaunded, what quality Vnguentum Rosarum had, he aunswered with great deliberacion, a Gods name, hoat, yea Mary sir ꝙ the other a worthy aunsweare for sutch a practician. Wherefore I exhort you to cast away all Sluggardy, and negligence, that yee may attayne to the knowledge▪ as well of Simples as of compoundes, and stumble not at matters as they doe. Yee haue the causes, and cure of dolour: now we wyll go to an apostumacion, as the order requireth.
                     Now, as touching apostumacion, concurrant wyth vlcers, what should I say,Apostumatiō concurrant with an vlcer sithen we haue largely sayd in the matter, when we spake of Apostumacions? But yet to help them that be tangled herein: we wyll talke a little more of it, and put somewhat to the enlargyng of our medicines, declared before. Then when an vlcer is thus entangled, ye must vse the remedyes, appoyncted properly for Apostumacions. But in case they shall not suffice, vse thys, wherein yee shall fynde sutch profit, that for certayne, yee shall maruayle not a little at it. But first consider, whether the vlcer be vexed wyth an hoat or cold apostumaciō. For at that diuersity, wyll folow ye diuersity of making of the Medicine. If it be hoat, apply thys. R. Leaues of Mallowes and Uyolets, ana. M.j. of hulled Beanes. l i.ij. seeth them al together,Hoat and cold apostumacions. vntill the Beanes be soft, whych don, stampe them: and if it bee requisite, to put any Oyle to the same, put a little Rosed Omphacine, and afterward spred it on a cloth, and lay it to the apostumacion, for thys wyll apease and resolue. But if the apostumation be cold yee shall take the same plaster agayne, howbeit ye shall search, & make it otherwyse. R. Of Mallowe leaues. M.ij. hulled Beanes. l i.ij. of Barbers Lye. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. and seethe them well, after stampe them, and apply it to the place. Certaynely, thys wyll work most aptly, for our purpose. But note heere, I pray you, that thys plaster may be rectified in our working, according as the Lee shall be

mylde or sharpe. Thus haue ye ynough, for the displacyng of this accidente, yf ye remember the sethings, with the other aboue. Wherfore we wil now talke, of hardnesse of vlcers.
                     Euery good Phisition, my frende, willing to cure his paciente rightlye,Hardnes of an vlcer wil appoynt himselfe twoo principall intentions, that is, to preserue, and to cure. The fyrst searcheth for the causes, the other imagineth wayes to displace theffect therof. Therfore to the intent we maye be able to remoue this cause, and withstande the effect,To search the cause, and displace the effect let vs see how many causes hardnesse hath. When I was geuen to reade Chirurgi, and delyted in the antique bokes, I fel bechaunce vppon Galens fyrst booke. De simplicium medicamentorū, where I noted him, to put three causes of hardnes. For it chaunceth,Thre causes of hardnesse. sayeth he, of to much drought of congelynge of matter, or els of fulnesse & repletion. If it come of drought, moysture wil ease it. And this must bee done with oyntmentes, plasters, and imbrocations, after the mynde of Auicen, Imbrocations be made with hoat water,Imbrocasion. and Mutton broth of the Weather, Plasters may be of all thinges, as ye hard before Now the oyntmentes be of Muscilages, and sometyme of Tripharmacon, as Mirepsus thinketh. How beit I suppose Myrepsus vsed it in hardnes, caused of frising, and not in drought. For I neuer saw Tripharmacon cause moisture, but in hardnes of cōgelacions or frising, it serueth wel, if it be made wt Uineger, which notably cutteth clammy and viscous humours. If it come of fulnesse, (as it is seene in Apostumations) euacuation helpeth the matter: as Hippocrates sayeth, sicknesses, which come of replecion or fulnesse, be cured by euacuation. Now if ye mynd to resolue it, let it fyrst be softned with some mollificatiue, and it wil the better vanish and transpire, the pores beyng opened with the mollificatiue. And if it fall to hardnes agayne, rype it agayn with the same medecine as Auicen wryteth in the cure of Apostumations, & then let it be resolued. As for the making of these medecines, ye must retourne to the treatise of apostumations, where ye shal fynd a special plaster made of Melilote, Sapa or newe wyne and lye, and an other of the decoction of Beanes, Mallowe leaues. &c. But as for the thyrd kind of hardnesse, parteineth to an vlcere, and for an end, if the hardnes wil not be amended by these meansfrete it with some corosiue, according to the maner, as it was prescrybed in the correction of hard lippes in an vlcere.
                     Now as concerning corrosiue, or gnawing in an vlcere, we would treat to the ful thereof, if we had not medled with the matter,Corosion or bytynge. when we were aboute the appeasyng of dolour, namely, for that that accident is much more combrous then any of the other, But yet in asmuch as we haue there geuen no remedyes, we wil here haue ye matter a little while in consideration agayne. Wee suppose then, that corosion is termed of that, that it with his sharpenesse, byting, and freting, resolueth, wasteth, and drieth vp the moistnes of the member, after which resolution, the substance of the flesh is minished, and so falleth to vlceration. Wherfore, according to our determination, there be two causes of this, the proper, and depending. And as for ye proper cause, it is as we sayd before, a certayne malignity, or fylthynes in ye flesh, which Phisitians call the secrete property. And for the displacyng of

this, ye must consider the property of the member and then temper and correct it with defensiues, linimentes, and oyntmentes, made accordinge to your intention, as is that, which I made, respecting both complexcion, and purpose, in the mallady, or euil.
                     R Oyle of roses, Mirte, and Uiolet ana. ℥.i, ss. Bole Armoniacke, Terra sigillata,
                        A good liniment. and Dragons blood. ana. ʒ.ii. Acatia 
                        ʒ.iii. pouder of Roses, Mirtilles, and Cipresse Nuttes ana. ʒ i.ss whyte waxe ℥.ss. make hereof a liniment, according to the art, and annoynt the vlcere and his circuite with the same. In case the hidraunce come of euil fleshe, sprynkle this pouder on it, and yee shall dispatch the malignity. R. Of Citrine, Mirobolanes, of Terra sigillata of Cerusse,A consumer of Flesh. ana. ʒ iii. of prepared Tutia. ʒ.i.ss. of Dragons blood ℥.ii. of brente Alome. ʒ.ii, mingle them and let it be a fyne pouder to be caste in the vlcer. Which ye shal couer with the same liniment, spreade in a cloth: or couer it ye 
                        Vnguentum album or Vnguentum de Minio. The cause depending, wee take it to be the antecedent, euen a Cholericke humoure, mixt with salt flegme, which gnaweth the fleshe,Antecedent cō
                           iunct. when it commeth to the coniunct, or place. Now for the cure of this, we order two intentions, the one to kepe of humours, yet fleting, the other to discomfyte them, which be already flowinge. The fyrst may be done with Cassiafistula, Diacatholicon, Manna, or any like purgatiue. And administration of the dust and liniment which we ordered now, wil accomplish the other, how beit apply this oyntment folowing vppon ye pouder.
                     R Oyle of Mirte, Roses,, and violets. ana. ℥.ii, Weathers fat. ℥.iii. Goats grease ℥.i.ss. iuice of Colewortes. ℥.iii. seeth theym togeather till the iuice be dryed, and then put therto. ʒ, iiii. of vermilion. ʒ.iii of Cerusse, and, ℥.ii. of Litharge,To make a cicatrice. and play them agayne, til they become very blacke, stirrynge theym stil that the Mineralles fal not to the botome, and burne. This done▪ put yet thereto. ℥.i. of Terebintine. ℥.vi. of newe waxe & make it to an oyntment betwene hard and soft, in lykenes of a Cerote. And this wil bryng the sore to a Cicatrice, and fil your had ful of money for your laboure.
                     Now rottennes and putrefaction followeth, whose description I wil rehearse to the intent ye may therby be assured of the Mallady.Of putrefaction or rottennesse. Putrefactiō
                        is when the dew breathyng of the spirite is inhibited and letted in a member, by whom the complexion should be mayntayned and defended. And whē this is corrupted, or els letted in his due passage, the moisture of that part is not ruled, and so doth the part putrify and rotte, as Aristole saith iiij. Metheo. Moysture and heate, not ruling the same, is cause of corruption at the fyrst meeting. But to say trueth me thinketh it hath three causes in all. The fyrst corrupteth the vital spirite wt holding his due breathing & passage as doe stupefactiues or dead thinges, as Opium, and to coole repercussiues things letting passe, be grosse thycke and clammy humors, whiche by theire multitude, thicknes and toughnes, stop the priuy spiracles, & breathynge pores: and as touching thinges that inhibit, they be causes primitiue. As brusyng, smiting, and bynding to strait, All these mortify a member, inhibityng his spirite and specially bynding, which I saw befall in a Manne of mutche honestye lyinge in the Hospitall of Sayncte Bartholomewes.

He was pained of a push betwene his tooes: and when one, whō ye know had opened it, there gushed forth so much blood that the Chirurgian thought it b
                           •
                        st to bynd the member, with a right strayt bond, wherupon the pacient dyed the nexte daye. Wherefore it is expediente,How
                              •
                            pa
                              •
                           iēt dyed by euil cure. that yee be ware ye fall not into such lewed ouersightes, whereby ye should get the name of Boch
                           •
                        rly ma
                           •
                        quell
                           •
                        rs, as he did, not without his desert. Marke here also that, that which corrupteth, may twoo wayes be considered. First as it appeareth, the way to putrefaction, next putrefaction already caused. If ye consider it, in the fyrst respect, make youre recourse to the contrary causes: according to the saying of Hippocrates,
                        Hypocrates. sicknesses caused of repletion bee dispatched by euacuation, which done, the effect is at a poynt, as Aristolle saith Remoue the cause, and the effect is remoued, But if ye take on putrifaction the second way, ye must put one the two eyes,Remoue the cause, and the effect will cease. which Galen ascrybed to a good Phisition. Wherof the right shal behold the cause, and left the effect, which is the putrifaction. The right shal vse contraryes to the least applyed. Oyntmentes and plasters, to repayre the putrefaction, whiche shalbee these, R Of Uertdegrece, of Rooch Alome, and of Hony, lyke partes, with a little Uineger, and haue it to the fyre, tyll the colour alter from greene, to red, which vse, spreadyng this ouer it.Galen.
                     
                     Take of Beane meale, of Barly, and Lupine meale. ana. li. ss. of Barbours lye. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss and seeth thē vnto such tyme, as they bee wel mingled togeather, like a past, which must be spred on a peece of cloth But note, if the rottēnes be so farre past, that it wil not be displaced with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, of equal partes, ye may vse this, which vndoubtedly wil dispatch it. Take of hony. ℥ iii. of Roch Alome & Uertdegrece. ana. ℥ ii. of sublimatum. ʒ.iii incorporate them altogeather at the fyre, til they be sufficiently sodden, and lay it to the rotten place, and then the plaster appoynted before.To helpe putrifaction. A good medecine. And if ther be caused an eschara, remoue it with digestiues, made of Terebintyne, and yolkes of egges or wt Butter. It may also be remoued with a plaster which was geuen for Apostumatiō, opened wt a potencial cautery, when this is remoued ye vlcer shal be cured, as be woundes. Now ye se what is to be done in putrifaction, or fyllthy sores.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     What say you of corrupted bones?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        NOw to come to a corrupted bone,Of Bones which are corrupted two thinges considered. the sygnes of it must be noted, that ye may know, whether it be so or not. For it hath proper sygnes, to be kowenn by, as wel inwardlye as outwardly. The outward sygnes be dull, and loosse flesh as Auicen. sayth. in the chapter De ventositate spinae.
                     
                     The signes inwardlye may not be seene with the eye, but be founde with the searcher. For if a man serch it wel, he shal not onely find it secretely frete, but also minished and abated in substaunce Wherfore if we fynd thys fault. and mynd to amend it, we shal aboue al things obserue two poyntes, one parteineth to the cure, the other to eschew reproach & infamy.A good obseruation.
                        
We shal auoyd infamy, if we refuse to meddle with the heads of great bones and ioyntes. For if we would worke in such places, we shal be endaū
                        gered of conuulsions, or some euil accidente, by reason of the fellowship and colligance, whi
                           •
                        e they haue with greate synewes. heads of cordes, & muskles:Auicen wherby we might be vtterly disgraced and shamed. as Auicen there declareth largely. And as for the cure (these causes eschewed) may be obteyned, specially if ye fault be in the middes of the arme or legge, bones, & tredes with conuenient medecines. There be also certen kyndes of instrumentes which they cal Trapanes, and Raspatories, very mete for repairing of alterated and corrupted bones. Agayne Vnguentum Egyptiacum, made after Auicens description, shalbe good, how be it, ye shal make better speede, if ye vse an actual cautery, that is if ye burne it with an hot yron. Uerily my selfe, whē I chaunced in such bones, did euer vse actuall cauteryes, because they comfort and rectify the weake member. Wherof there be two kyndes in especiall, the fyrst hath this shape A. and the part is playne, which is applyed to the bone. C. the other is figured. R. Now in cauteryzing and burning, I vse this dilligence, to eschew inconuenience. I prepared an other instrument, like a fynger of a Gloue,These figures are in the end. with an hole in the middes, through which I put my cautery, to saue the flesh from burning, this vsed I in playne bones. The second was appoynted, which I vsed in holes, and hollow places. There may be inuented yet many other formes of instrumentes, for cauterizing of Bones, according as the worke and place shal requyre.
                     Now as touching the causes of bones corrupted, they be the accident and priuetiue: of which two the antecedent is the worse. For why the antecedent wil fester the bone, or euer the flesh be corrupted, for by reason of the cause primetiue, corrupt, and freting humours wil fleete to the bone, and frete it, which Auicen termeth Ventositas spinae. Now how this may be knowen and cured, ye shal learne of him which wryteth a special treatise of it. For we mynd not to meddle with it, because it would draw vs farre from our purpose, by reason of the nomber of intentions. The primatiue cause is what soeuer be falleth from outfoorth, as brusynge, incision, alteration of ye ayre (I meane not of alteration of the ayre it selfe, but of alteration caused in the bone by the ayre, and the vse of some oyntmentes. And therfore consider you whether it come of a wound,Alteration of the aire. or apostumacion, and so by dilligent calculation, shal ye come to the cause of the corruption. If it procede of apostumation, corrupt humours be the cause. If it come of a wound, then applications of oyntments, or occursaunce of thair haue done it. And if it come of a wounde, then consider agayne whether any hole bone were cut of, or any bone minished, or els any part, Agayne there is no diffrence whether a bone were taken out violently, or expelled of nature, For Auicen sayth, a Fistula may be feared wher nature expelleth it. Wherefore if ye couete to knowe all these particuler causes and obseruations: peruse Auicen in that Chapter,Auicen. where ye shal fynd al thinges to your ful contentation. This is sayd concerning corrupted bones. Now in asmuch as our tyme is so shorte by appoyntment, let vs goe forth to the rest of our communication.
                  
                  
                     
                     Soarenes
                     I pray you, what is the cause of Uarices, and swellyng?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        VArices bee swelling vaynes in the legges,Of swellings the cause. fylled with Melā
                        cholyke, blood. And these are bred diuerslyd, by stoppinge of the spleene▪ weaknes of the liuer, to much feding on meates that encrease Melancholye, longe standinge and waytinge before menne, wearinesse of footegate, and finallye bearyng of great burdens, as it is euident in them that vse it And this mallady is very hard to be redressed, and requireth many intentions and obseruations in the cure. The first is to order the life conueniently. The .ii. to purge the humour. The thyrd is to apply conuenable,Melancholik metas. local medecines. Now the regement shal be to absteine from meates, whiche brede Melancholy. As Beeffe of the Oxe, Bugle, and Cowe. All salte meates, Pulse, Colewortes, Water birdes Salt Cheese and grosse wine, with other lyke. The matter is purged with blood lettynge, digestiues, and potions. Ye shal take the blood of Basilica or the liuer veine, making a large gash and hole, that the grosse melancholyke blood, may passe and comforth And it wil be the better, and more auayleable, a great deale if the pacient be exercised by going, or some other way before, so that the humours bee well mingled togeather. After ye Bloudletting, these syrupes must follow syrupe of Epythimum & of Fumiterre, and then a purgatiō of pilles De fumo terrae, or Cappets. Al which ye shal your self better indosate accordyng to ye pacients state then I here make farther mētion therof. This is spoken in respect of ye accident, which if ye mynd to cure wel, apply it to the principal intention in the cure. Now as touching the localles, and matter coniuncte: when yee wil cure swellynge vaines, fyrst vse an vniuersal purgation,Fyrst to the whole, then to the particul
                              •
                           r of the whole body, and then come to the particulare intentions, which comprehend thre considerations. The fyrst putteth of fletyng matter. The second remoueth that which is fleeten. The third comforteth the veines, strayneth them togeather, and resolueth congeled blood, yee shal kepe of fleeting matter with defensiues, applyed vnder the knee, whiche may be such.
                     R. Bole Armoniacke, and clay,A defensiue vnder ye knee. an. ʒ.iii. Dragons blood. ℥.i. Terra sigilata. 
                        ʒ.iii. make them in fyne pouder, and incorporate them with the white of two Egges: wt ℥.i. of Oyle of Mirtine, and place it vnder the knee, byndinge it wyth a Roller indifferentlye fast. I saye indifferentlye faste, because to strayt bynding will mortify the member (which were worse then the former euil) neither to slack.How to bynd a member For that is not able to presse the veines togeather neither inhibite the discente of the Melancholikk blood to the place. Therfore let the bond be indifferent, so that the bloud be repressed, and the member not mortifyed. When he haue so done, ye shall the day following, smite the veine, which appeareth aboue the holownes of the foote, makinge a large hole, that grosse blood may haue his passage & walke,To open a veine to purge grosse blood. or presse doune the blood with youre handes, beginning beneath the defensiue, til a greate part of the blood of the veins be auoyded. But note, that yee must bathe all the legge with hote water, before yee presse downe the blood. When the blood is emptied out, stoppe the vayne, and couer the whole legge with this

plaister. R. Of Camomell, Melilote, and Wormewood. ana. M.vi. of Mirtilles. & red Roses, ana M.iii. of Cipresse Nuttes .xx, of Acatia. ℥.iii. of Branne M,A plaister for the Legge to resolue. iiii. of Beane meale, and of Lupyne meale. ana. li. ss. braye yt is to be brayed, and seeth them in new whyte wyne, and Barbours lye, wherein these thinges were sodden before Tamarike, Moline, Smallage, and rootes of Capers, and play altogeather, til it be lyke past: after this, put a little Uineger to it, that it may the better cut the humoures, and so inrolle the whole legge therwith. This plaister (if a man consider it well hath power to dry, to comfort, to resolue, and to cutte thinne clammy matter, which be necessary poyntes, in this troblesome accident. What wil ye more? If ye do thus, ye shal▪ dispatch and ridde your handes of it with honestye. But in case the defensiue so dry, and cause doloure, ye must chaunge the plaister, and commaund the pacient to kepe his legge higher thē his body, alway in his bed, that bloud descend not downe agayne. For this point is necessary, if he wil be cured of the mallady: accordyng to the populer prouerbe, Gamba al & lecto braso al pecto,
                        Purge a sore man, after he is amended, for scare of dropsye. &c which willeth the hand to be kept at the bosome, and the legge in the bedde. And when the pacient is somewhat amended, purge him agayne: For otherwyse it wer to be doubted, lest he fall to an Idropsie, Pthisicke, Phrensye, and doating. For the matter, whiche was wonte to descende woulde be witholden, and in this case, his property is to ryse, & cause such accidentes, as Hippocrates sayth, to cure olde and antique emeroydes, if one be not left open, putteth the pacient in peril of an Idropsy, Pthisicke, & destruction of mynd. And in an other place he sayth, of men that be destracted.A conclusion. A frensy is loosed at the rysyng of the swelling veines. Wherfore if a frensy be dispatched at the prouocation of them: it is consequente that the stoppe of them, wil be cause of the same. Wherfore Aristotle hath this general rule, in his boke of places. If the presence o
                           •
                         a thing be good, the absence of the same is euill. Therfore to eschew this euil, we must purge the pacient once euery moneth, wyth some purgatiue, which wil euacuate the Melancholike humour. There be yet other thynges obserued, as by bynding & cuttyng of veines, which, what for Bocherly cruelty, and otherwyse daunger of the pacient, I passe them ouer, syth I neuer practised them, nor neuer intende to do the cures beyng so perillous, and ful of daungers.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes
                     What say you of a round vlcer, Good sir Chirurgian?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        SIr, as touching roūdnes in an vlcer, we nede not to say any thyng at all. For ye haue sufficientlye laboured the demonstratiue sciences,Geometricall measures in Chirurgi & haue, as I vnderstand right wel profited in them For ye can erect tryangles, cut lynes, deuyde circles, yea, and square thē also, if it were neede: al be it, to this day, the true squarynge of a circle, hath not bene inuented. But to the purpose. If ye will deuyde the roundnes of an vlcer by the Dyameter, with a hoate Iron, or other Instrument, yee shal deuyde the compassynge of Uilles and small heres well ynough, which is one of the greatest lettes in the ensoundynge

of an vlcer. And so shal you withstand the circuition: which done ye maye prosecute the cure of the cutte, burning, or otherwyse workyng to your pleasure. Now for that we haue rydde your hands of these troblesom accidentes: we wil retourne to the cure of the capital vlcers, wherof wee made mention before. Wherof the virulent is fyrst.
                     Good Phisitions haue euer vsed to trye out fyrst, the cause of maladyes and to cutte them of, which done, the disease would easely be displaced.The cause of Soarenes, is first not considered. And in good fayth, this seemeth to be the very path way
                           •
                        , to artificiall curynge.
                     Wherfore we also, because we would not swarue from the right waye of our auncient mayster, wil fyrst declare the cause of a virulent vlcer, & then order the intention in ye cure. The cause then of a virulent vlcer, is Cholerik humours, which become sharpe by reason of salt flegme mixt with choller, and after they gette virulency, by adustion and burninge. For virulency is not otherwyse bread, as sayth Auicen, but of the subtilnesse of hot watry humoures, which originally proceede of euil gouernaunce, and order of life.Ulcer Uirulent, how it groweth. Therfore we wil fyrst appoynt the intencions which must bee obserued in their cure. They be fyue. The fyrst ordereth the lyfe, the second purgeth ye humoure, the third kepeth the flux of humours,Fiue good intentions. the fourth dryeth them that be already fleetyng. The fyft ensoundeth the vlcer, and comforteth the mē
                        ber. In the fyrst we must forbid all sharp, pontike, salted, and hoate thyngs, which shal bee able to alter the blood, to heate, and adustion, as Ginger, Peper, Cinamon, and geue him chicken broth, Lettice and Borage, as al other things that moderate the blood, wherof Chicken broth is thoughte to be best. For it reduceth humours to equality, conserueth complexions, and refreshed the vertue. Al this is spoken for example, that ye maye take occasion by this, to chuse and refuse thinges conuenient, and disconuenient. Ye shal purge the matter, if ye geue purgations, that is, things that draw cholere, as Electuarium e succo Rosarum▪ Electuarium solutinum, Diaphaenicon or some other lyke in operation. The fluxe of humours is prohibited if wee apply this defensyue in the circuit of the vlcer, foure fyngers lesse or more for the same. The defensiue is thus receypted.
                     Take Bole Armoniacke, and Dragons bloude. ana. ʒss. Beane meale. ℥.i. pouder of Roses and Myrtylles,Euery goo
                              •
                            defensiue. ana. ʒ.iii. Oyle of Mirt. ʒ.iiii. iuice of Housleke ʒ.i. Weathers fatte, ʒ, ss. with a little Waxe: seeth the oyle and fatte, with the iuice, til the iuice be wasted, and then put to the remnaunt, makyng it to an oyntment, after the art, and order it as it was now sayd. And as for ye drying of humous, vse the drying symples: how be it, there must be diuersity in compoundyng of them, accordinge to the natures and complexions, wherof one may be thus.
                     Take ashes of Dill, of burnt Leade, and of Terra sigillata. ana. ʒ.i. Lytharge of Syluer, Flowers of Pomgranettes, and vnholed Galles. ʒ i.ss of Creuis shelles, or house Snailes burnt, of Cerusse, ana. ʒ.ii. of roche Alome burnte. ℈ i. mingle theym all togeather, and pouder it fynely. whiche vse for dryinge. And if this profyte not, vse the redde pouder called Precipitatus doubtles, this wil rectify the vlcer, and digest it. And here note by the way, that digestion is not causyng of mater as some vnlearnedly

holdeth opinion but it is proportionating of humors to the natural heate,Digestion causeth not matt
                              ••
                           , but it is ye proporcionating of the humour. so that nature is animated, to expulse theym defyne it thus. Digestion is an ingrossing of thin humours, and thinning of thicke thinges, with some preparance to the expulcing. And for this purpose, we compound hoat digestiues, in cold maladyes and colde in hoate. Finally, wee ensound with Vnguentum de Minio, Tripharmacon, Vnguentum Caphoratum, & de Cerussa: Or spread the defensiue aforsayd in the vlcer. This also that followeth is verye good.
                     Take oyle of Myrt ℥, ii. of Rosed Omphacine. ℥.i. of Weathers fatt ʒ.ii. of Uermilion ℥.ss. of Cerusse. ʒ.i. seeth them til they be black putting therto at ye end. ℥.ss. of new waxe. And after it is taken of the fyre encorporat it with ʒ.iii. of Camphere, and ʒ.ii. prepared of Tuti, and so wil it be an oyntment, lyke a Cerote And this wil comfort the member amend the complexion, & bryng the vlcer to skinninge, Now for skynning of it, wash it with Alome water which was prescribed before in skynning of vlcers: But one thing I warn you of, if ye see that the vlcere be enlarged, with these drying medecines ye must lay thē apart, & vse easier medecines. The signe of to much drying, or abstertion by oyntmentes wil be this. The sore wil bee lyke an apostumated sore, and the pacient shal fele payne, nyppyng and bytyng, as Auicen sayth, Wherfore I wil ye forget in no wyse,A signe of ouermuch drying a sore mē
                           ber. this token and sygne, because it will be much for your aduauntage,
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     I pray you say som thyng of fylthy vlcers
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        IT is euident to see, what gluttonous, & rauening kynde of liuing we vse,Glotony is no smal ennemy to nature. by the alteration of our blood: which is not only altered to heate, and adustion, but also to foule rottennes. In good fayth, reason would we should foresee, that we fel not to such excessiue eatyng and drinking, wherof might insue, sharp fylthy, and corrupt humours, which, cause vlceration, when they come to ye coniunct, and afterward feede the vlcer. Wel let them be theire own workmen and drynke as they brew: we wil to our purpose. And fyrst let vs note what sordityes,Of filthy matter▪ what it is. fylthy and corrupt rottennes is. They defyne it, to bee a certen whyte thicke matter, congeled, propense vnto blacknes and lyke lyes This kynd of matter, properly requireth abstertion and skowryng, as virulency doth drying. Moreouer there be two kyndes. a playn and hollow fylthy vlcer, which requireth foure intentions: the fyrst ordereth the lyfe, the second purgeth the humors: the thyrd wypeth and s
                           •
                        owreth of the fylth: ye fourth pertayneth to ensounding:Fower intencions in twoo kyndes of vlcers. ye shal order the lyfe, as in a virulent vlcer because these two differ not, but by the way of more or lesse. And therfore the dyet shal respect, specially the quality, which we there respected in the order. Lykewyse must the purgatiue be as ther was sayd. And the filth shalbe skowred away with these medecines following. R. Of Rosed Hony strayned ℥.ii. of clere Terebintyne. ℥.iii. play them togeather, til they be wel myngled and then put a,A good perfite mundification 
                        
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. of Barly flower & a little Saffron to it. And it wil be a good mundificatiue, for yt purpose. But if this shal not serue, let this follow.
                     
                        Take of clere Terebintine. ℥, iii. of Rosed Hony strayned ℥.ii. of the iuice of Smallage. ʒ.ss. seeth them te to the wasting of the iuice, then put 
                           q
                           quarter
                        .ss. of Barly meale to it. ʒ, ss, of Frankensence, ʒ.i. of Sarcocol, and a lyttle Saffrō and let it be a soft abstersiue, that may be layed in the vlcere, with tentes: And if ye be sette besydes the stoole in this, then make this following. R. of cleare Terebintyne, of Rosed Hony strayned. ana. ℥.iii. Iuice of Planten. ʒ.ii. iuce of dogs toung. ℥.i, ss, of Sarcocol, Frankensence, Mirhe, and Aloes Epatike. ana. ʒ.i. play altogeather, til halfe the iuice bee wasted, But stir it continually, least it burne, After this let it be strayned, and applied in the vlcere, whether it be playn or hollow. But if the praye shal yet escape your nettes, make this, wherewith doutles ye shal haue your purpose.
                     Take of Barbours lye. ℥.iiii. of redde pouder Principitatus. 
                        ʒ i.ss. of Rosed Hony strayned ℥.ii. mingle them wel togeather,To skower 
                              •
                            dry al vlcers playn or hollow and doubtles ye shal scowre anb drye the vlcer with this abstersiue. Some haue also vsed this mundificatiue with good effecte. Take the iuice of Smallage. ℥.viii. the iuice of Agrimony. ℥ iiii. the iuice of Planteine. ℥.ii. suger rosate, ℥, x. boyle these a season, then cast into them the meale of Barly, Lupines, and Fenigreeke. ana. ℥.i Boyle them then to the consistence of an ointmente, & at the end, put in. ℥.i, of Terebintine,Contraries when to vse them. & vse this to thy honour in clensyng & mundifying a sore or woūd frō matter. For wheras there be but two moistures bred in an vlcer, as Galen wryteth, wherof the one requireth abstertion, ye other drying: both are respected and considered in this medecine, as it may easely appeare, if a man consider the symples wel. Now yee shal incarnate the sore with oyntmentes. that contrary the straunge quality of the vlcere: as with hoate if the vlcer be cold, and with cold, if it be hoat. For what is ensoundinge of discontinued partes, but to rectifye the qualitye, whych shorteth and hyndereth the vertue nutritiue, and to qualify the complection of the member?Nature nourisheth her selfe For if ye doe thus, nature beyng fortifyed, wyll of her selfe cause flesh to growe, as it appeareth not onely in man, but also in brute beastes. And therefore, I compound no other ointments in this case, than were ordered before, in the cures of hoat & cold vlcers, whither ye may resort, when ye shal neede. Thus mutch haue I sayde, of the plain filthy vlcer. Now wil we to the holow and cauy vlcer.
                     Why should men maruayle, if men of olde tyme, came to the knowledge of Natures sickenes and causes, for asmutch as they were taught. euen by the leading of nature, which they of that tyme, more diligently obserued thā we doe: And therefore. they came to meruaylous great knowledge, which we in these daies, attaine not vnto, because we obserue not in like case. I say this, in consideracion of a Moulde warpes moinyng vnder Grounde, whych gaue me occasion to obseruacions, in a cauie vlcere
                           •
                        . For because I was present, where a Gardener stopped the mouth of the earth, or hole, where afterwards, because the cause was not remoued,An example of Calyus or Moldewarp. seuen Moldwarpes came out by sundry tymes. Truely I noted it, thinkyng it worthye of consideracion in the cure, wherefore, when we be mynded, to handle thys cure in his ryght kynd, we must try out the cause, whych wee seeke by humours, accidents. and qualities of the matter. And therfore, when ye mynd the cure of anye sutch Ulcere, consyder aduysedly, whether anye of

the foresayde accidentes be the cause, why the sore refuseth ensoundinge. And if any such be found there, and ye thinke that the accidentes, be the very le
                           •
                        te:Amend an euil accidentes and then the cure wil prosper. retourne then to the correction of that accident whiche hyndreth your purpose, and when ye haue amended that, ye shal haue your desyre. Now if the cause be found in none of them, then marke the matter, whether it be sanious, virulent, or fylthy, and then according as ye fynd it, so resort to the cure of the Capitall vlcers, and worke as is there appoynted, for in so doing, you shalbe assured to quite your selfe of it. On thother syde, if humours be the cause, which is lightly perceiued, by the colours of the flesh, ye must purge them: For if it bee ruddy and itching, it declareth Choler. On the other part, if it be whyte, it is a token of Flegme, and so of Melancholy if the coloure be dimme and broune. Wherfore if ye shal alway behaue your selfe thus in your working, ye shal not stay, but haue your eye stil to ye mark, wherat you entend to shoote.
                     Here should we speake of a festerd vlcer, vnlesse we had talked of yt matter, when we treated of the accidentes of vlcers, where ye shal find the causes of it, and the cure, Therfore ye must make your repayre thither, when nede requireth, and not loke that I should double it agayne. Now haue I, my frend, payed my debt, and discharged my bonde, according to my promise it shal be your part to beare with my trauel, and to take my dilligence in good worth. And though my stampes be not so fyne, to coyne such rych money, paraduenture as ye loked for: yet haue I labored diligently to geue you currant money, with which I trust to content you. Wherfore thus remain, that ye be dilligent labourers in this, and then within smal tyme yee shall swim without Corke, and trauerse great streams, by the ayde of these thinges. But if here after ye shal looke, to be holden vp by the chinne (which I thinke not) ye must procure and retayne some other. For I may not attend vppon you, for businesse that I haue my dere frend sorenesse.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes
                     
                        TO say for my selfe, and my fellowes (which I may because I know their myndes) we thanke you, as far as we be able to say or think for your faithful paiment, brotherly loue and gentle curtesy. Ye haue so fynely coygned al, so orderly layd it forth, euery some by it selfe, and so gently deliuer it, that wee cannot chose, but allow it, and highly comend it. But one thing greeueth me (I think it doth my fellowes also) yt ye leaue vs in the streame to swimme without helpe. Ye know righte well gentle Chirurgi, what a nomber of Gulphes be in the streame of Chirurgi, which ye haue not medled withal, and this requireth the helpe of an expert workmā, Wherfore we shal desyre you, to graunte vs some ayde. Certaynly we wil repayre to you agayne. for other things, which we wil shew you at your leasure.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        WEl youre desires may do much wt me, howbeit I may not promise at this present, al your desires or requestes, but of ye hed I wil say some thing.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     Mary we pray you, shew vs the cures of the head, when it is wounded & in peril. For the hed is the prince of mēbers, whose cures are most hard, & so bid you fare wel.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        NO man, deare Soarenes. that coueteth to gratify other,Of honest request and frendshyp. vseth to make lyghte of his frendes requestes, but rather imbraceth them with al dearnesse of mynd, specially if the thing truly asked, shalbee righteous and honest, or bryng the party, who is required to no hindraunce For if those poyntes should appere in any request, theire petitions woulde seeme dishonest, and worthy of repulse. For why, honesty and righteousnes should not please the desyred, more then the desyrer. Uerely men should bee far of from the way, if they thought, that iustice and honesty might be acquyred by other mens losse, and discommodity. Wherfore seynge we consider that the matter, which we couet to get al our estimation (for we desire to heare you talke of the maladyes, that come of a cause▪ primatiue in the head, with their cures) shal be no lesse to you profitable, than to oure selues quiet of conscience.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        WHy should we not boldly require this, namely, syth both of vs, you to declare, and we to hear, be most at leasure at this present time? We haue also good cause our selues in that our cōscience doth stirre, and encourage vs forth besydes the charitable loue, which we owe amonge our selues one to an other miserably afflicted, in such causes. Again if we did demaunde any thing rashly, perchaunce euen that, which should be pleasaunt to other men, might worthely be denayed vs, for why, rashnes semeth to import two thinges: vnrighteousnes in the demaunder, or els vanity in the thing demaunded, yet for as muche as our sute is right iust and honest, and you pleasaunt Mayster Chirurgi. gentle and free harted to your frendes: let it be your wil and pleasure to re reason with vs concerning the matter, to the intent we through your apt and wyse communication, may declare so many daungers in ye head (wher vnto these commom practicians, rushe out on with al haste, as doth Tom a Bedlem in his naked prograce) and also redresse the same, if anye suche chaunce vnder our symple playne handes. For you are the Man, as wee do thinke, who is skilful to cure hurtes in the head, and auoyde daungers in the same. And thus did we perceyue right wel, not onely at other tymes but specially in the places, where wounded menne are kept, wher yee helped greuous and perillous chauces in the hed. Go to then gentle mayster and follow your frendes desyre, which be in great loue with you. And thus doyng, ye shal doe vs presently great pleasure, and vnto our posterity.

And al be it, yee cannot receiue worthy rewarde at our handes, for so great a benefyt: yet the almighty God, who doth suffer no good turne to be vnrewarded, nor vice vnpunished, wil recompence your payne, and prosper you in your Actes and deedes, who euer bee praysed, for himselfe and his woorkes Amen.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi
                     
                        THe begynning of your matter, al be it, I did wel perceiue it, yet by means ye tale was somwhat long, it was almost fallen out of my remembrance, I being now feeble, and fallen into decay with much labour of mynd, and anguish that I take for my pore frends. For according to the debt of our corrupt nature, they are decessed, and haue geuen vp their Soules, to whom the merciful God, not in respecte of their good dedes, but at the contemplacion of his owne bountiful clemē
                        cye, graunte endles rest and saluation with his sayntes and elected. But yet as farre as I can remember, I noted in some, what we are bound to doe for our frendes and acquaintance, in consideracion of our familier conuersation with them. Of truthe we are not ignoraunte, dear frends, howe harde a thing it is for vs, at this present, to satisfy your desyre, speciallye, for as much as my mynd doth not only take care, but melteth away in floods of sorrowe, for the great affliction I daily feele. Is it possible, that I should content youre desyres with lyke wordes as I vsed, when I talked of woundes, apostumations, & vlcers? Uerely, I would I might gratify you, so that ye should couet no further in the matter. But alas, I am racte and tormented within my selfe, when I feele and consyder, myne insufficiencye and vntowardnes. But yet, lest I should be seene to turne my backe, and geue my dearest frendes a repulse or an vltimum vale (who be as myne own eyes) yet I wil take the matter for youre sakes vppon me. Neuerthelesse, this would I desyre & obtain at your hands, that none should interrupt me in my tale: but in such places, where I ende my whole matter. For the time is very short for our discourse, which we mynd to fynish. And certaynly, If I thought otherwyse, nothing were better to me, than to be questioned wt in euery doubt, which you shal not neede.
                  
                  
                     Soarenes.
                     
                        GEntle syr, ye haue most happely preuented vs. For the matter which wee were appoynted, to get at your hands or euer we came hether, by prayer or fauor, yt haue you offred of your selfe Therfore seyng we are agreed of the matter, sette on a Gods name, and luckelye make the onset. For there may not be greater pleasure to vs, then to heare your woordes, and maner of talke, so yt the precious fruite and profyt, which we looke for in especial, be preferred, for that is the matter.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                        I Noted, deere Soarenes, and your friendes, that R. R. in hys famous worke, vnder whose banner I s
                           •
                        rued most & gat all that I haue, at his handes, or not wythout hys especilall fauour: dyd fatherly admonishe hys Schollers, and hearers, that they should to theyr possibility, try & s
                           •
                        arche out, the causes of diseases. Otherwise, they should attempt, to cure one thyng for an other, and gieue Chalke for Cheese.Chalke for Cheese. And if they dyd so, they should greatly erre in the cure or rather prouide a beare, to help theyr Pacients to theyr graue. Wherefore, I haue determined wyth my selfe, sith your will is so, that I shall daunger my selfe in the matter, to recite vnto you the sicknesses, whych happen in the head, wyth theyr causes. And thys doe I, to th'entent we fall not vnaduisedly in that, had I wiste, whereof we mencioned before. They be fyue in number, that is to say,Fiue causes that do hurt the head. apostumacion, vlcer, wounde, bruse, and breaking. But as touching apostumacions, and Ulcers wythout, wee wyll heere make no further a do, because we haue sufficiently spoken of them before, in our former treatise of Woundes: whereunto yee may repayre at your pleasure. But as for bruses, Woundes, and Breakynges, wee wyll lay our Foundacion, as farre as our Wit shall extende. Yee haue the Maladies, wherefore, wee may proceede to the causes and cures.
                     And fyrst, we wyll begin at a Bruse or Crushing,The cause of bruses, what they are. whose causes be falles and strokes, whereof followeth the member of the continuaunce broken. And here we vse thys terme, of the continuaunce, broken, or bruse: after a large maner, for euery riuing or frushing of mans fleshe, whych may bee two wayes, that is to say, by meanes of a Wounde, & wythout a Wound, As a bruse, whych shall be wythout Wounde, may easely be cured, except the bone, whych is vnder it, be riuen, the skin remayning whole & sounde. Whych hurte, the sicke himselfe, wyll shewe to the Chirurgian, by certayne sygnes, as by often scratching, or touching of the place wyth the Nayles, or by some other meanes. But if it be so, that yee cannot be persuaded,How to finde out a s
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           pe by what tokens. by the Pacientes shewing: or if ye be dryuen to and fro, and reasoning the matter wyth your selfe, as in sutch cases, mens myndes be pluckt, now hether, now thether. Yee must consider the smiter, of what strength and force, he might be of, & where wyth the stroke was inflicted: as in lyke maner the place also, whether any thing fell on the head, from an hygh. For the higher that the place is, and the mightier the smiter, so mutch the greater & worse must the bruse be deamed. For heauy thyngs. falling towards theyr naturall place, are founde of greater force & violence, at ye ende of theyr discent & fall, than at ye beginning, when they were fyrst losed of theyr staies.Of incision in the heade. These thynges considered, ye shall make incision vnto the scalpe, ruling the same after sutch sort, as shall be declared afterward, when wee speake of ryuinges of the scalpe, wyth depression of the bone. On the other syde, yee gesse by the sayd sygnes, that the bone remayne sounde & vnbroken, then set al your intent, to the cure of ye bruse: which shal stand in a resolutiue medicine, being somewhat bynding wythall, if ye stand in feare of putrefaction.

For what soeuer is brused or frushed, must needes putrefy, as Galen wryteth. But I suppose, yee are mynded to aske me a question. How it is, that resolutiues should be applied in bruses, wherein is great concurse, & shewing of matter, for asmutch as repercussiues should rather be vsed, as was sayd, at the beginning of sutch matters. Yee haue well and trimly doubted at the matter: for thys shal make mutch for the cure of a bruse in great perill, whereof yee shall diligently marke, that effusion of bloud doth immediately follow vpon a bruse, because the veynes be violently cut of, and the mouthes op
                           •
                        ned. And the bloud whych shal so once be Isshewed forth, can neuer returne backe, into the veynes agayne. Wherefore, seeing it is wythout the vessels,Of bloud rū
                           ning the chief cause, and the hurt that doth follow the same. it must needes putrefy. & so consequently, corrupt and rot the Fleshe. For thys purpose gentle resolutiues, being bynding things wythall, must be applyed at the beginning: whhere the one resolueth the bloud, and the other being contrary in working, closeth the veyne, that no more come forth. And hereof appeereth the ignoraunce, and ouersight of these Emperikes, and vagabonde Chirurgians. For they mynister repercussiues, at the beginning of euery bruse, wythout resolutiues: whereof followeth incision of necessity, if they wyll auoyde putrefaction. And therefore I wyll geue you the medicine, whych euer is vsed in sutch cases, that yee fall not in the lyke reprehension and shame.
                     Take Camomell, Melilot, Bran. ana. M.i. of Beanes, Lupines, and Barly meale. ana. ℥.ij. of Mirtilles. M.ij. of Cipresse nuttes .xv. bray sutch thinges as ought to be brayed fynely, and then seeth all in new Wyne and Barbers Lee, vnto the tyme it be lyke a Cerote. And at the ende, yee shal put these Oyles to the same, that is, of Dill, of Camomell, and of Mirte. ana. ℥.i. But note, here the Oyles must be vsed, where no putrefaction is. For in case of putrefaction, I would vtterly forbid them. Then play them agayne, tyll the Oyles be well incorporated: & afterward apply it warme. Marke well thys medicine. For it were a long matter, and to mutch for one day, to recite to you, how many haue beene cured, by the helpe of thys medicine alone.Many men haue bin cured by this medicine. But if the bruse be concurraunt wyth a wounde, or euer yee worke in the matter: yee must diligently consider wyth your selfe, whether the rim or pannicule, whych from out forth, couereth the scalpe, be cut or not. And if it be not cut, the wounde must be cured, as we shewed in the treatise of Woundes, sauinge that the digestiue must be made, wyth Rosed Omphacine and yolkes of Egges, ouer whych yee must euer apply thys medicine, whych we aboue recited. For it wyll keepe of putrefaction, and harde corrupted bloud. And after thys maner, proceede forth in the cure, till sanious matter be generated, that done, lay aparte the dygestiue and apply an abstersyue, in hys place. Whych may be made thus.
                     ℞. Of cleere Teretintine. ℥.ij. of Syrupe of Roses. ℥.i.ss. of Plantayne water.A good abstersti
                              •
                           e for the head. ℥.ss. play them together, till ye water be wasted, and then put thereto. 
                           q
                           quarter
                        ss. of Barly meale, and a little Saffron as may be able, to colour the mundificatyue. But take it of the fyre, or euer yee put to the meale, and s
                           •
                        e it be well styrred, vntill it be well incorporated togeather. Now, when yee haue thus done, yee may vse it, and apply euer the same Vnguentum Basilicum, after thys descripcion.
                     
                        Take oyle of Roses and Camomell. ana. ℥.iij. oyle of Mirtine.
                           Vnguentum Balilicum.
                         ℥.i.ss. play them togeather, till they acquire theym a blacke hugh, and then put these drugges to them, of cleare Terebintine. ℥.ij. of Shyp pitch. ℥.i. of new waxe ℥.ij ss. And play them agayne a little, and so take it of the fyre, and stirre it continually▪ till it be thicke. And for asmutch as these woundes, by reason of mutch sensibility of the part, be oftentymes vexed wyth an Erysipelas: thys place asketh to shewe, how we may withstande that troublesome malady.
                           Erysipelas is a hoatred, roūd inflamacion soare, or cholerick voyle wt a feuer in the body. And to thentent ye may so do, note this, concerning an Erysipelas, or Cholerike apostumation, and Prynt it deepely in mynde. It is this. An Erysipelas may happen, by reason of boyling of the humour, or for that, that corrupted matter, is retayned wythin. Whych thing we sawe our selues come to passe, by reason of matter, abyding wythin, in one worthy capitayn. Now this thyng is cured by purging of the cause: As Hippocrates sayth, Quaecunque aegretudines ex plenitudine fiunt, euacuatio sanat.
                        Diseases cō
                           ming of fulnesse. are helped by emptinesse. If it be sharpened and chafed, through heate & boyling of the Cholerike humour: anoynt it with Vnguentum Rosatum and lute the woūde wyth ye same, as the best learned Chirurgians dyd vse. For if mordicacion or heate be caused, by meane of Oyntments: it will be pacified through coldnesse, whych is in ye Medicine. After ye are at poynct wyth thys, couer the whole hole wounde wyth thys.
                     R. of Rosed Omphacine, and oyle Mirtine. ana. ℥.ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum. ℥ i. of Populion. ℥.ss. of whyte Waxe. ℥.iij. and melt all at the fyre: this done and prepared, infuse a lynnen cloth in the same oyntment, and see it be all to weated in it, and then take it forth, and cast it in colde water, yt it may be thicke agayne. This cloth also must bee applied to the heade,Clothes applyed to a woūded head. for feare of a noying of the place: and be applyed where the hayre was shauen of. Moreouer, ye shall forme and shape one other cloth, after the same manner, with the sayd oyntment, so that ye may make permutacion, at euen and mornyng, of the clothes. But if the panicule or rimme be cut, and the bone discou
                           •
                        red, ye shall neede more dilygence and circumspection, whiles ye search, whether the bone be clouen, or riuen in pieces. And if neyther of these faults be found, then is nothyng els to bee done,A pouder for the head. otherwyse than in woundes. sauyng yt thys pouder shalbe sprinckled, where the bone was dyscouered & opened. R. Aloes epatike, Sarcocoll, Myrrhe, ana. ʒ.iij. Frankēsence. ʒ.i.ss. Flowerdeluce. ʒ.ss. & let it be made into fyne pouder, for ye sayd vse. And as for farther prosecution of the matter, ye shall do as in ye cure of woūdes. But in case ye bone be riuen, an other maner of cure wyll handfast you: whych wyll be farre distant, & vnlyke the former. And to the intent ye may be able, to ascertayne your selfe, in sutch cliftes & reuinges, ye shal here note the sygnes & tokens, that follow clites, & riuings of aboue.
                     These thyngs be signes of a broken bone, vomityng, daslyng of eyes,Sygnes of broken bones en the head. vertige or swinyng, blyndnes and fallyng. All whych must be vnderstand, to happen at that present, when the stroke was giuē. And sometyme an apoplexie, a dumpysh priuacion of sense, and a feuer with a vehement horroure and colde doe ensue. Now were the pacient taken of a Feuer, withoute Colde, there were no great Daunger in the matter, for that accydente

commeth ofttyme, of a priuate cause, whych mooueth the accident. And where it is not possible. but the body should be replet, or vacant of superfluous humours, so it cannot be, but there should insue great difference, at that diuersity. For if thys kynde of breakyng, occupy a vacant body, the Paci
                           •
                        nt wyll be wythout Feuer: But if it fall to a repleat Body, laden wyth euill humours, the Physicians may thyncke the stroke to be daungerous, and hard of cure. For wee haue thys lesson of Auicen, saying: all Woundes,Daungerous woundes, how to know them. and Ulcers be daungerous. whych chaunce vpon superfluities of a wayward, and froward Body. And albeit, it be daungerous, if the Pacient be taken wyth a Feuer, at the beginning, yet is the matter more to be suspected, if he be inflamed wyth Feuers, three or foure dayes, after the stroke was gieuen, because thys should spryng of putrified Bloude, retayned wythin the Scalpe vppon the Rimmes, whych thyng is knowen by the increasing of the accidentes. Notwythstandinge, thys may bee also, whē sanious matter is a generating. For why, Hippocrates affyrmeth in hys Aphorismes,
                        
                           Hippocrates. Aphorismes.
                         that Dolours, and Feuers wyll happen, more at Generating of matter, than when it is generated. But thys may easely be disceuered: For here the accidents fall and be a layed, but there they be augmented and increased, Therefore, when sutch accidentes shall insue vppon a stroke, euen the same day, ye may well Iudge, that the breache or breakyng is complet. Whych if yee mynde to cure rightly, yee shall forthwyth prouyde these thynges before your eyes. Fyrste, when the matter is come to that poynct, that ye must make incision, feare not to cut the Wounde, after the maner of a triangle, or one ryght angle, or els of a crosse, and remooue the Fleshe from the Bones.How to cut to the ende to heale. When ye haue so done fill vp ye wound wyth small quisettes, well weate before in the whytes of Egges. Howbeit, note and obserue this alwayes, that the quisettes, whych shall touch the bone, must be weate in hoat Wyne, for feare of altering and spotting of ye bone: better than if they were weate in whytes of Egges, by reason of the coldnes. For why, Hippocrates saith. Frigidum inimicum neruis, ossibus, cerebro & spinali medullae: calidum vtile & amicum. Colde is an Ennemy to the Synewes,How colde hurteth. Bones, Teeth, Brayne, and the Nuke, or Marowe of the Backe, but heate is profitable and friendly: and therefore colde must be kept from the Skull, least we stumble at that blocke by errour, Now thys operacion fynished, yee shall geue the Pacient in commaundement, to rest him selfe after that maner vntill the next morning, prescribinge hym an order, how he shall rule himselfe, & hys diet. Hys dyet shalbe to eate Wheat bread, or tryed and boyled Barly wyth Almonde mylke,A dyet. and drynke boyled Borage water, for ye space of foure dayes: and after the fourth day is past, geue hym Wheaton, for Barly bread, dipped in Chicken broth, or broth of Mutton of the Weather, least the sycke be ouermutch weakned, with the slender diet. Now the next day, returne to your Pacient, & open his woūd gētly, whych done, search the Bone well and warely, wyth a searcher of seluer, whych must neyther be to blunt, to ouer runne the rimmes, or clifts neyther so small or fyne, that it should enter into them. Yee shall search it thus. Draw the Searcher to and fro, pretely vppon the Bone: and if it slyde playnly wythout stay, it is a sygne the Scalpe is saulfe and sounde.

But if it stay, and fynde some let, ye may then think well,How to serch a wound. that the bone is clouen and cut. But now, in as mutch as we speak of rimmes, and because they be dyuers, this place requireth, to distincte them properly, or euer we medle further in the cure.
                     Fissures or Chinkes, be caused in the heade two wayes: with a thyng, whych geueth a blunt stripe, or els wyth a thing, whych cutteth.Fissuries or chappes. If it bee wyth a thyng, that giueth a blunt stripe, the thyng properly, is called a clift or a ryuing. And if it be wyth a cut, it is called a chynke or a clift. And all these varry in length, shortnes, largenes, and smalnes, they vary also otherwyse. For euery of them, I say, the chinke and clift,A clift in the heade. may be wyth depression of the bone, or wythout depression. For an instrument, whych cutteth, may cause depression, namely, if it be thicke or blunt. And albeit, they agree in the former poynctes, yet they differ in this, that is to say, the clift, which is caused by a bruse, is euer thought to be with penetracion, or through going and percing of the bone, where it is not a lyke alway in a cut or incision. I say this of mens scalpes, and not of chyldren. For in chyldren, which be within seuen yeare of age: we may be deceyued, as we see by experience. For why, sutch sculles will be infolded,A note. betwene a mans Scull, and a voyes. because they be not yet hardned ne strengthned: and moysture also aboūdeth in them, whych property is not founde in mens scalpes that are come to ripe age. For mens Scalpes wyll ryue. and be cut through, rather than be infolded, by reason of the hardnes, and drought of the Bone. Wherefore, men that are come to hardnesse, are depryued of this, which is founde in tender age. And after what sort, euery of these may be cured, we shall declare orderly, when we haue fyrst premysed the intencions, whych must needes be obserued, if we intend warely, to eschue daungers in sutch cases. And as soone as we shalbe at poynct wyth thys, wee shall accomplyshe our promise, both of a ryuing or clyft, wyth the depression of the bone.
                     Presupposing then the regiment of lyfe, these be the chiefe and pryncipall intencions about thys cure: that is to wit, to conserue the complexion of the member in hys proper state, to prohibite Apostumacions, and to apply locall medicines fit for the purpose. Certes we may conserue the complexion, and rectify it, if it be decayed, wyth Emplasters,
                           Auicen.
                         as Auicen wryteth in the chapiter, of the wounding of the skin of the head. Et principium quidem consistit in emplastris, & erit rectificatio. &c. The beginning standeth in plasters, and so will the rectification be soone had. We shall preuent or put of apostumacions, if we shall worke the thynges, whych the Pacientes strength shalbe able to abyde and suffer, as we haue commaundement in the same place. And doubtles, the disposicion of the Body, shall away wyth it well inough, if we proceede no farther than till the cause of apostumation, be intercepted and cut of. These be the causes of an hoat apostumacion, Siphac,
                        What thing do anoy the brayn most, a gobbet of a bone, pryckinge the vtter Rimme, whych is called Dura mater, annoyaunce of tentes, colde approaching to the Rimmes, or Pannicules, plenty of meate and Drinke, and the secret euill (as they call it) whych I vnderstand, to be a certayne malignity of Complexion, and superfluities of froward bodyes: which we shall preuent & cut of by purgation and bloud

letting. The Pacient shall bee purged, according to the signification of his vryne.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         For why, that wyll shewe the humour, whych is excessyue in ye body, as we sayd in the cure of Ulcers. And as touching bloud letting it hath, as hee sayth, two intencions: the one to make euacuacion, and the other to prohibit, or wythdrawe. But where we treate of bloud letting, I pray you of good Fellowshyp, note thys well: for it shall greatly make for the preseruacion, and sauegard of your Pacient, whych is soare, and for your selfe also.
                     
                        A goodly note 
                              〈…〉
                            cure.Note, deerely beloued, that it may chaunce, that the sycke come vnder your handes, the same day he was wounded, or els after the fourth. From the fyrst day vnto the fourth exquisytely, you may vse dyuers bloud letting, because thys is the tyme, when matter causing Apostumation, vseth to flow▪ & turne agayne to ye place. And thys bloud letting must bee made in the common veyne, called Mediana, of the opposite arme. Here yee shall dyligently marke, and take heede, that yee erre not, in the signification of thys worde opposite, as some haue, whych were not seene in thys worde at all. For thys word opposite,
                        To let bloude on the contrary part, why it must be by reason. signifieth contrariety, as when a thynge is placed, ouer agaynst the contrary part. Wherefore, the partes of the ryghte syde, may not properly be opposite one to an other, wythin themselues, but parts of the right syde, to the partes of the left. Thys wyll appeere in the shape of mans body, whych is erected and fygured, after the maner of a Quadrant, albeeit, it bee not fully square and shaped wyth equality of corners, as is a true quadrant or square.M
                              •
                           n is made Geometrically in order. Now it is euident, that thys quadrangle, in maner is measured, wyth two Diameters, whych also properly bee opposite. So hauing respect to thys quadrangle, it shall be an easy matter to see▪ on whether part the veyne shall be opened. And thys bloud letting, as we sayd before, is made for two purposes, according as the cause requireth, that is to weete, to make euacuacion, or els to diuert or turne away the bloud to the opposite part, If your entent be to turne a syde the bloude, it must be done in the opposite part.Example of bloud le
                              •
                           ting. For example: When the Wounde is in the left syde, a veyne of the ryght syde shall bee opened: & contrarily, when the Wounde is in the ryght syde, a vayne of the left, whych must bee the common. On the other part, if your purpose be onely to make euacuation, yee shall worke the feate in the vayne, whych is most proper to the parte wounded. As bee the vaynes in both handes, called Cephalicae, that is. the head vaynes: whych wyl voide matter and bloud from the 
                           •
                        ead. Wherefore, they doe amysse, and euilly, yea, maliciously, who indifferently take bloud of the one, or other hand at the beginning, where the intent should be to diuert, and turne away the bloud by fleubotomy. For they make euacuation, and turne not away the bloud, to the contrary part, and so consequently cause they the feebled member,Poore men are corrected, for great mēs faultes. to bee more feeble, and decayed in sutch wyse, that other members send thyther theyr superfluityes, as hee sayth, Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui: What fault so euer bee committed amongest the hygh counsayles, the poore People suffereth for it. For it is certayne, that the member is feebled, as soone as it is wounded.

Wherefore in so doing, they open the way to apostumation whyles they thyncke to preuent and stop it, and become occasion of the Pacients death. And thus craftely worke the Emperikes, and Heathen Uagaboundes, coueting not onely to slea, and sup the Chrystian bloud, but vtterly to extinguishe the Chrystian name, if it were possible. Yet a Gods name, wee can abyde to call them vnto vs, and intertayne them wyth al gentlenes, where we should not only forbid them the arte, but also treade them vnder oure feete, and make them bond Slaues, as the Turkes doe vs Chrystian men, when they take vs, and vse vs worse than Dogges.
                     Now, in case the Body bee full, and replenished wyth humours,When to let bloud, two tymes in one place, & why. ye shall let your Pacient bleede agayne, in the same place, where yee let him bloud before. But if the apostumation were in the clensing places, as vnder the arme holes, Flankes, and eares, I would in no wyse let my Pacient blede, for that malady: because I fynde not, why I shoulde so doe. For an Apostumacion may not a rise, in the emunctory places, but by euilnesse or malignity of some pryncipall member, or by reason of the superfluities of some member adiacent. If the place be apostumated through matter, expelled from a principall member: Fleubotomy were not to the purpose, because the matter myght bee reuoked inwarde, whych Nature had put forth. Neyther should it be well to the purpose also, if the swelling came of superfluityes, of ye next parts thereunto. For we should put the matter from the vnnoble and petite member, and burdein agayne the pryncipall wyth it, whereof would ensue great inconueniences and daungers. Wee bee also fobidden to vse repercussiues, for feare of the lyke daungers, in the sayde emūctory or rūning places. But if I had occasion (in as mutch as we liue, and haue a doe wyth nyce, foolishe, and wylfull people, which cal for things to theyr saufety, in sutch wyse, that we must woorke agaynst our Rules, to satisfy theyr lustes) I would open in that case, the Basilica, or lyuer veine. And it shall make no matter, whether yee open the veyne in the ryghte syde, or left, so the Apostumation bee in the vpper part of the body: but in case the apostumation be in the lower part,If an apostumation be in ye midst of the vpper part of the body, then to bleede eyther on ye left arme, or else right, is well. bloud may bee taken from the Lyuer veynes, in the foote of the opposite parte, accordinge as yee shall thyncke it most conuenient. Howbeit, it wyll be surer, and farther from pearill, to take bloud of the Lyuer, in the same parte of the Foote. For it were ieoperdy, least some humidite, retayned in the glandeous Fleashe, might by stirring and angering of the matter, cause Apostumations. Wel, I haue sayd inough, as touching bloud letting, now wee wyll to the locall Medicines, whych shall be declured in the cure. Wherefore, let vs come to the cure of a breacke in ye Scalpe, namely of a clyfte, or a ryuing: and fyrste here marke thys Fygure for bloude lettynge, heere after thys place.
                     
                        
                        
                           Under ye ton are .iij. veines, which ar good to be opened against Apoplexia Angina, & stopping of ye sprits of asperation, and respiraciō, and al the euils of the mouth, tōgue, and throate.

                                 R
                                 The veine called Sciatica, & cōmeth frō beneth the Knee▪ downward, & are .ij. in number. & are good to be opened in warme water to help ye swelling of the secret members & also ye payne called Sciatica.
                                 
                                 Q
                                 
                                    Saphena, commeth from the holownes vnder the kne, as Sciatica doth. It is in ye inside of ye ancle and is opened for the Splene Matrix. &c.
                                 P
                                 The vaine of ye forehead, to be opned against frensy Megrē ache in the hed forgetfulnesse, &. soarenesse in the eyes. &c. 
                                       〈◊〉
                                     this vain springeth from the outward throate veine.
                                 O
                                 
                                    Vena externa or Cephalica in the arme, is opened with a large cut, not dep to let forth grosse matter, and to clense the head, from al greeues, as falling sicknes dimnes of head. &c.
                                 A.
                                 Mediana. which is in the myddest is the chief or gain or spring of the bloude, it must bee opened to helpe the sides, Midrife, stomack, hoat feuers &c
                                 D
                                 
                                    Vena interna. or Basilica, cōmyng from the heart and lyuer, by this veyne is a synew like to it, in which is cō
                                    tayned ye spyxite of lyfe, & vnder ye same are mighty sinewes, therefore it is perilous to open ye veyne but by great knowledge, but it help to be opened agaynst pleuricy, pestilence. &c.
                                 B
                                 A braunch of Cephalica in the hand.
                                 H
                                 
                                    Funis brachij.
                                 
                                 G
                                 
                                    Saluatella.
                                 
                                 E
                                 These .iij. last are of smale force to 
                                       •
                                    open, because little bloud doth cū from thē, but yet to open these smal vaines in warme water, doth helpe Apoplexia.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        But yet or euer we take the cure in hand, I think it mutch appertayning to our duety, to shewe what way we mynde to follow in the cures. For I haue found two, after Auicen, whereof the one doth only moyste, and the other only dry. But to say truth, neyther of them liketh me, by it selfe alone. For if I vsed the way of moysting, in a bruse, I might well doubt of putrefaction, because thys way greatly promoteth putrefaction. For it is done wyth oyles, and yolkes of Egges,When to dry 
                              •
                            whē to moyst a wound in ye head. whych cause putrefaction in a brused place. On the other part, the way of dryuyng downe, wyth Aqua vitae, & the pouder, whych Auicen describeth in the Chapyter, De incisione cutis, before alledged, doth not fully content me, though it haue two parts: whereof the one defendeth from putrefaction, but ye other parteth not the brused. Therefore, because I would not fall into eyther extreamity of onely drying, or only moystyng▪ I haue gathered a certayn way of them both, consistyng betwene them both. For it shall altogether haue vertue, to dry and to moyst, because as I iudge, medycines for the head, must actually moyst, and drye potencially. For by the help of drought, we preserue the complexion of the bone, and pannycles whych be dry of complection, as Galen wryteth. And by moysture, wee procure dygestion, if any thyng were turned and brused. All these thynges shall we obtayne, wyth Rosed Hony strayned, Aqua vitae, & the pouder, whych we shal order in ye cure. Neyther must you maruayle at the matter, my frend Soarenesse, and your Felowes, as dyd one, when he heard a man say, that Hony was moyst in feeling, and drying in vertue and workyng. Uerely of hys corpulency, if I may so say, it moysteth, but as touching his qualityes & vertue, hys operacion is drying. But it was no wonder, that the young Phylosopher, dyd not perceyue the matter: Alas he had not yet read ouer bookes of simples, neyther the Prynciples of Philosophy. Lady Ignoraunce caused him to muse, but not to search the cause, as did the Phylosophers, as Aristotle wryteth, in his supernaturals. He woulde not haue marueyled, if hee had read Aristotle concerning the mynglinge of the Elementes: whereby hee shoulde haue easely perceyued, that Hony is of the Qualityes, whereof I reported it to be, by reason of the complection in mynglyng, if it bee aduisedly consydered, according to his essence and Nature. And if there shall bee any man, whych shall not perceyue throughly, the Nature of the Symples, contayned in Medicines, yet let hym assuredly perswade hymselfe, that I wyll descrybe no other way of Cure, than I haue wrytten, and haue got thereby, both profyt and good well spent tyme: yee haue heard the cautelles and prouisions, whych I recken necessary. Nowe wyll I orderly descrybe you the cure.
                     Then, when yee fynde a Clift, by reason of a Bruse, yee shall obserue thys order: if ye mynde to cure it rightly, in hys kynde. Fyrste,Beware of sharpe prickyng bones in the head for hurting of ye Brayne. before all other things, cōsider whether it be wyth depression, & infolding of ye bone, or not. For if it be with depression, or infolding, all that, whych is brused, must needes be taken forth: because it woulde otherwyse prouoke some

apostumacion. For why, in that case it coulde not be otherwyse, but some gobet of bone would be vnder the scalp, pricking the vtter rimme, or Dura mater. And in thys case heare them not, whych shall counsayle & perswade, to remooue part of the brused, and to leaue part. For these men cannot remoue the whole cause, in as mutch as in euery little part of ye brused bone, may be some shiuer, whych by priking wyll come to apostumacion. Therefore to auoyde, and eschue the sayd cause, let vs take forth all the brused. But if the clift be founde, wythout depressing of the bone, ye may not cut out altogether, but only make an hole in that part, where the matter shall most easely come forth. And to the performaunce of thys worke, yee haue three proper instrumentes,Sawe, Chesill, and wimble for the hed the Sawe, the Chesill, and Wimble, amongest whych we haue most neede of the Wimble, because I fynde in it more cō
                        modity than in other instrumentes.
                     Fyrst, it will lightly make ye hole, yea, and that without mutch molesting of the Pacient: whych thyng cannot be done, without raspatory. Againe it wyll make an hole,The Wymble is best to perse the heade, to purge forth matter, if it be vsed discreetly. and euentacion, meete for the Passage of matter. Howbeit, there is one great discommodity, in thys instrument, whych is, it wyll lyghtly pearce the Brayne, if it bee not handled of a ryght experte Worke man, in that behalfe. But thys chaunceth vnder hys Handes, who alwayes turneth the Wimble about, after one maner fashyon, where he should vse a trimmeling kynde of moouing the Wymble, for if the Wimble passe through. by the rounde moouing, and so touch the Dura mater, it will cut and rent the same, which doth lyghtly happen in a tremblyng mouing. For if it touched the Dura mater, it myght wel prycke her, but not pearce her through.A witty heade and a steddy hand, is fit for a good Chirurgian, Wherefore, it would leaue her whole and sounde. And therefore, who so would exercise thys feate, ought to haue a light hande, and witty head togeather, wyth a sad Iudgement, and not to be taken from among them, that haue vsed to handle grosse matters, and occupacions: as Digging, or Plowing, heauing of Tymber, and currying of Horses. For theyr handes be hardened wyth labours, and may not lightly feele when it is through the bone, if they lay lode on theyr worke. And therefore thys work must be done, wyth most exquisite diligence, and circumspection, least wee slea Men, whyles we labour to preserue them. For thys cause, you must gieue some attendaunce to them, whych handle thys woorke manlike: so that ye may the better, and wyth more sauegard, attempt thys cure afterward. Now, as soone as the scalpe shalbe holed, ye shal wyth al speede possible,Make hast in the 
                              •
                           ure of the head to defend ye ayre, which wyll corrupt. power in so mutch Rosed Hony strayned, as shall be able to couer the rimme of the Brayne. Thys hast is made, least the Ayre be entred in, and made alteracion in Caphelica, next power Aqua vitae vpon the Hony, till the hole shalbe fylled, whereunto ye shall cast so mutch of thys pouder, as may ryse the depth of a Knyffes thicknes, from the Rimme.
                     R. Aloes, Epatike, Sarcocol, Mirrhe, ana. ʒ.i.ss. Incense. ʒ.i. Dragons bloud. ʒ.ss· and. ℈.ss. of Saffron myngle them together, and ponder them fynely, for the vse we spake of. All thys doe we, to saue the Complexion of the bone, and pannicles, after the mynde of Auicen, and Galen, as is alledged before. When ye haue thus done, take so mutch of a Sponge, as may bee

sufficient to fill the hole: and thys is done for two considerations. The fyrst is, to exclude the noyaunce of tentes.Work 
                              〈◊〉
                            in ye 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of the head. For a Sponge wyl gyue place to the stretchyng of the brayne, and tentes can not, but somewhiles cause apostumacion, by reason of their resistaunce and stubbernesse. The other cause is, that the matter is sone drawen forth, from the pannicles. For it myght alter, if it remayned any whyle, or els be imprisoned, whych is no rare and straunge thyng, to see daily in the cures of these lyght and commō Practicians. After al thys, fil the wounde wyth Aqua vitae, pouder, & linte: applying vpon the same a peece of cloth, anoynted wyth Vnguentum Basilicum aboue described, to the intent the medicines be retayned there. And when yee haue acccomplished all these thynges in order, lay thys plaster on the head shauen.
                     Take Camomell, Melilote,A very good emplaster for the head. ana. M.iij. Mirtilles .M.ij. Cipresse nuts .xv. red Roses, and Wormewood. ana. M.i. Beane meale, & Lupine meale, ana. ℥.iiij. Bray all that ought to bee brayed, and seeth them altogether▪ in newe, whyte Wyne, and Barbers Lee, of lyke porcions, vnto sutch time as it shall be lyke a Cerote. After thys, spreede it on a cloth warme▪ and apply it to ye head. Thys plaster is vsed for many purposes. Fyrst, to comfort the head, by strengthing of the complexion, next to defende from colde, and rectify the ayre, whych is inclosed. Thys is it that Auicen sayth:Take heede of colde, in a Wounde of the head. 
                        Oportet vt vehemens caueatur f
                              •
                           igus, et
                              •
                           am in aestate, quoniam in eo est timor magnus. Yce must beware of vehemēt colde, though it were in Sommer, because there is great feare in it. He meaneth that the Ayre must bee rectified, namely, whych entreth into the head, at the opening of the Scalpe. For some wyll go in. whether yee wyll or not to fulfill the roome, in as mutch as nature cannot suffer any place to be vacant, or empty, as the Phylosopher doth wryte. He meaneth not that the whole ayre of the Chamber, oughte to be rectifyed, as some Practicians thincke, and woulde fayne be seene to be circumspect in the matter. Thyrdly, to procure digestion. Fourthly,There is no place empty, for ayre filleth euery open place. to drawe sanious matter, as soone as it is generated, and retayned in the Sponge, Fifthly, to resolue the matter, whych is wont to cause Apostumacion. For oft tymes (as sayth Galen, whom Auicen citeth) apostumacion foloweth whatsoeuer instrument ye vse, whych yee shall preuente and eschue, if ye apply the former plaister on the head. And thys may easely appeare, if a man consider diligently, the Simples in the playsters. Now, thus shall you proceede in the cure, vnto sutch tyme as the Cicatrice shall be produced: alway iterating and renewing, the former medicines, as often as they shalbe olde, and dismitted. But in asmutch, as the fleshe groweth here aboue hys place, ye shall represse and keepe it downe, wyth Roche Alum brent, applying it alway, in the circuite of the superflous flesh. But moderate the Alum in small quantity, that it cause no dolour,To correct proude fleshe. by reason of his vytinge, & mordicacion. Thys is the selfe same maner, whych hetherunto hath bin vsed in cures, wherewyth haue bin holpen aboue many hundred persons, in our tyme: but I neede not heere make rehearsall of theym, sith a manyfest thyng shall neede no Witnesses. But I say, I remember one thing, whych was almost forgotten negligently, and is necessary

to be obserued about opening of a scalpe, whych is thys. When yee open the scalpe, in sutch cures, and make an hole for the foresayd purposes: be you ware that yee touch not any seame of the scalpe.Fiue seames in the scalpe. They bee fyue in number, two vncomplet and false, and three true seames. The fyrst is named Coronal, of a crowne, because the crownes be worne in that place, & it is in the former part of ye head: the second Lambda or Lauda, lyke ye Greeke letter, λ, which is in the hinder part of the head. The thyrd true seame, Sagittal,
                        
                           Sagittalis sine discriminalis.
                         like an arrow, vnder the partyng of the haire, whence one ende toucheth the seame Coronall, and the other Lambda, in the hynder part: the two false seames, be at sydes in the regions, or plattes in the temples, Now in case any clyfte or chynne, touch eyther of the two, we must vs
                           •
                         mutch diligence, and c
                           •
                        rcumspection. Note here also, that clyftes and chynnes, may chaunce in the sayd seames: either in length, whych is, when the clyft together wyth the seame, make .iiij streyght angles: or els in breadth. If it chaunce in length, the bone must needes be bored, and holed on both sides, of the seame, because the particion of Dura mater may not 
                           •
                        ee touched in the Woorke. I say it must needes be holed on bothe sydes for as mutch as it may be, that bloud be fallen from the veines, in both partes, and there be congeled. For if we would feele, or worke in the seame where Dura mater is bound and stayed (as do they,How suffocacion in the Brayne may come. whych come fro practice to Chirurgi) we might well feare and doubt, of suffocacion of the brayne, because the rimme being losed, should presse it downe, and so choake it. And that we should make no sutch loosing of Cephaljca in the place, we are admonished by Cornelius Celsus, in the Chap. De calua
                              •
                           iae curatione. Howbeit, he doeth it in consideration of Hippocrates confession, where to the profit of hys posterity, he confesseth that he was deceyued, working in a seame. Where fore, yee shall not worke in any seame, least yee be deceyued, as was Hippocrates, Prynce of Physicions. But if ye fissure or membrana chaunce in bredth yee shall make holes in the same, in both sides of the seame: alwayes obseruing thys, that neyther particion, neyther seame be touched at all. When these holes be made, yee shall finishe the Cura, according to the order and maner, as was before prescribed. And as for the thinke, yee shall doe in lyke maner, if ye be assured, that it perce and run through the scalpe. On the other syde, if it go not through that part of the scalpe, whych they call vitrea tabula, that is, the Glassy table but only come to the Spongious bone: Ye shall proceede to the cure, wyth Aqua vitae, and the pouder alone, whych shalbe sufficient. Now if yee list, ye may playne and abate the bone▪ about the riuen place, whereof wyll followe sooner incarnacion, and causing of the Cicatrice. These be rules, and orders in ye cures, whych are not mutch vsed in hard maladies proceeding of a cause primitiue. Nowe therefore, haue you that, whych ye so earnestly haue required: A gifte in myne opinion, as great as my poore knowledge is able to bryng to passe shortly for the help of mankinde, whych is in Soarenesse, but yet I dyd keepe these thynges long wyth my selfe, to the intent I myght once at least, so soone content your myndes. But whether I haue so done, as myne entent was,

I am vncertayne. For why, I am become in these treactises, as one that buildeth hys house in the middes of the Market steede, about the whych, as touching the heyght, and breadth, among the lookers thereupon aryse alteracion, & controuersy, whereas the Builder thought hys worke of conuenient proporcion. So feare I, least perchaunce my doing, shall seeme to some, abiect and base, and to some other, to obscure or darke. But certes, in asmutch as I am not able to please al sortes, I thought it best, to retaine the meane way in speaking, specially sith I neuer lyked, to flye ouer ye tops of trees: but playnely to go a soft pace, & as it were wyth a leaden foote, to the intent, that who so listed to ouer get me, myght the easier attayne thereunto, wythout paynefull trauell in theyr Iourney. And thus gentle Soarenesse: wyshing God to sende thee health, and vs to meete meryly agayne: I make an ende wyth a Cautery good for thy purpose: and a rule to help the stone.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     But fyrst how make you the red pouder, for the parting water?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        YOu must make it thus. ℞. Of water wherewith Goldsmithes doe seperate golde and siluer, whych is greene,A goodly water of greate strength, to se
                              •
                           perate metall good for to cō
                           sume rotten fleshe. when it hath seperated the mettalles: of thys take. ℥.vj. of Quicksiluer. ℥.iiij. myngle them together, and put them eyther into a little stone Limbecke, or Still, or els into one of Uenice glasse, well luted wyth clay, bothe the head of the Still, and the parte whereupon it standeth, and also the receyuer, whereinto it droppeth, that none passe away. Distill it on a softe fyre, in a close▪ Furneyce. Your parting water is thus made.
                     R. Salt Peter, Alum Roche, and Romayne Uitriall, ana. l i.ij. beate them together in a Morter, then put it into a double glasse, well luted, or so stopped, that no ayre do transpire, or go forth: thys wyll make a singuler good Water, drop one gutta or drop vppon the grounde, and you shall see it boyle, as though it were on the fyre. These are profitable, to the worke of Chirurgj, in foule soares, and Ulcers: here is good occasion mynistred, to speake of making of Medicines. But I referre that, to the booke of Compoundes, where there are not onely good store of them, but also good medycines, no lesse profitable to Chirurgj, than needefull to Phisicke.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     Now how make you Lee, to open, in the maner of a Cautery?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        MAke it after thys fashion.A good Lee for a Cautery R. A prety rounde Tub of two gallons, wyth a hole in the bottome. stopped, put into thys Tub, ashes of the Ashe tree. Make a hoale in the middes, to put in a pottell or more, of vnslecked Lyme, and powre vpon it quickly hoat Lee, as mutch as shall couer the Lyme, and wyth all speede couer it wyth Ashes, that ye ayre may be kept in, for two dayes: the

thyrd vnstop the hole, and let the water distill, from the Lyme and Asshes, and keepe thys in a close Uessell. Thys wyll quickly open any part that is soare, as apostumacions wythout payne: and if an Egge wyll not sinke in it, but fleete, then it is good Lie, for the purpose.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     THere are good pouders, profitable to your Arte, I pray you learne mee some of them, to clense dead Flesh: and as for ye booke of Compoūds, I wyll reade that at more leysure.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        A good pouder for rotten fleshe.I Wyll teache you to make a trosse, to clense rotten Fleshe, whych is. R. Water of Plataine. ℥.vi. Mercury well sublimated, & made in pouder. ℥.ss. Seeth them in a little Pan, to the consuming of the fourth part: then let it stand .xij. houres, after kneade it with a little▪ Beanemeale, and roul
                           •
                         them vp into a trosse. Note also, that you must mingle so mutch Uermilion, wyth the Beanemeale, as wyll colour it: dry thys trosse, in an Ouen, or hoat Sunne.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     How make you a potenciall Cautery?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     TO make a Cautery. R. Of the strongest Sope Lie, asmutch as wyll suffyse,A potenciall Cautery. put it in a brasen Kettle. Put thereunto. ʒ.i ss. Romayne Uitriall, let all seeth vntill the Lyquor be consumed, then gather vp the Fome, that doth remayne: and keepe thys to open Apostumacions. For in opening wythout payne, thys doth excell all other.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     BUt that the tyme is farre spent, and I haue put you to mutch paynes, els I would haue learned some thyng, to haue taken away Grauell & Stone, from the Kidneys, Raynes, and Bladder.
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        AT thys present, I haue no tyme conuenient, to serue that turne at large: it requireth no small trauell. For like as among all mortall euills, the Stone is the greatest: so the cure is most cunning. Notwythstanding, I shall by Gods grace intreate, hereafter at large,For the stone a good regiment. the diet, the proper medicines, cure, and cutting of the stone. But yet in the meane tyme, let the Pacient keepe hym warme. Eate no salt fyshe, or Fleshe burnt, rosted meates, hard Cheese, or slimie thyngs, ingenderers of viscious humours, grosse or clammy▪ Or drynke hoat Wynes, or eate Uenison, or any water Foule, or bee costiffe bellied, or keepe theyr Backe hoat. &c. The signes of the Stone are euident, as paynes in the Raynes, Bladder, Yarde, Loynes. &c. Wyth paynfull lamenting and crying, stopping of the Uryne. &c. The causes are many, as of Parentes, of euill Diet, wyth many euill accidentes. The vryne often tymes doth declare the euils of those partes, as Hippocrates in the thyrd part of the .ix. of hys Aphorismes affirmeth,
                           Hippocrates. Why matter commeth frō the yarde. saying: Si sanguinem aut pu
                              •
                            mingat, renum aut vesicae exulcerationem significat. To make water, or pisse bloud, or els filthy matter: it signifyeth

Soares and Byles, eyther in the Raynes, or els in the Bladder: and assuredly, sutch Soares, and Ulcers,
                           Hyppocrates. why matter commeth from the yarde. come from the stone the whych doe excoriate, fret, cut, and cause both Bloude and Matter wythout vryne, to come forth at the Yarde. But sometyme pure bloud is pissed, of the breaking of a Ueyne: and sometime from Women, for the secret infirmity, or naturall passion, through clensing of termes. But grauell in the Uryne,Why men doe pysse bloud. betokeneth the stone in the Bladder, sayth Hippocrates. lib. iij. Aphorism. Quibus in vrina velut arenuae subsistunt, ijs vesica laborat. calculo. Furdermore, it is skant possible, for olde people to be helped in the Raynes, or Bladder,A reward for Lecherie. for ye stone. Specially in great glotonous people, as Drunkardes with Ale and Beere: or els them, which were neuer satisfied with Lechery in theyr youth &c. Howbeit, to speake a little, for the help thereof, two thynges must bee considered. Fyrst, the preseruatiue. Secondly, the curatiue.Preseruatiue Curatiue. The preseruatiue, by good Dyet, and wholsome regyment of Lyfe, as what yee do eate, the maner of eating and drinking. The tyme, the place, the quality and the quantity of the sayd meates and drinkes: as meate of light digestion cleane Bread wythout Bran. Not to bee to mutch hoat or colde, neyther mutch trauell, or sitting still idle, but good exercise. &c. And note, when the stone is in ye Bladder, then it is harder than that whych is in the Raynes, and more burnt. Now, if your grauell come of heate,
                           Galens Syrupe for the stone. or through hoat accidents, as wyth hoat Wynes, Labour. &c. Then follow. C. Galens Syrupe, whych is most excellent also, in thys our age, and is thus made.
                     R. Syrupe of Endiue, of Sorell, of water Lillies, ana. ℥.v. the Waters of Fenell, of Endiue, ana. ℥.i. mingle them together, and geue the Pacient to drynk, Morning and Euening: and anoynt the Raynes, wyth Galens colde oyntment, whych is wrytten in the Compoundes.
                  
                  
                     Soarenesse.
                     But what remedy, when the Stone commeth of colde?
                  
                  
                     Chirurgi.
                     
                        
                           GALEN must put to hys helping hande, whych wylleth,When the stone cōmeth of colde. when sutch contraries do happen, when nature is so chaunged from heate into coldnesse, or if it were colde from the beginning: then to help wyth warme thynges, to dissolue, and thys was hys reamedy. R. Theriacae Galeni. 
                        ʒ.i. Syrupe of the Barkes of the Citri. ℥.i. warme water,Good potage, for the stone. as of Carduus Benedictus. &c. ℥.ij. mingle them together, and geue your Pacient, or take it your selfe ten dayes: For it is no lyght trifling Medicine, but most effectuall, and substanciall, inuented by Galen. And lyke as in hoat burning of the stoue, to drynke cleane Whay, or Butter mylke is good,Men do wante prouidence, to foresee their own euilles. and to eate Purslen: euen so in the case of coldnesse, Hares fleshe sodden with Capers, and young Nettles is best, and a morninges to eate halfe an Ounce of newe drawen Cassiafistula myngled wyth Suger: and to drynk Whay of Goats mylke. Oh that Men would foresee, the euilles agaynst Nature, as Feuers, Poxe, Leapers, Goutes, Stone, Cankers. &c. And take in hande to helpe them, in theyr fyrst Spryng, for then they would bee soone helped.

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
As example. Fyre and Water, are good Seruauntes, but euill Maysters. For if they get the victory, who can rule them? the proofe is manifest: for it is easy to quench a fyre in the beginning:Fire and water be good seruauntes, but euill maisters. but when it hath gotten holde, of the Thacke, Sparres, Beames. &c. then it is to late. So when vyle humours haue incensed the bloud. Ueynes. &c. And haue gotten the vyctory, rebelling against good nature: then it is eyther to late, or els to hard, to put them away, and bring nature agayne, to hys good estate. Yet it hurteth little the Physicions, Chirurgians, and Apothecaries, to vtter theyr knowledge, and also theyr Wares, wyth promises fayre and false, in matters past cure. For golde hath no corrupcion, although it be gotten wyth a corrupted Conscience: But to our matter. Take thyngs in due tyme, for tyme wyll neuer be called againe, do what you can. Howbeit while as the body is yet lyuing, there is left some help to releeue, or repayre it agayne: and in sutch case of grauel, or ye stone, what haue euer done more pleasure, than Clisters, or Enemaes, mynistred beneath at the Fundament? nothing truly, cutting excepted. Yet in cutting, vnlesse the Chirurgian be very cunnyng,Cutting of ye stone, is perilous. the Pacient wil soone cry: Quare de vulua eduxisti me? And although the Chirurgian haue great knowledge, yet one Pacient doth skant scape among an hundred, happy man by hys dole. On the other side, there be sutch bodyes, when they are newly clensed, and deliuered from Grauell, or the stone: eftsoones the bodies are sutch, that they haue it agayne as paynfully, as at the first tyme. And some of those bodies, haue the property of the North wynde, in drying, or turning into dust: And other some haue the property of Frost,Example, to coagulate, to make colde, and turne soft thynges into hardnesse, as Ise is. Therefore in sutch euilles doe thus. Make a Clyster after thys maner.
                     R. Milium 
                              •
                           olis, or els the Berryes of Alkakengi. ℥.vi. cleane running water.A goodly Clister for to help the stoue 
                        l i.iiij. seeth thys vntill the Water be halfe consumed, then strayne it, of thys water take a Pynte or more, for your Clister, putting thereunto the Oyles of Dill, Camomell, and new Butter, ana. ℥.ij. and a little Salt: thus is your Clister fynished, and made, mynister it warme but not skaldyng. Though thys seeme a playne Clister, yet it is marueylous good in working: and clenseth not only grauell, but also helpeth the Cholicke, and paynes in the Guttes. When. yee haue mynistred thys, then followinge wythin three dayes, mynister thys, for it is of great vertue.
                     R. Of the decoction of Mallowes, Pari
                           •
                        tory, Colewortes, Holihocke, Smalage,Another synguler good Clister. Sitrach, Polipodium, Carduus benedictus. Alkakengi feede of eche lyke quantity of these. l i.i. Oyles of Dill, of Camomell, of Lilles, ana. ℥.i.ss. Butter. ℥.ij. Hiera simplex. 
                        ʒ i. and a little Salt, mingle all togeather, and warme put into the Clister bladder, and Mynister, as is aforesayd. If you haue not thys choyce of Oyles, you may take cōmon oyle of Oliues. Thys Clyster is most excellent good, for the stone and grauell: it hath vertue to open, cleanse, waste, and skower wythout daunger, peryll, or hurt. When thys is done speedely, haue thys Cataplasme at hande, and warme apply it to the payned place: whether it be in ye Raynes, or the lowest parte of the Belly, or Flanks, let it be done oftentyme, haue two in store, to lay vnto the place warme, one after an other, it is thus made in good order.
                     
                        ℞. The Leaues, and Stalkes of Prassium, of Mallowes, of Holyhock ana. M.iij. sodden in the Broath,A good Cacaptaine for the kene. wherein a Weathers head hath bin sodden. Seeth herein also the rootes of Mallowes, well beaten in a Morter. l.i. the Muscilage of Fenigreeke, and Flaxe seede. ana. l.v. then let it bee strayned forth strongly, to thys Iuyce put the Oyles of Dill, Camomell, whyte Lyllyes. ana. ℥.iiij. freshe Butter. ℥.vj. Hony. ℥.v. boyle all togeather in a cleane Pan, put in Bran of Barly, and Meale, temper all wyth a stycke, vntill it come to the thicknesse of soft Paste, spread it in two seuerall Cataplasmes, and warme apply one of them after an other, to the dolorous place. And when one is colde, then apply on th'other oftentimes, thys is of a singuler operation: wyth thys, that great learned Man, mayster Doctor Marianus hath done mutch good,A drynke for the stone. and thys I haue also proued many tymes. Then to make ye matter perfect, geue your Pacient to drynk Benedictae laxatiuae 
                        ʒ.vj. tempered wyth cleane odoriferous, warme whyte Wyne, a quarter of a Pynte or more, when thys is done: wrap hym in warme clothes, wyth head well couered, and so let hym sweat. And thys clenseth the Raynes, and Bladder, equall wyth any other: except you wyl hasard your Lyfe, in cutting. Furdermore, note a great secret, whych I do disclose for the sake of mankynde. Let the Pacient haue the stilled Waters, of Saxifrage, Parietary, Persily, Filipendula, and Smalage, altogether. ana. ℥.iij. and put into thys water, thys precious pouder following.A most worthy pouder for the stone. ℈.i.ss. or. ℈. R. Persily rootes cleane washed and scraped, I meane theyr ryndes, and Persily seede, ana. ʒ.vj or more, and. ʒ.viij. of the Flowers of Iringium, or the Sea Thistil, and also Iringium rootes, and the rootes of Carduus Benedictus. ana. ʒ.ss. Cut your rootes fynely and thyn, and put all together in a close vessell, into the Ouen, vntill they bee dry, and then make pouder: keepe it close from Ayre. And when occasion doth serue, temper your foresayd quantity into your Waters, or els wyth whyte Wyne or Chicken broth, drynk it warme. Also note well thys Syrupe for ye stone, wherein ye Pacient may take euery second nyght warme.A Syrupe for the stone. ℥.ij. R. Rootes of Holyhocke. ℥.iiij. the Leaues of Mallowes, Filipendula and Parietary. ana. M.ij. the seede of Persyly, Fenegreeke, and Flaxe. ana. ℥.i. Iuiubes in number .xxx. cleane scraped Lyquoryce. l.i. the rootes of Sparagus, Carduus Benedictus, Iringium, Persyly, and Fenyll. ana. ℥.ij.ss. seeth all these in .x.l j. wayght of cleane running, or Well water, vnto the thyrd part be wasted: then strayne it, and put vnto thys Decoction. l.i.ss. of cleane whyte Suger, styrre it, and make your Syrupe, and keepe it in a close double Glasse. These foresayd thynges are excellent good, to bee sodden in cleane whyte Wyne, puttyng thereunto. l.i. of the whyte Guaicum rased, and put in a Uessell of three gallons, made close in the mouth: and so put into a fayre great hollow Caldron of water, and so to seeth foure houres, then take it from the fyre, and let it stand vntill it bee colde. Then open it, and strayne it, and keepe it close, to drynke at all tymes.
                     And thus also hath Rychard Bulleyn, a zealous Louer of Physike,
                           Rychard Bulleyn hys practice for the stone. more for the consolation & help of th'afflicted sicke people, being poore, then for ye
                        
lucre and gayne, of the Money of the Welthy and Ryche, written. Thys Man I say, although he professeth comfortable Cordialles, and Heauenly Medicines for the Soule, being a Deuine: yet he hath good Experience of many Infirmities, and Sicknesses, infecting the Bodyes of Mankynde, and hath done many goodly Cures, whych I doe leaue vnwrytten, both for the proiixity of tyme, and also for that no adulacion, flattery, or any priuate affection should appeere, or be suspected in him the aucthour hereof towardes hym the sayd Rychard Bulleyn, because hee is hys naturall borne Brother: but to the matter, hys Medycine for the Grauell in the Raynes, and Stone. And thus hee wryteth in hys prety Worke, which if it please GOD, shall hereafter come abroade to the profit of the commō wealth, of the Englishe Nation. And thys is hys compendious order: Sayth hee, the great Dolour, Phlegmon, or Ulcer of the Raynes by the whych Raynes, Uryne is conueyed into the Bladder. &c. or the Stone in the Bladder: doe cause great paynes in making of Uryne, whych Uryne is often stopped, or els pisseth little at once, with excoriation, and Bloude. Where grauell, and ragged stones, comming of grosse, salt, hoat matter, viscuous humours: after long hoat burning Feuers, euill Diet, Cheese, olde poudered Beefe, Bakon, Uenison, salte Fishe, hoat Wynes haue bin vsed in Diet. The stone is oftener in the Bladders of the leane hoat Men, which haue larger vesselles, then in fat persons hauing small vesselles, and colde moyst fat bodies. &c.
                     
                        Two thinges considered in the stone, for the cure of the same.The stone, sayth he, after the Mynde of Galen, in the Raynes is lighter, lesser, softer, and redder, declyning somewhat into Graynes, but in the Bladder, it is greater, heauier, harder, greeuouser, in colour whytishe, or more adust, and both these are daungerous, and skant curable. After one is .xl. yeare olde: as sayth Hippocrates. Aphoris. Quicunque nephretici sunt, non sanantur post quadraginta annos: Who so hath the passion in the Raynes, after .xl. yeares, is past cure: the regiment in the cure is double. The fyrste is, to prohibite the generacion of the stone. The second is to displace, or remooue it, when it is growen. The fyrst intencion hath fyue thynges, not naturally, directly contrary agaynst the stone. As ayre, grosse, mysty, cloudy. &c. to be fled▪ for it doth ingender grosse matter.
                     Meates and Drynkes, as grosse Wyne, and salte meates, burnt, things, colde water, whych wyll bryng grosse matter, and breede the stone.
                     Labour immoderate, to mutch excercise, which ingrosseth the bloude:
                     Solitarinesse, mutch study, no trauell, or Lechery immoderate, which are great enemies to nature.
                     Great affliction of the mynde, watching, fasting. &c.
                     To help these euilles, doe thus, as followeth.
                     Use meates of light digestion, in due tyme, place, and order.
                     Moderate labour betwene meales, to help digestion, and make the body strong: and to beware of Listes, Wrastlinges. &c. that wyll hurt the body, being vsed immoderately.
                     
                        Of all thynges to beware of Idlenesse, the mother of euilles, and nourisher of as many sicknesses to the body, as are caused through glottony: & specially, of to mutch copulacion carnall.
                     Use pleasaunte Musicke, and thynges to delight the spirites: for Melancholie, whych is colde and dry, is a great furderer of the stone: & when these are done, vse these thynges followinge.
                     R. Syrupe of the two Rootes, Hony of Roses,R. Bulleyns Syrupe for the stone. Syrupe of Uinegar simple. Syrupe of Fenell, Syrupe of Saxifrage. ana. ℥.ss. the water of Fenill, of Wormewood, of Persiley, of Maydenhayre, of Alkakengi. ana. ℥.i. mingle them, and temper them▪ warme, and drinke thys oftentymes, mornyng and euening, vntill the matter flegmatike be digested. Then vse this potion, to purge the sayd digested matter in this order following. R. Of the decoction of the foure great hoat rootes, into whom put these seedes,R. Bulleyns electuary for the stone. Persily, Saxifrage, Anisseedes, Smalage, Fenell, Asparagus. ana. ʒ.i. seeth these together, then strayne it, and put into the same, Electuariae de Cassia, Diacatholiconis. ana ʒ.iij. Diaphiniconis. 
                        ʒ.ij.ss. mingle theym in warme drynke, wyth Hony of Roses, to make it sweete, and drynke it warme in the mornyng, wythin four dayes following, whych are of great vertue.
                     R. Pilles of Hiera Nicolai. 
                        ʒ.i.ss make fyue Pilles in number, rounde, new and gilted, and take them earely. Drynking the Broth of a Chicken,R. Bulleyns Pilles for the stone. wythin .ij. houres following. Then apply thys Emplaster warme into the Raynes, the day next after your Pilles.
                     R. Crummes of two Manchets newe baken, and thyrty Fygges. three yellowe Yolkes of Egges,R. Bulleyns emplaster for the stone. Saffron. ʒ.i. freshe Butter. ℥.ij. sweete Rose water. ℥.vi. let all stande in a Morter ten houres, then beate all wyth a Pestle. Then spreade it vpon a clothe, & very warme apply it to ye Raines, renewe it still warme, and apply it to the Raynes agayne. Then haue at hand thys Clister following, to take after the Emplaster hath remayned, by the space of fifteene houres.
                     R. Oyle of Dyll. ℥.vi. clene whyte Wyne. ℥.vij. new freshe Butter. ℥.iiij Capons, and Duckes grease, wythout Salt,R. Bulleyns Clister for the stone. 
                        Cassiafistula newe drawen from the Cane. ℥.ss. the yolke of one Egge, wyth a very little fyne whyte Salt, temper all in a Pan, to the order for a Clister, and warme put it into the Bladder, and so mynister towardes Euening, and assuredly these bee goodly reamedyes for the Stone. The whole Regiment for the stone, deuysed by the sayde Rychard Bulleyn, shall by Gods Grace, shortly come forth, to the profyte of the commmon People.
                     
                        IN this place, good Reader, but ye infortunate hap hath preuēted me wyth lets, else assuredly, I would haue wrytten at length, the whole large Anatomie of ye body of mankinde: but here I do end, only wyth ye names of these bones at this present time vntil hereafter, if God wil suffer me to doe more, I am then youres.
                     
                        
                           i. Os frontis. vel coronale.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa furcu
                                 •
                              ae.
                        
                        
                           ij Ossa petiosa, vel lapidosa.
                        
                        
                           ij. Os laude.
                        
                        
                           i Os basilare, vel polim
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              hon.
                        
                        
                           ij Ossa nasi.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa colatoris.
                        
                        
                           xx Ossa mandibulae, super.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa mandibulae infer.
                        
                        
                           xxx. Ossa spondilia. vera & mendosa.
                        
                        
                           ij. Parietalia
                        
                        
                           ij. Spatulae vtrius
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              . Humeri.
                        
                        
                           Os adiutorij.
                        
                        
                           ij. Focile vel radius.
                        
                        
                           xviij. Ossa manuum digito.
                        
                        
                           x. Ossa pectinis manum.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa focile minus brachorum.
                        
                        
                           xxiiij. Costae verae & non verae.
                        
                        
                           Malleoli.
                        
                        
                           vij. Ossa thoracis
                        
                        
                           i. Os cordis.
                        
                        
                           i. Os Epiglottale.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa ancarum.
                        
                        
                           ij. Patella & rotula gen.
                        
                        
                           ij. Ossa 
                                 •
                              haab tibiarum.
                        
                        
                           ij. Canna tibiarum.
                        
                        
                           ij. Os nauicularis, b
                                 ••
                               nauifama,
                        
                        
                           viij. Ossa planta pedis.
                        
                        
                           ij. Os balistae.
                        
                        
                           ij. Tubercula femoris
                        
                        
                           Os maius tibiae.
                        
                        
                           Crus.
                        
                        
                           Cubitus.
                        
                        
                           iij. Ossa cauda.
                        
                        
                           i. Ossa pectinis.
                        
                        
                           Ossa digitorum pedum, quae 
                                 〈◊〉
                               sunt .xxvij.
                        
                        
                           Dentes numero xxxij &c.
                        
                        A tergo & a fronte me finxisti. Psal. 139.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Index betweene Soarnesse, and Chirurgj.
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        A.
                        
                           A Faythfull man needeth no miracle.
                        Fol. 8.
                        Apostumation is Compounded of three thinges.
                        9
                        An ignoraunt Chirurgian, is a man stear.
                        
                           5
                        
                        A good medicine for apostumacion.
                        1
                              •
                           
                        
                        A Cicatrice.
                        13
                        A digestion.
                        Ibidem
                        An abstersiue.
                        Idem
                        A good repercussiue.
                        14
                        
                           Auicens medicine.
                        Idem
                        An excellent Emplaster to asswage payne.
                        15
                        A very good emplaster.
                        Idem
                        A softning emplaster.
                        17
                        A Wounde of a bruse.
                        19
                        A good question.
                        20
                        A defensiue very good.
                        Idem
                        An abstersiue to clense.
                        21
                        A good Oyntment for Woundes.
                        Idem
                        A good practice.
                        24
                        Anticedent, Coniunct. &c.
                        25
                        A good exiccatiue to dry.
                        26
                        
                           Aristotle, a good note for the Elementes.
                        Idem
                        An incarnatiue to cause fleshe.
                        27
                        A defensiue.
                        Idem
                        A Sinatiue.
                        Idem
                        A good foundation.
                        28
                        
                           Auicens wise prouidence.
                        29
                        A good pouder.
                        Idem
                        Alteracion of nature, what it is.
                        30
                        Alteracion of extencion.
                        Idem
                        A good liniment.
                        31
                        A consideracion of dead fleshe.
                        Idem
                        
                           Anticedent & Coniunct, what they are.
                        Idem
                        A very good obseruacion.
                        32
                        Alteration of ayre.
                        Idem
                        A defensiue vnder the Knee.
                        33
                        A conclusion.
                        Idem
                        An other good defensiue.
                        34
                        A sygne of ouermutch drying.
                        Idem
                        An other good mundification.
                        Idem
                        A very good abstersiue for the head.
                        37
                        A good pouder for the head.
                        38
                        A Diet▪
                        
                        Idem
                        A cl
                              •
                           tt in the Brayne pan.
                        39
                        A note betwene a mās brain pan, & a childes.
                        idē
                        
                        A good note for a Chirurgian.
                        Idem
                        A witty head, & astedfast hād for a Chirurgiā.
                        41
                        A very good emplaster for the head.
                        42
                        A Water to consume rotten fleshe.
                        43
                        A good Lee for a cautery.
                        Idem
                        A good pouder for rotten fleshe.
                        Idem
                        A potenciall Cautery.
                        Idem
                        A rewarde for Lechery.
                        44
                        A Syrupe for the Stone.
                        Idem
                        A good plaster for the stone.
                        Idem
                        An excellent pocion for the stone.
                        Idem
                        A good Clister for the stone.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        B
                        
                           BOrias the North East wynde.
                        Fol. 1
                        Blinde Bayard is boldest in the Carte.
                        10
                        Bloud proceeding of a primatiue cause.
                        25
                        Breache of continuaunce.
                        30
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        C.
                        CUrtesie.
                        Fol. 2
                        
                           Chirurgerj is a Sanctuary for vagabondes.
                        5
                        Christ is not couetous.
                        8
                        Composicion, Replecion, & Complexion.
                        10
                        Consider in what bodies, Apostumacions are bred.
                        12
                        Consider to open a mēber, before it do rot.
                        13
                        Cautery potenciall.
                        14
                        Choyse of medicines are very good.
                        16
                        Captayne William Rede of the holy Iland.
                        21
                        Cold is the greatest enemy to ye sinewes of al.
                        id.
                        Chirurgians do neuer agree.
                        23
                        Chirurgians must know Simples.
                        26
                        
                           C. Ce
                                 •
                              sus.
                        
                        26
                        Colde vicer.
                        27
                        Consider the vryne, and so woorke.
                        28
                        Corosion, byting, or gnawing.
                        3
                              •
                           
                        
                        Contraries▪ when to vse them.
                        35
                        Chalke for Cheese.
                        37
                        Clothes applyed to a wounded head.
                        38
                        Cutting of the stone is perillous.
                        44
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        D.
                        DOctor Turner.
                        Fol. 4
                        Doctor Kaies.
                        Idem
                        Doctor Recorde.
                        Idem
                        Doctor K
                              •
                           ningham,
                        Idem
                        Doctor Fayre.
                        Idem
                        Doctor Andrewe 
                              •
                           orde.
                        Idem
                        Dogge 
                              •
                           eaches, what they are.
                        5
                        Do
                              •
                           or in complexion.
                        15
                        Distilling of bloud from the head.
                        23
                        Deepe cuttes hurt the arteries.
                        24
                        Digestion causeth not matter, but it is the propo
                              •
                           tionating of the humours.
                        34
                        Diseases comming of fulnes, are helped by emptynesse.
                        38
                        Daūgerous woundes, how to know them.
                        Idē
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        E.
                        EUill parentes, theyr fruictes.
                        Fol. 6
                        Example.
                        15
                        Example.
                        19
                        Example.
                        20
                        Euill accidentes follow mutch bleeding.
                        24
                        Example of a Moldwarpe.
                        35
                        Erisypelas, is a hoat, red, round inflacion soare, or Cholerik boyle, with a feuer in ye body.
                        38
                        Example of bloude letting.
                        39
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        F.
                        
                           FLora a Goddesse of Flowers, or an Harlot of Rome.
                        Fol. 2
                        Fyrst seeke Gods Kyngdome.
                        Idem
                        For counterfeyte Chirurgians.
                        6
                        Eyght thinges or properties, of a good Chirurgian.
                        7
                        Foure notes in an apostumaciō, beginning, augmenting, 
                              •
                           ate, and declining.
                        10
                        
                           Foule bodies doe repulse repercussiues, excepte they be purged.
                        11
                        Four intencions, and sixe vnnaturall thinges to be obserued.
                        14
                        Fiue notable things to be obserued in healing.
                        id.
                        Fooles with Bookes, bee worse than vnlea
                              •
                           ned Pra
                              •
                           tioners wyth practice.
                        25
                        Fyrst handle the accidents in a cure, & note three thinges.
                        28
                        Fyrst to all the whole body, and then to the perticuler member.
                        33
                        Fyue good intencions.
                        34
                        Foure intencions, in two kyndes of vicers.
                        Idē
                        
                        Fiue causes that do hurt the head.
                        37
                        Fi
                              •••
                           res, or Chappes.
                        39
                        Fiue sca
                              •
                           es in the Brayne pan.
                        42
                        Fiue kindes of Ulc
                              •
                           rs.
                        23
                        Fyre, and Water are good Seruauntes, but euill Maysters.
                        
                           
                              •
                           4
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        G.
                        GOD giueth health.
                        Fol. 22
                        Galens note.
                        32
                        Great Clarkes are not the wisest men.
                        28
                        Geometricall measure in Chirurgi.
                        33
                        G
                              ••
                           tony is no small enemy to nature.
                        34
                        Galens Syrupe for the stone.
                        44
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        H.
                        HOw to know apostumacion.
                        Fol. 9
                        How to rebate fleshe superfluous.
                        13
                        How to make incision.
                        15
                        How to dry humour
                              •
                            that do abound.
                        Idem
                        How to sewe a wounde, and how not.
                        20
                        How to make a Cicatrice.
                        27
                        How bolde the Chirurgian should be in cure.
                        29
                        Hoat and colde apostumacions.
                        30
                        Hardnesse of an Ulcer.
                        31
                        How a Pacient died, by euill cure.
                        32
                        Hippocrates order.
                        Idem
                        How to bynde a member.
                        33
                        How to finde out a stripe, by what tokens in the lead.
                        37
                        How to cut, to the ende to heale.
                        38
                        How colde 
                              •
                           urteth.
                        Idem
                        How to searche a wounde.
                        39
                        How 
                              ••••
                           ocacion of the Brayne may come.
                        42
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        I.
                        IGnoraunce.
                        Fol. 2
                        Incision, how to make it.
                        13
                        It is perillous to sewe a wounde, comming of the byting, or 
                              ••
                           nding of some beaste.
                        19
                        In healing a compounde Ulcer, marke the accidents concurrant.
                        28
                        Imbrocation.
                        31
                        If an apostumacion, be in the middest of the vpper part of the body, then to bleede eyther in ye left arme, or els right, is well.
                        40
                     
                  
                  
                     K.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        L.
                        Linx can see best of any creature, and his vryne wil turne into a stone. Pl
                                 •
                              ni.
                        
                        Fol. 5
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        M.
                        MAny good medicines are made of the playne people, to help in the absence of the Chirurgians.
                        Fol. 6
                        Man is but miserable, & is quickly gone.
                        8
                        Men do vse prety termes, for foule soares. & call thē by one name, when they are an other.
                        9
                        Mans secret prouidence.
                        17
                        Matter doth couet digestion.
                        19
                        Melancholy meates.
                        33
                        Man is made Geometrically in order.
                        39
                        Make hast in the cure of the heade, to defend the ayre, whych els will corrupt,
                        41
                        Men do want prouidence, to foresee theyr owne euilles.
                        44
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        N.
                        NAture worketh three wayes to help hir self.
                        7
                        Nature must be releeued by sundry meanes, in the tyme of daunger.
                        Idem
                        No locall medicine applied, before the body bee purged.
                        14
                        Nature nourisheth hir selfe,
                        35
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        O.
                        OF vacabond Chirurgiās, worse than theeues
                        Fol. 5.
                        Of contraries of Elementes.
                        9
                        Of resolucion.
                        11
                        Of repercussiues, when they are good.
                        Idem
                        Of an Embroche.
                        12
                        Of GOD, is the beginning, & ending of all thinge
                              •
                           .
                        17
                        Of Woundes.
                        Idem
                        Of commision mortall.
                        18
                        Of the first, and seconde intencion.
                        19
                        Of woundes in the muscles.
                        20
                        Of Synewes.
                        Idem
                        Of Woundes deepe, and not deepe.
                        24
                        Of incision of small Ueynes.
                        Idem
                        Of exiccatiues.
                        26
                        Of vrine cōsidered, of euery sick, & soare man.
                        28
                        Of radicall moysture.
                        Idem
                        Ouid, a good note.
                        29
                        Of dolour.
                        30
                        Of putrifaction, or rottennesse.
                        
                           
                              ••
                           
                        
                        Of bones, which are corrupted, two thinges cō
                           sidered.
                        32
                        Of swellinges, the cause.
                        33
                        Of filthy matter. what it is.
                        34
                        Of honest request, and friendship.
                        36
                        Of incision of the head.
                        37
                        Of bloud running, the chiefe cause, and the hurt that doth follow the same.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        P.
                        PArtes most daungerous to be hurt.
                        Fol. 18
                        Pate Hardy the Scot, a good Chirurgian.
                        19
                        Purge a 
                              •
                           oare man, after he is amended, for feare of dropsie.
                        33
                        Purge the pacient, according to the vryne.
                        39
                        Pooremen are corrected, for great mēs faults.
                        id.
                        Preseruatiue, and Curatiue.
                        44
                     
                  
                  
                     Q.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        R.
                        RE
                              •
                           ercussiues.
                        Fol. 24
                        Regiment of Lyfe.
                        28
                        Remoue the cause, & the effect will cease.
                        32
                        Richard Bulleins practice for the stone.
                        45
                        Richard Bulleins Syrupe for the stone.
                        46
                        Richard Bulleins Electuary for the stone.
                        Idē
                        
                        Richard Bulleins Pilles for the stone.
                        Idem
                        Richard Bulleins emplaster for the stone.
                        Idem
                        Richard Bulleins Clister for the stone.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        S.
                        
                           SAbinus a famous Mountayne in Italy.
                        2
                        Soft Chirurgians, make foule soares.
                        Idē
                        
                        Sir Thomas Eliot knight.
                        4
                        Sundry names of apostumacions, but in effect, are but apostumations.
                        9
                        Soares compounded.
                        10
                        Sygnes of death.
                        24
                        Sanguine, Cholericke, apostumacions.
                        25
                        San
                              •
                           es is matter, comming of corrupted bloud, or els putrifaction, and sometyme it is taken for poyson.
                        Idem
                        Strong members, do oppresse the weake.
                        Idem
                        Sanious matter.
                        26
                        Soft Chirurgians, make foule soares yet Botcherly manglers, marreth altogether.
                        29
                        
                           Signes of broken bones in the head.
                        38
                        Sawe, Chesill, & Wimble, for the head are good instrumentes.
                        44
                        Sagittalis, siue discrininalis.
                        41
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        T.
                        TRagedy beginneth euer euill, and endeth the same well.
                        Fol. 2
                        Thomas Phayre Doctor.
                        4
                        Thomas Pannell.
                        Idem
                        Two kyndes of Chirurgians.
                        
                           5
                        
                        The souldiour is hurt more by an euill Chirurgian, than by his enemies weapon, often it is so proued.
                        6
                        The miseries of man, whē he is hurt in body.
                        id.
                        The discriptiō of an vnthrift, or a villaine of nature, stryuing agaynst grace and vertue, vnprofitable for a common wealth.
                        Idem
                        The vertue of Chirurgj.
                        7
                        The Chirurgian is the best hande crafte in the Worlde.
                        Idem
                        The Chirurgian is natures seruaunt.
                        Idem
                        The strength of nature.
                        Idem
                        Two maner of healinges.
                        8
                        Two kyndes of apostumacions, hoat, & colde.
                        9
                        The aboūdance of bloud. in the apostumacion.
                        id
                        The cruelty of the Cholericke apostumaciō, but the bloudy apostumacion is gentler.
                        Idem
                        The quantity of the apostumacions
                        Idem
                        Three causes, the Primatiue, the Antecedente, & the Coniunctiue, whych belong to the apostumacion.
                        11
                        To abate dead fleshe.
                        26
                        To alter a completion in a soare.
                        Idem
                        The diffinicion of a wounde.
                        17
                        Two kindes of woundes, the one simple, and the other double, or compounde.
                        18
                        The Chirurgian must looke pleasauntly, vppon his Pacient.
                        20
                        To clense the wounde, and drawe forth broken bones.
                        21
                        To end a double wound, & begin accidentes.
                        Id.
                        To correct a swart wound.
                        22
                        The fluxe of bloude, proceeding of a primatiue cause.
                        23
                        To stop a bleeding veyne.
                        24
                        To staunche bloud.
                        25
                        Two sundry sortes of vlcers.
                        26
                        To know, whether vlcers be hoat or colde.
                        Idem
                        To make the skin whole.
                        27
                        Three sundry intencions: of regiment, of matter, of growing.
                        Idem
                        To abate proude fleshe.
                        Idem
                        The cause of superfluous fleshe.
                        28
                        To remoue an escharous scab or crust.
                        29
                        Two causes of matter.
                        30
                        To searche the cause, & displace the effect.
                        31
                        Three causes of hardnesse.
                        Idem
                        To make a Cicatrice.
                        Idem
                        To helpe putrifaction.
                        32
                        These signes are in the ende.
                        Idem
                        To open a veyne, to purge grosse bloud.
                        33
                        The cause of Soarenesse is first, not considered of many.
                        34
                        To skower & dry all Ulcers, plain, or hollow.
                        35
                        The cause of bruses, what they are.
                        37
                        To let bloud on the contrary parte, why it must be, by reason.
                        39
                        The Wimble is best, to pearse the head, to purge forth matter▪ if it be vsed discreetly.
                        41
                        Take heede of cold, in a wounde of the head.
                        42
                        There is no place empty, for ayre filleth euery open place.
                        42
                        To corect proude fleshe.
                        Idem
                        Two things considered in the stone, for the cure of the same.
                        45
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        V.
                        
                           VNguentum Aegyptiacum of Auicen.
                        
                        16
                        Ulcers be hard to cure, yt follow a sicknes.
                        23
                        Ulcers in good complexions, are soone cured.
                        Id
                        Uariety of simples.
                        26
                        Ulcers hoat, colde, and byting.
                        27
                        Vnguentum Album.
                        
                           Idem
                        
                        Ulcer virulent, how it groweth.
                        34
                        Vnguentum Basilicum.
                        38
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        W.
                        WHat is called Chirurgj.
                        Fol. 5
                        What perill is in ye application of a repercussiue, although in some case, it is most best.
                        11
                        What hurt ensueth of a repercussiue sometime.
                        13
                        What goodnesse commeth of a repercussiue an other tyme.
                        Idem
                        What harme ensueth of an euill Chirurgian alwayes.
                        15
                        What the Chirurgian must doe.
                        Idem
                        What woundes be mortall.
                        18
                        Woundes in the Muscles.
                        Idem
                        What ye Chirurgian must obserue in his cure.
                        19
                        Who so doth graunt to one absurdity, many one will eftsoones follow the same.
                        Idem
                        When to let bloud on the contrary side of the body, and why.
                        21
                        When the Chirurgian is put to shame.
                        22
                        What an vicer is.
                        23
                        When to incarnate, & when to seperate a soare,
                        24
                        When to vse contra
                              •
                           tes in healing.
                        30
                        What thing doth anoy the brayne most of all.
                        39
                        Whē to let bloud, ij. times in one place, & why.
                        40
                        Whē to dry & whē to moist a woūd in ye head.
                        42
                        Worke tenderly, in the wound of the head.
                        43
                        Why men do pisse bloud.
                        44
                        When the stone commeth of colde.
                        Idem
                        Why corruption cōmeth from the Yarde.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  ¶ The ende of the Dialogue, betweene the Soare man, and the Chirurgian, By William Bulleyn. Marche. 1572.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  The Booke. of Compoundes.
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Alypta Muschata?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take the best Gum of Laudanum. ℥.iii. of Storax or Styrax Calamita. ℥.ss. of lignum Aloes. ʒ.ii. stacte or the fattest part of Mirrhe. ℥.i. of Amber. ʒ.i. Cāphire. ℈.i.ss. of Muske. ℈.ss. of Rose water asmutch as you will, This doth help children whych be short winded, and the straightnes of ye breast and wombe, which cannot keepe theyr Mylke: of thys wee may make excellent perfumes, which noble men be accustomed to vse, it is oftentimes mixed with electuaries.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you your owne Antidotarie which you vse yourself?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take of Mirrhe. ℈.i. of Opium, whych is the Iuice of blacke Popie. ℈.xviij. of Amomū, ℈, vi. of Persely. ℈.xv. of smalage seede.The goodly vertues of Aslucritum. ℈.xii. of Squinantum. ℈.ix. Cassiafistula. ℈.iiii. white Peper. ℈.iiii. blacke Peper. ℈.xv. of the best Mustarde. ℈.xii. Storax. ℈.vi. Siler Montan. ℈.iiii. of the best Mithrydatum Andromachi. ℈.v. of Honie clarifyed, as mutch as wyll suffice, and as you iudge meete. The quantity which shall be receyued at one tyme of this is. ʒ.ii. Take your Storax with Hony, sprynkell or cast the other on dry, seeth your Opium with sweete wyne, sodden to the thyrd part, vntyll it be as thycke as Honie. This, is good agaynst a quarten Ague, longe headache, the turnyng syckenes, the fallyng euyll, ouermutch wakyng, scensines, the payn of the eyes, reumes, tothache, shortenes of wynde. syghing, olde coughes from the Lunges: it causeth also the Spitell to be thycker. and apt to auoyde, taken wyth Hydromell, which is made of Hony and water sodden together▪ and if a man do spyt bloud, then it must be taken wyth Acetum mulsum whych is made of Uinegar and Honie, or els it ought to be receyued with Uinegar mixed with Water, or wyth. ʒ.ii. of the iuice of Knotgrasse, or Plantan, howbeit you must adde or diminish, accordyng to the strength of the pacyent. It is also a present remedy for the stomacke, for it consumeth superfluous humors, and causeth a good appetite. It cureth the Hikeope and stoppeth vomitting, it moueth a man to auoyd wynde, both from the lyuer, stomacke, and lower partes. It helpeth payn of the Liuer, the yellow Iaundice, and all diseases of Melancholie, the griefe and heauines of the Splene: it ingendreth good colour, it purgeth downeward fleume and choler, it doth distribute meate digested in to his partes: it prouoketh vryne, and causeth the grauell in the raynes and bladder to auoide, it cureth Illijca & collica passio: taken with drynke it moueth a man to the stole, and cureth inflamacions in short tyme: it doth mitigate the gnawyng and payne in the belly: it doth heale and take away the ouermutch stretchyng forth of the Matrice: when it cannot be easely taken in at the mouth, then let it be mynistred with the Iuice of Fenegreeke at

the fundament, and so it will take away the payne in all the lower partes: it doth cure all dyseases of the matryce: it asswageth the payne of Women whych labour of chylde: it cureth the Mother and drawing vp of the Matryce and stretching of the same, it stoppeth vnnaturall Purgations, & purgeth corrupt & superfluous humours, it stoppeth Fluxes of bloude from the Matryce▪ if it be taken alone or wyth old Wyne: we may also vse thys in ye gowt of ye feete, & in Arthritica passio, which is a weaknes in al the ioyncts of superfluous humours, Spasinus called the crampe or contraction of synewes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     
                        FOr as mutch as you haue shewed me the vertue of sundry symples before, now would I gladly learn how to compound medicines of sundry kyndes, to help me no to in the tyme of Sicknesse, and fyrst what is Aromaticum Rosarum
                        ▪ and how should it be made?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take cleane red Roses. ℥.xv. and the best Liqueris scraped. ʒ, vij. Lingnum Aloes, Sanders yellow. ana. ʒ.iij. Cinamom. ʒ.v. Macis, Cloues, ana. ʒ.ij.ss. Gum Traganthum. ʒ.ij.℈.ij. Nutmegs, the great Cardamomū called ye grayn of Paradice, Galangall ana. ʒ.i. Spicknard, Amber grise. ℈.ij. Muscke. ℈.i. & cleane whyte Suger, as mutch as wil suffice, and so dissolue all together in the pure syrup of red Roses.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     What is thys to my help being Sicke?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        
                           Gabrielis Ioannis Damascen. N
                                 •
                              cholai Myrep. Leonardus Fuc. Decom-. Medican,
                        
                        THys healeth the weakenesse of the Stomacke, and doth comfort all the pryncipall partes of the body, and wyll clense corrupt humours, foule and grosse matter remayning in the Breast, and Stomacke: it also refressheth the Brayne, and comforteth the heart, and causeth good Digestion, and dryeth vp superfluous moyster in the guttes. And euen so reporteth Nicholaus Myrepsus, Gabriell, Ioannes Damascenus, and Leonardus Fuchsius, men learned and dayly approued, to whom we must gieue credence as to most worthy Teachers.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     
                        GOD is so iust and mercifull, that he wy
                           •
                        l neyther suffer any vyce vnpunished, or vertue vnrewarded. Therefore these Men haue receyued the fruictes of their owne Labours, being good instruments to comfort the troubled, & heale the sicke that be afflicted with sundry infirmityes. Where as an infinite number through the beastly abusing of th
                           •
                        mselues, be plagued wyth fond foolyshe delightes, as inordinate riots, Banquets, surfeytes, actes Uenereons, Wrath, and other Passions whych bring them all to my house, except Dyet wyth his brother quiet, and merry man meete these Companions in the way, and turne them backe agayne, into the pleasant Palace of you mayster Health, whych in all poynctes are

contrary to me poore syckenes, now subiecte to all myseries, as Feuers. &c. Yet of Charity shew me some holsome medycyne for dyuers infyrmites.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        I Shall shew thee a very excellent medycine against sundry infyrmities, which Leonardus Fuchsius in hys compoundyng of medicines doeth greatly commend, and it is thus made. Take of Asarabacca, Balme seede, Henbane seede, ana. ʒ.ii.ss. of Cloues, Myrrhe. Cipres, Opium, ana. ʒ.ii the iuice of Balme, Cynamom, Folium Indicum, Setwall, Gynger, Coste, Corall, Cassiafistula, the Gumme Tragagantum, Spike, wyld Fenell, Frankinsence, Euphorbe, Storax Calamita, Cardamomum, Siler Mōtane, Mustard, Saxifrage, Dill, Anisseede, ana. ʒ.ii Lignum Aloes, Rubarbe, Rhaponticum, the confection called Alypta muschata, the Otters stones, Galanga, Opoponax, the fruicte, Anacardin, Mastyck, Brymstone vnsleked, Pionie, Seaholme, Roses, Tyme, Gladyan Peneryal, both round and long Aristologia, Gentian, the outward rind of Mandrager, Germander, Bayberies, yelow Carotes, Ualeryan rootes, long Peper, whyte Peper▪ the wood of Balme called Xylobalsamum, Carawayes, Amomum, Parselie, Louage, Rew seede, ana. ʒ.ss. fyne Gold, lyttle Perles, lyttle Fishes called of the Apoticaryes Vnguis Odoratus, the bone in the heart of the red Deare, the shauyng of Iuerie, Calamus Aromaticus, Pelletarye of Spaine, ana G. xi. of Hony as mutch as you iudge meete.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     And what is the vertue of thys?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     IT helpeth reumes of the head, whych come of cold, the moystnes and runnyng of the eyes, the toth ache, and Head ache, if the forehead bee therewyth anoynted: it doth also cure the fallyng euyll, madnes, turnyng syckenes of the head, and to conclude, all maner of dyseases, which be about the head, it healeth all those whych be troubled wyth the cough, or haue superfluity of humours in the breast, the gnawyng and grypyng of the mouth of the stomacke, whych the Grecians call Dispepsia, and the Latines Appetitus prostratus, which is a corrupted appetite: it cureth spittyng of bloud, and the ache in the hyppe, or huckelbone commyng of humours, it asswageth also the Collyke, and scoureth the reines, it prouoketh a mā to pisse, and cureth the strangurian, breaketh the stone congeled, and taketh awaye all dyseases in the belly: it cureth quotidian and tercian Agues, taken with the iuice of Stichados, in the begynning of the fyttes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     
                        I Do heartely thanke you. I pray God I may receyue comforte by your holsome composicion, called Aurea Alexandrina. Now sir, for as mutch as I haue red the bare names, both of simples and compoundes, euen as men passyng through Cityes, fyelds, woddes and riuers, smally regardyng theyr vertues, condiciōs or properties, euen so haue I don: but now if it shall please your Maistershyp▪ I would request that in short questions, you shew me the Compoundyng of Aromaticum Garyophillatum.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        WHereunto are wee Mortall Wyghts borne, but one to helpe the other, the Po
                           •
                        re to the Ryche the UUyse to learne the ignorant, the whole to comfort the sycke? For we which now bee in good health and feele no gryef, once shall decay, and fall into your myserable estate, finishyng our time in dolour, agonie and paine. And thus I am perswaded, that our liues can not bee prolonged one minute: for the almyghty hath set our course and end, whych we may not passe, no more than the Sonne, Moone, and the Starres can go out of theyr course and order, whych they be placed in. But Medicine easeth maketh cleane, and comforteth nature, taketh away payn but prolongeth no lyfe, and thus our Diuines say. But I beyng thy Potycary, neyghbour Sycknes, dwellyng neare thy Doore, wyll teach thee many goodly medicines: and now how thou shouldest make Aromaticum Gariophillatum. Fyrst take of Cloues. ʒ.vii Mace, Setwall, Galanga, yellowe Saunders, Trochisdiarodonis, Cinamom, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, long Peper, the great Cardomomum ana. ʒ.i, Roses. ʒ.iiii. grated Liquorice, Gallia muschata, Folium Indicum, Cubebes, ana. ℈ iii. of Amber. ʒ.i. of Muske ℈.ss. of Syrup of Pomecitron, as mutch as you iudge meete. This comforteth the stomacke and the heart, stoppeth vomityng, it consumeth also the corrupt humours in the stomack, and doeth nourysh all the pryncipall members, it causeth heate, and dissolueth winde.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Acatia?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the plant or braunch of a Bullais or slow tree, wyth the fruicte & lay it in a vessell certain houres, and so let it stand, then seeth it vpon the fyre, and streine forth the liquour, the which streined, seeth it on the fyre agayn, vntyll it be thycke, and then kepe it in fyne vessels lyke shelles and so dry it.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Amylum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke Wheate and beate it lyghtly, not to small, and put it into a vessell of glasse, and couer it wyth water, so that the water bee aboue it, two or three fyngers▪ and so let it stand by the space of a Nyght: in the Mornyng presse it downe well, vnto the substaūce, whych Amylum is made or doe descend to the bottome, afterward strayne it wyth a Siue, and cast away the Bran, whych swimmeth on the Water aboue, let the resydue, whych shall make Amylum, stand tyll it goe downe to the bottome of the vessel, & the water swim aboue, then cast forth the Water softly, so that nothyng remayne, and dry it wyth a lyttle Cotten: let this be done in Sommer, and also Sonne dryed least it waxe sower, and so corrupte. Couer the vessell wyth a fyne cloth, that nothyng fall in: If you wyll make thys in Winter, then you must take great heede, that it be not sower ye must also prouyde, that it be soone dryed, eyther in the Sunne, or in the

wynd, or in the fyre, and thus you may make Amylum of Rice.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Aqua odorifera,
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Rose water. l i.iiii. Storax Calamita, Beniamen, Cloues ana. ʒ.i. of Muske, Ciuet, Amber Grece, ana. G. xx, of Camphire. ʒ.ii. some put vnto this, ʒ.i. of Lignum Aloes: let them be put into a vessell of Glasse, couered wyth a couer, hauynge holes in it, then let them boyle in a Uessell full of water, as it is in Balneo Marie, whych is a Glasse or Uessell set within an other greater on the fyre: thys done strayne them wyth a fyne lynnen cloth, and so to be reserued in a vessell in the Sunne, by the space of .xv. dayes, & then it wyll proue an odoriferous water most pleasaunt.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Benedicta Laxatiua?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of the best Turbith, Suger, ana. ʒ.x. Diagridion. ʒ.v. wylde Lillies, Roses, ana. ʒ.v. Cloues, Spicknard, Ginger, Saffron, Saxifrage, long Peper, Amomum, Cardamomum, Smalage seede, Salgem, Galanga, Mace, Carowais, Fenell, Spinage, Kneeholme, or Butchers Brome, Gromell seede, ana ʒ.i. of Hony asmutch as wyll suffyce. Thys doth cure the weakenes of the ioyntes, and the cold goute in the feete, it doth also purge the reynes and the bladder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Balsamum artyfyciall?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take Terebyntyne. ℥.xij. Gumme Elemi. ℥.v. of Rosen. ℥.iii. let thē be melted together, and when they be molten▪ myngle these pouders, folowyng, of Arystolochia longa ʒ.ii. of Dragons bloud. ʒ.iii. make these in great peeces. Thys medycyne doth heale both new and old Woundes, and chyefly those that be about the heade
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Confectio Dulcis de musco?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Safron▪ the sweete roote Doronicke, Setwall, Lignum Aloes, Mace ana. ʒ.ii. whyte Perles, sylke in pouder, Amber, red Corall, ana. ʒ.ii.ss the confection, called Gallia Muschata, Spycknarde, Folium Indicum, Cloues, ana. ʒ.i. Gynger, Cubebes, long Peper, ana. ʒ.i.ss. Muske. ʒ.i.℈, ii. make thys wyth Hony not claryfyed, ye fowerth part of the weyght of all the other. Thys doth cure the tremblyng of the heart, and all dyseases of the Melancholy, and those men, whych be heauy wythout a cause: it remedyeth also the dyseases about the brayne, as the tournyng syckenes, and fallyng euyll, the wrythyng or pullyng of the necke, or the mouth on the one syde, and all dyseases of the lunges, and shortnes of wynde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Confectio Hamech.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrste take the fower kynds of Mirobalans. ℥.iiii. Rubarbe. ℥.ii. Agarike Coloquintida, Polipodie of the Oke ana. ʒ.xviii. Wormewoode, Tyme,, Sene, ana. ℥.i, Uiolettes. ʒ.xv. the flower of harder Tyme. ℥ ii. Anisseede, Roses, Fenell, ana. ʒ.vi. the iuice of Fumitarie. l i.i. Prunes in number .lx. of Raysens of Coraynes the stones taken out. ℥ vi powre all these into a vessell of Glasse, which hath a strayght mouth, and stop the Mouth by ye space of .v. dayes afterward let them boyle once, then strayn them, and dissolue into the strainyng of Cassiafistula ℥.iii. of the fruict of the wilde Date tree, called Thamarinde. ℥.v. of Manna or sweete dewe. ʒ.ii. breake them with your hand, and strayne them. Then cast on Suger l i i. of Scammont. ℥.i ss. seeth them vntyll they shalbe as thycke as Hony, then cast vpon them the pouder of all the fiue kyndes of Mirobolans, Reubarbe, Fumiterie seede ana. ʒ.iii. Anisseede, Spicknard ana. ʒ i. Thys cureth all dyseases whych come of fleume and choler, but chiefly the ryngworme, scabs, keper, cankers & sutch others.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Cerotum Stomachale?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of red Roses. ʒ.xx. of Wormewood leaues. ʒ.xv. of Mastycke. ʒ.xx. Spicknard. ʒ.x. beate them small, then take of Uirgine waxe. ℥.iiii. Oile of Roses. l i.i.ss. make your confection. There be some whych doe wash the oyle and the waxe, and then resolue them wyth a gentle lyre, and afterward myngle them with the other, and so it is iudged better. This doth mitigate inflamacions, and hoat apostumes, whych be jn the stomack and liuer.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you a confection for the eyes?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of whyte Leade washed. ʒ.x of Amyle. ʒ.iiii. of Gumme Arabike, and Tragantum ana. ʒ.ii of Camphire. ʒ.ss. make these into pouder, and dissolue them in Rose water, afterward make thereof little balles.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you conserue of Buglosse?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of the leaues of Buglosse l i.iii. beate them in a Morter of stone, and then cast vpon theim l.iii. of Suger, make your conserue lyke Opiatum, whych is a thynne Electuarie. Thys comforteth the stomacke, and healeth diseases whych come of Melancholy, 
                           •
                        he sownynge and tremblyng of the heart▪ it purgeth also Choller.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you a conserue of Rosemary.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take of the flowers of Rosemary. l i.ss. of Suger, 
                           •
                        'i.i ss. make your conserue. This doeth comfort a moyst brayne. and molify harde and stiffe members, it also purgeth Melancholy and fleume.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a conserue of Borage or Buglosse?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of the flowers of Borage. ℥.iiii. Suger. ℥.xii. make your conserue, accordyng to the arte. Thys doth remedye the tremblynge of the heart and sownyng, it also purgeth Melancholy, and causeth a man to be merry.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you conserue of Roses?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Rose leaues. l i.i. beate them in a stone morter, and caste vpon theim of Suger, l i, iij. make your conserue after the fashion of Opiata. This doeth comfort the stomacke, heart and all the pryncipal partes, it mollifyeth also those parts, which be hard. & purgeth Melancholy.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a conserue of Uiolettes?
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     FIrst take the flowers of Uiolettes. l i.i. beate thē in a Morter of stone, and cast vpon them. l i.i. o
                           •
                        . Suger, make your conserue accordingly. Thys dooeth cure inflamacions of Choller, quench the thyrst, & moueth a man to the stoole,
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a conserue of Mayden haire?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Maiden hayre▪ 
                        l i. beate them and put Suger vnto them. as in the other. This helpeth the Pluresie, diseases of Melancholy, and red Choller, and the Splene or Mylte.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you a conserue of Gladian?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of the rootes of Gladian. l i. seeth them in water, vntill they be well sodden, afterward dry them, and searse them through a Siue, then set them on the fyre again, and put, l i.iii. of Suger vnto them, make thys conserue like to the Electuarie Opiata. This remedieth diseases of the brayne and sinewes, with all sutch as come of fleume.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you a conserue of Enula campana?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the roote of Enula campana. l i.ii seeth it well, afterward dry it, then searce it through a Siue, and then set it on the fyre agayne, and put. l i.vi. of Suger vnto it. Thys doth comfort the stomacke, and pryncipall parts agaynst fleume, and helpeth the heart.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a conserue of Cychory, or Succhory.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take the Succhory flowers. l i.i· beat them in a morter of stone, and cast vpon them. l i.iii. of Suger. Thys purgeth Melancholy and Choler.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you conserue of Sorell?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take the leaues of Sorell. l i.ss. beat them as you dyd the other, cast vpon them of Suger. l i ss. Thys helpeth Choloricke persones.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Conditum Cotoneorum
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke as many Quinces as you iudge conuenient, and seeth them, and take of the decoction of them. l i.iii. of Suger. l i.j. seeth them well, and reserue thē, some Apoticaries put in the whites of Egges when they be clarifyed. I wyll also teach thee an other way to make thys confection. Take of the seede or kirnelles of Quinces. ℥.iiii. tempre them by the space of halfe a day, wyth. l i.iii. of the iuice of Quinces, then boyle them a lyttle. and strayne them, and cast vpon them. l i.ii. of Suger, afterwarde seeth them well, and keepe them in boxes.
                     I wyl also teach thee an other way to make an other confection of the same. Take of Quinces. l.vi. when they be sodden, put vnto them l.iii. of Suger, and seeth them well, as thou didst before, keepe them in litle boxes,
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diagalanga?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Galanga, lignum Aloes, ana. ʒ.vj. of Cloues, Mace, Louage, ana ʒ.iii, Ginger, longe Peper, Cinamom, whyte Peper. ʒ.i.ss. of Calaminte, Mintes dryed ana, ʒ.i. of the lesser Cardamomum, Spycknard, Louage seede, Fenell seede, Anisseede Carowayes ana, ℥.x. of Calamus Aromaticus. ʒ, i. of the best Suger. ℥.x ss. of Honie clarifyed, asmutch as wyll suffice. Thys doth cure the diseases that come of wynde, and belchyng whych seemeth sharpe in the mouth lyke Uineger: it is proued to cause good digestion, and fortefieth the weakenes of the stomack and liuer being colde.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diacyminum Nicholaj?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of Cummin layed in Uineger, by the space of a day, and afterwarde dryed. ʒ.viii.℈.i. of Cinamom, Cloues ana. ʒ.ii.ss. black Peper, Ginger ana. ʒ.ii. G. v. of Galanga, Sauerie, Calamint ana. ʒ.i.℈ ii. Charuil seede, Louage, ana. ʒ.i. G. xiii. long Peper ʒ.i. Spicknard, Cardamomū, Nutmegs, ana, ℈.ii.ss. of Hony asmutch as you iudge cōuenyent. This helpeth the stomack and pryncipal parts, which be troubled with wynd: it causeth good digestion, & bryngeth heat to the stomack, and other pryncipall parts that be cold.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diambra Mesue?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Cinamon, Doronicke, Cloues, Mace, Nutmegges, Leaues of Galanga and Spicknard. ʒ.iii. the great and lesser Cardamomum, ana. ʒ.i. of Ginger, Saunders, lignum Aloes, longe Peper ana ʒ.ii. of Amber. ʒ, i. of Muske. ʒ.ss make it wyth the best Suger, and the water of Roses. Thys comforteth the brayne, heart, stomacke. and all the princypall members, it causeth good digestion. and maketh a man merry, and ingendreth heate in the pryncipall partes, it is very comfortable to old Men, and those whych be colde of nature and complexion, to women also, and cureth the diseases of the matrice.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diamargaritum calidum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Cloues, Cinamon, Spicknarde, lignum Aloes, Galanga, Liquorice, Trochisci Diarodonis, and lyttle balles of Uiolettes ana. ʒ.i.ss. Nutmegges, Mace, the confection of Muske, Setwall, Reubarbe, Storax Calamita ana. ʒ.i. Perles, Ginger, the bone in the heart of ye red Deare, the shauyng of Iuorie, Iuncus odoratus. 
                        ʒ.ss. Muske, Amber, Cardamom, Louage, Basell seede ana. ℈.j. G. ii. of Camphire G. vi. of Mel Rosatum, asmutch as will suffice. This doth cure the weakenes of all the body, sownyng, and faynting, both of the stomacke, and also of the heart, and comforteth the liuely partes, and those that be pensiue and sad wythout a cause, it cureth the cough and consumption, it doth also recouer those which be weake wt longe diseases.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diamargaritum frigidum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the .iii. kyndes of Saunders, the flowers of Roses, and Uiolettes, the seedes of Melons, Trochisci Diarodon raw Silk, made in pouder, ana. ʒ.ii. the bone in the heart of the red Deare, Spodium, Doronike, ye roote both of red and whyte Behen, Spicknarde, Saffron, ana. ℈.ii. shauynges of Iuorie, flower gentyll, Saphire, Iacinte, Emeraude, Sorell, and Endiue seede, Lignum Aloes, gray Amber, ana. ʒ.ss. of fyne Gold. ʒ.i. Camphire. ℈.i. of Muske .G ii. mixe them and make thereof a pouder, puttyng in perles. ℈.i. and Corrals red and whyte, ana. ℈.i▪ss. and whyte Suger.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diathameron of Dates?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Cloues, Ginger, ana. ʒ.v. G. xvi. of Cinamom. ℥.iii. of the Substaunce of Dates, Galanga, Spicknard, Setwall, Cost, Pellitarye of Spain, white and red Coral, Rhaponticum, Spyke, the fruict Anacardium, Date stones, Balme seede, Anis seede, Iuniper Seede, ana. ʒ.i.℈.ii.

of fyne Golde, the bone of the Hart of the red Deare, ana. ℈.ii.ss. of the shauyngs of Iuery, of Muske, ana. ℈.ii. of Amber. ℈.i. of Hony Roset asmutch as you iudge best: but few Apotycaries do make this, for it is not greatly vsed, yet some do occupy it very much. Thys wyl recouer a man from dager of death vnto Life. It also helpeth those that be short wynded or haue any disease in the wynd pype, or haue the coughe, or be in a consumption: it cureth also all dyseases of the breast and stomacke, the dropsy and payne in the raynes, it bryngeth Myrthe, it maketh a man lusty and fat.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diarhodon Abbatis?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of whyte and red Saunders, an. ʒ.ii ss, of Gumme Arabike and Tragantum, Spody. ana. ℈.ii. Asarabacca Masticke, Anisseede, Fenel, Cinamon, Rewbarbe. Basill seede. Berberyes. wyld Succhorye seede, Porselyne seede, whyte Popy seede seedes of Gourdes. Cucumers, Melons, Citrons, ana. ℈.ss. Suger Candie. Roses, ana. ℥.i.ʒ.iii. of Camphire. G. vii. of Muske. ʒ.i. make thys wyth the syrupe of Rose water. Thys hlpeth the yellow Iandice, weaknes of the Lyuer, consumptions, dyseases about the heart, and those whych be troubled wyth the heate aboute the stomacke, lunges or the whole body, and also those whych be recouered from longe and lyttle agues.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diacalamintha.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take Calamynfs, Peneriall, Hysope, blacke Peper, Siler Montan, Percellye, ana. ʒ.ii.℈.ii. of Louage. ʒ.i.℈.i. of Smalage, Amynthine, Dill, Anysseede, Cinamom, Gynger ana. ℈.ii. of Hony asmutch as wyl suffice. Thys cureth dyseases of the stomacke whych come of cold, causeth digestion, and chifly in olde men, it taketh away the cough, whych doeth come of a colde cause.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diatrion Pipereon?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the Pepers. ʒ.vii.ss. Gynger, Tyme, Anisseede, Spicknard, ana. ʒ.iii. Amomum, Cinamon, ana. aure. Cassiafistula, sil
                           •
                        r Montan, Enula Campana dryed, ana. aure. ss. make it wyth Hony claryfyed. This doth engender heat in the stomack and belly, it remoueth all paynes of flumatike causes, it purgeth the stomacke of raw humours, and helpeth digestion.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diaireos.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Flowerdelice. ℥.i. Sugar Candie, Tragantum: ana. ℥.iii. myngle them and so make them in pouder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diairis Salamonis.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of Flowerdelyce ℥.i. Peneryall, Hisope, Liquorice, ana. ℥.vi. the Gumme Tragantum, Almondes, Pineaples, Cynamon, Gynger, Peper, ana. ʒ.iii. Figges, Dates, Reasons of Corans pycked, ana. ʒ.iii.ss. of red Storax. ʒ.iii. of Hony asmutch as wyll suffice. Thys is ministred agaynst the Coughe, shortnes of wynde, and also restoreth the speach lost.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diatragacanthum calidum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Gumme Tragantum Hisope, ana. ʒ.iii. Pineaples both kynds of Almondes Blaunched, Linseede. ana. ℥.vi. seede of Fenegreeke, Cinamon, ana. ʒ.ss. Liquoryce, Gynger, ana. ʒ.ii. make a pouder of these. This is good agaynst the hardnes and strayghtnes of the breast which cō
                        meth of a grose and colde cause.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diatrangacantha Frigida?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of whyte Tragantum. ℥.ii. Gumme Arabike. ℥.ii.ʒ.ii. of Amilium ℥.ss. of Liquorice. ʒ ii. of Penedies. ℥.iii. the foure greater cold Seedes, pared and pycked, ana. ʒ.ii of Camphere, ℈▪ss. of the syrupe of Uyolets, as mutch as wyl suffice. Thys doth cure all diseases about ye lunges, breast, and those whych be in a consumption, & euyl lykyng: the Pluresie, Coughe, & those whych be hoat & dry: the, roughnes of the tongue, & the weason, let ye pacyent hold it in hys mouth, and swalow it downe, when it is melted.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diamoron.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the iuice of Mulberies. l j.ss. the iuice of blacke beryes & straberyes. l j. hony. l j.ss. sweete wyne soddē to ye thyrd part. ℥ iij. make it after this forme. Take your iuice, let it boyle wyth your Hony & sweete wyne vpon a soft fyer in a vessell of glasse or tynne, vntyl it be well sodden, and to know when it is wel sodden you must take a drop of it, and lay it vpon a Marbell stone, and if it wyll abyde vpon the stone, and cleaue lyke thycke Hony, the stone beyng turned on the one syde, then it is well sodden, and thys done strayne it and keepe it in a vessell of Tinne. Thys is verye good agaynst sores in the throat, and all kynds of stranglyng, and paynes in the mouth, togargaryse therewyth.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diacodium.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke .x. heades of rype black Popye of a meane bygnes, cast vpon them, l i.ii.ss. of rayne Water, and if they bee more moyst than dry then let them lye in the Water a Day and a Nyght, but if they be dryer let them lye longer: after this seeth them vntil two parts of ye Water bee consumed, then strayne them, then put in sweete Wyne. ℥.iii.

good Hony. ℥.i. then seeth it agayn, and put in Acatia, Hypocistis▪ Saffron Myrrhe, and the flowers of Pomgarnets, ana. ʒ.iii. and seeth it agayn: this helpeth Catars, paines in the lunges, and causeth sleepe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diaprassium?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of greene Horehound. ʒ.v.ss. Tragantum, Pine aples, sweete Almondes, of a kynd of Nuttes called Pistici, the substaunce of Dates, Figges, Raisens of Corans, the stones taken out, ana. ʒ.iii.ss. Cinamom, Cloues, Nutmegges, Mace, Galinga, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, Gynger Setwall, Liquerice, Rhaphontike, Anacardin, storax Calamita, Galbanum, Turpentine washed, Mastike, Mirrhe, Flowerdelice, Aristolochia Rotunda, the roote of Cipres, Blacke Peper, Anisseede, Fenell, Dyll, Smalage seede, Parslie, Saxifrage, ana. ʒ ii. wyld Lillies, Organe, Wormwood, Squinantum, Cardimomum, white Peper, Carowayes, Louage, Daysie, ana. ʒ.ii.ss. Peletorie of Spayne, water Myntes, Peneriall, Dittā, Coste, Sauerie, Basill, Pionie, long Peper, Amomum, Orobus ana▪ 
                        ʒ.i.℈.iii. the wood of Balme, Cassiafistula, Corall▪ shauyng of Iuorie. Balme seede, yelow Carettes, ana. ℥.ss. Muske, Amber, the bone in the heart of the red Deare, ana. G. xiiii. of hony clarifyed as mutch as you iudge sufficient, make it after this sort folowing: put into it. l i.iii. of Hony, and of greene Horehoūd Betony, and young Pine Aples pared, ana. ʒ.v. put also vnto them ʒ.iii. of the best old wyne, and let them boyle together wyth a soft fyer vntyll the wyne be consumed, let your Fygges be made cleane wyth in and wythout, dresse lykewyse your Dates, and let your Reasyngs be pycked, & then dresse also your Pine Aples, Almondes, and the Nuttes Pistaci, dry euery one of them by them selues, afterward beat them in a Morter. and put vnto them Turpentyne washed, after thys beate all agayn and let them bee tempered wyth the same Hony in the Morter where they were before, and myngle them with the Spyces whych we haue spoken of before. Thys doth cure the weakenes of the stomacke, chyefly Reumes, and the brayn whych is colde, the. turnyng Sickenes, the eye syght, the Winde pype troubled▪ wyth grose fleume, it doth also mitigate the tothe ache. The iuice, is mynistred in al fluxes, and chiefly in the bloudy Flux, with the decoction of raine water, in the which Spodie was sodden, or with Rose water, it stoppeth also the Fluxe of meate vndigested. which the Phisicians call Lienteria.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Dipapauer.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of whyte Popie. ʒ.xxv. sweete Almondes blanched, Kirnels of Pineapple, Gumme Arabike and Tragantum, the iuice of Liquerice ana. ʒ.x. of Amilium. ʒ iiii. of Purslen Seede, and Lettice seede, Kirnels of Quinches, ana. ʒ.iii. of Saffron. ʒ.i. of Penedies. ℥.iiii. take of the syrupe of Popye asmutch as wyll suffyce. Thys helpeth those whych be in a consumption, and those whych can not sleepe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Diacurcuma?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Tragacanth, Saffron, of Azarabacca, persley, yellow Carrets, Anisseede, smallage sede, ana. ʒ.iiii. Rubarbe, wyld Fenel, Spicknarde. ana. ʒ.vi. Cost, Mirtle beryes, Casiafistula, Squynantum, Balme seede. Mader, the iuice of wormwood, Egrimony, & Balme. ana, ʒ.ii. Calamus. Aromaticus, Cinamō, ana. ʒ.i.ss. wylde Garlike, Ceterach, the iuice of Liquerice. ʒ.ii.ss. the gumme Tragantum. ʒ.i. make it with clarifyed hony. This cureth old diseases, and the euil lykinge and deformity, of the body: when the meate beyng receiued, doth not nowrysh that is corrupt in the body: it also healeth the dropsy, and diseases of the liuer and the Spleene when they be hard or indurate, it purgeth the stomacke of corrupt humours, cold and wyndy, it mittigateth pain in the raynes and bladder, and prouoketh vryne.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diasatyrion?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of the rootes of Satyrion which bee lyke stones, the ga
                           ••
                        den Parsnyp, the Nuttes called Pistaci, Pineaple sede, Cloues ana. ʒ.xii. Ginger, Anisseede, Rocket, Byrdes toung,The two stones of Satyryon or Orches, the one will fleete, and thother sincke in water. or Stichwort, ʒ, v. Cinamom, cloue Garlik. ʒ ii.ss. of Muske, G. vii. make it after this form, put ye rootes. of Satyrion in so much clarified Hony as wil suffyce, let also the Parsenipes and Pineaple seede be wel beaten by themselues, and then put them into the same Hony, and stirring them wel, suffer them to seeth a certayn space, then mingle with them your Pineapels and the Nuttes Pistaci wel stamped, and when they haue boyled a little whyle, take them from the fyre, and put vnto them, the pouder of the spices and at the last put in your Musk with Rosewater. This doth restore and fortefy the weaknes of the reines, & of the bladder, it prouoketh vrine, and moueth a man to haue great deuotion to pray in Uenus temple, or to be venerous.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diaprunum solutiuum
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take a hundred Damsones, and put them in a Tinne vessel with so much water, that they may be wel couered, and let them boyle wel til they be softe, afterwarde take them from the fyre, & when your water is so colde, that it is but Luke warme, then take them forth, and put thē into a siue, ouer a greate vessel, and chafe your Prunes so long with your handes, that nothing remayne but stones, and skins. Then put into the water, in which the Damsons were sodden in before. .℥.i.ss. of Uiolets and boile them, and make a syrup, with li. ii. of Suger, into the which Sirup put the substance of the Prunes, let them seeth, tyll they be thicke, and then put into the same water. ℥.i. of Casiafistula washed,

put therto also. ℥.i. of the fruite Tamarindes, dissolued and strayned into the same water, remember also that ye boyle in the same of Prunes ℥.i. of Uyolettes, seeth them wel, stirryng them continually, and when they bee sodden, take them frō the fyre, & sprynckle theron these ponders, following. Saūders, Spody, Rubarbe, Roses, Uiolets, Purslain seede, Succory sede Barberyes, the iuice of Liquerice, the Gum Tragagantum, ana ʒ.iii. of the foure greatter cold seedes, ana ʒ.i. if ye wil make it laxatiue, putte vnto euery pounde, when it is taken from the fyre ʒ.ss. of Scāmonye, Diaprunes not losyng this, is ministred in hoat and burning agues, and chiefly in Synocha, which is a continuall Feuer of aboundance of blood: in this ague it may safely be ministred in the begynning, increase, and at all tymes: & wi
                           •
                        h out Diagridion, it may be geuen at al howers of the day, and wt Diagridiō but in the morning, and that circumspectly, because it is very laxatiue.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diaphoenicon?
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     TAke of Dates infused with vineger thre dayes and three nightes ℥.vi.ʒ.i. of Penedies which be litle wrethes of Suger, dissolued in the decoction of Barly ℥.iii.ʒ.i. of Blaūched Almondes. ʒ.xv. of Turbyth ℥.ii ss. of Scāmony, ʒ.vi. Ginger, long Peper ye flowers of dry Rue, Cinamome. Mace, lignum Aloes, Anisseede, Fennelseede, yellow Carottes. Galinga, ana, ʒ.ii▪ beate them wel and make them with clarifyed Hony. This doth cure mixt Agues of diuers humours, the Collike and payne in the bellye, it purgeth all raw humours of cold.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes
                     How make you Diacarthamum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the roote of Tragantum. ℥.ss. the substance of Quinces. ʒ i. thickest chiues of Saffrō, ℥ iiii of whyte ginger. ʒ.ii. Diagridiō. ʒ.iii. white Turbith ʒ.vi. Manna, or swete dew, Mel Rosatū strayned. ℥, i. of Suger, ʒ.viii. wyld Lillies. ʒ.iiii. make an Electuary, putting vnto it as mutche Hony as wyl suffyce. This purgeth choller and phlegme.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Diacorallium magistrale.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        FIrste take of the Spyces of the confection Dyarodon Abbatis whiche I didde speake of before. ʒ iiii. of both Coralles, lyttle peeces of Perles, ana. ʒ.ss. beate them to fyne pouder, and put vnto them of Suger resolued in the Water of Roses ℥.viii.ss. make them into smal peeces. This doth comfort the hart and stomake, and chiefly

those which haue bene long sick of colde.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diacasiafistula pro aenematibus, or Clisters?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Flowers of Uiolets, the leaues of Malowes, Marcury & Parietary, ana· M.i. of wormewod, M.ss. take al these greene, & yong make a decoction of these in a sufficient quantity of water: then strayne them, and pressyng them with your handes into this strayner, you must dissolue a li. of Casiafistula &▪ li. i of the best Hony or suger, This purgeth and moueth a man to the stole, it is very expedient for tender and delicate persons, because it is gentle in operation.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diasene?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of lignū Aloes, Cloues, Galinga, Nutmegs Foliū iudicū, Mace Cinamome ana. ʒ.ii. the stone Lazuli. ʒ.i. of Sene, twyse asmuch as of al the other, of Saffron. ʒ.i. of the shauing of Iuory, Spodie, Anacardin, the bone in the heart of the red Deare, little fyshes called Unguis odoratus, ana. ʒ.ii. wyld Lillies ℥.i, Beries of Myrtes, Gentian, Bayberies, Eleborus niger, or Berefoote ana. ʒ.ii. Walnuttes made in pouder, in nomber xv. of Amber ℈.ii. of Hony asmuch as wil suffice. This is good to heale the Leprye some Phisitions mingle with these, serpentes fleshe, This doth remedy al diseases of Melancholy & madnes, the gnawing and grypnyg about the mouth of the stomacke called Cardiaca passio, it taketh away heuines, quarten Agues, and diseases of the spleene.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Decoctio pectoralis
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of dry Hysop, Maydenhere, Figges, Sebesten, Raysens, of Corantes, Barlye, Liquorice, ana, equal partes, boyle these togyther in a sufficient quantity of water, then strain them, and so reserue them This asswageth al payne about the breast, it cureth also the cough & hoarsenes, and if Aster be put in, it helpeth the reume.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Decoctio communis?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Prunes, wyld Dates, Raysons or Corans, Uiolets, Lyquorice Barly ana, equall partes, boyle them in a sufficient quantitye of water, then strayne them,, and kepe them. This decoction is much vsed in hoate Agues, and other hoate diseases, and when the yeare is hoate to temper medecines withall, which be receiued in such hoate Agues, at all tymes. This decoction is chaunged, according to the diuersity of diseases,

because some be hotter than other.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Electuarium Catholicum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take Sene & Casiafystula new drawen, Tamarindes, ana. ℥.vii, Reubarbe, Uiolettes, Polipodie, Anisseede. ana. ℥.iiii. the foure grea
                           •
                        ter cold seedes, ana. ℥ i. take li. i, of Polipodye, and beate it, and seeth it wel in water, and strayne it▪ then make a syrupe with the best suger, temper your Casiafystula and your Tamarindes togeather, and when the decoction is almost made, put them into it with the other spyces, and so make the electuary. This is ministred in hoat and burning Agues because it doth mollify, disperse, and comforte, it doth also cure diseases of the Lyuer, and of the Spleene.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Electuarium Rosatum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Suger, the iuice of Roses, ana. li. i.ss, of the three Saunders, ana. ʒ.vi of Spodye ʒ, iii. of Diagridion ʒ.xii. of Champhire ℈.i. temper it after the forme of an Electuary. with a sirupe made of the same suger, and Roses. This doth purge Choler easely, and healeth hoat diseases in the ioynts, the heade ach, the payne of the eyes, tourning sicknes, and it hath byn proued agaynst the yellow Iaundice.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Electuarium de psyllio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of the iuice of Buglosse, both harde and the wylde, the iuices of Endiue and Smallage, sodden altogeather and syned, ana. li. ii. Anisseede, Sene, ana. ℥.ss. of Maydenhayre. M.i. the iuice of Fumitery ℥.iii, of Asarabacca. ℥.iii. Spicknard ℥.ii. let them lye a day and a night, then set them on the fyre, and suffer them to boyle once, then cast vppon them ℥.iii of Uiolettes, of the harder tyme. ʒ.ii. boyle them once agayne, but with a soft fyre, then strayne them▪ and when they be strayned, put vnto them ℥.iii of Fleaworte and let them all stand a day and a night, but stirre thē continually, this done, presse forth ye slymye sap of them, & take li iiii, of it, & put vnto it. li. ss. of fyne Suger of Scammonye, roasted in an apple. ℥.iiii. after this sette it on the fyre agayne, and seeth it a lyttle, and then put into it of Trochisces, Dyarodon, Trochisces of Spodye, and Trochisces Rubarbary ana. ℥.i. lyttle Balles of Barbaryes ℥, ss. then make youre Asarabacca into a grosse pouder, that it may bee the more laxatyue, you may put also to these confections, greene Uyolettes, and dry Damasens. This purgeth yellow Choller. and healeth the turning sycknes of the head, which commeth of a cholericke humour.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Electuarium Indu maius
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke Cinamom, Cloues▪ Spicknard, Roses, Casiafistula, Mace, Cypresse. ana ʒ.iiii, yellow Saunders, ʒ ii.ss. lignum Aloes, Nutmegges ana. ʒ ii. Turbith. ʒ.i, of Suger Penidies an. ʒ xx. Galinga. Cardamomū Asarabacca, Mastick ana. ʒ.i.ss. of Scammony ʒ xii Beat these altogether with the Oyle of Almondes, then take of the iuice of Quinces, Pomgranetes, the iuice of Smallage, Fenel. ana li. ss. seeth these iuices with clarifyed Hony, vntil they be thicke, and then make the Electuary with the other spyces. This purgeth superfluous humours, and chiefly, Flegmaticke and corrupt humours in the stomacke, and in the other principall partes: it dissolueth wynd, and cureth those diseases which come therof, as the payne of the stomake, and the inward partes, the Collik and payn in the raynes: it doth also consume corrupt humours in the ioyntes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Electuarium stomachi, to comfort the breast.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke the Beryes of Mirtes finely beaten. ʒ.xii. of Roses, Spodie Manna, which is the Flower of Frankensence, of the thre Pepers of yelow Saunders, the flowers of the wylde Pomgarnets, gumme Arabyke, ana ʒ.i.ss. the kyrnels of the Pomgarnets, made in pouder. ʒ vii. of Coryander steeped in Uineger, and made in pouder. ʒ.iii. Sorel, and Playntayn seede, of Roses, ana ʒ.ii. breake them al well, and rub them wyth your handes, then put them into Sorel water, and so make your Electuary. This comforteth the stomacke and the inwarde partes: it stoppeth a Lask, e which commeth of to strong a purgation, and moueth a man to meate.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Electuarium de Gemmis?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of white Perles. ʒ.ii. little peeces of Saphyre, Iacint, Corneline, Emerauldes, Graneties. ana. ℥.i: ss. Setwal▪ the sweete roote Doronike, the rynd of Pomecitron, Mace, Basel seede, ana. ʒ.ii. redde Corall, Amber, shauyng of Iuory. ana. ʒ ii. rootes both of the whyte and red Behen, Ginger long Peper, Spicknard, Fol
                           •
                        um Indicum, Saffron, Cardamom, ana. ʒ.i. of Trochisci Diarodon, lignum Aloes, ana ʒ.v. Cinamom, Galinga, zurubeth, which is a kynd of Setwal. ana ʒ.i ss, thin peces of Gold and syluer, ana. aure ss. of Musk. ʒ.ss. make your Electuary with Hony Emblici, which is the fourth kynd of the Mirobalans with Roses, strained in equall partes as much as wil suffice. This healeth cold diseases of ye Brayne, Harte, Stomack, and the Matrice, it is a medecine proued against the tremblynge of the Harte, faynting and Souninge, the weakenes of

the stomacke, pensiuenes, solitarines, kynges and noble men haue vsed this for their comfort, it causeth them to be bold sprited, the body to smel well, & ingendreth to the face good coloure.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Emplastrum diachylon album?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        TAke of Fenegreeke, Linseede, the roote of Holioke, presse out all these the slimy sape, and take of it one parte, and of Litharge wel beaten, and clēsed from drosse, one part. ss. of olde and cleare Oyle iii. partes, beate the Litharge and the Oyle long in a morter of stone with an yron pestel. Then boyle thē on the fyre softly, styrryng them vntil the Litharge runne togeather, then take it from the fyre, and suffer it to coole, after this take the slymy sape, and boyle it once. Then cast by little and little, the slymy sape of the herbes vppon the Litharge, and the Oyle, beatyng thē with a pestel, till it be thick: Ye may put vnto this emplaster, the fine pouder of Flowerdelice, and you may vse for your common Oyle, which is sallet Oyle, the Oyle of Flowerdelice, some mingle with this the slimye sappe of Melilote. This emplasster is very good agaynst impostumes and hardnes of the liuer and splene, or stomack, swellinge aboute the throat, and all hardnes of euery place.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Emplastrum diachylon magnum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Litharge broken and syfted. ℥.xii. Oyles of Flowerdelice, Camomil, Dyll. ana. ℥.viii. of the slymy sape of Lynseede, Fenegreke, Holyoke rootes, Fygges, Reasons of Corans, and of the fatte in, the belly, of the Seele syshe, the iuice of Flowerdelice, Squilla, & of Hysope. ana. ʒ.xii.ss. of Turpentyne. ℥.iii. the gumme of the Pyneaple tree, yelow Waxe. ana. ℥.ii. make it after this fashion: Beate the Litharge and the Oyles which we did speak of before in a Morter of stone, with a Leaden pestell, by the space of halfe an howre, then let it boyle vppon a soft fyre, stirryng it continually til it be thicke, then take it from the fyre and suffer it to coole, afterward take the slimy sape with the other, and boyle them vntil they be hard, then take it of, and lay it vppon a Marbel stone, and make it in great peeces. This emplaster is stronger in operation, & better to rype, and to resolue al hardnes and inflamations, and is dayly vsed of good Chirurgians, for the excellent vertue therof.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Emplastrum de Musilaginibus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke you the slimy sape of Holyoke seede, of Linseede, of the inner rynd of the Elme tree, of Fenegreeke ana. ℥.iiii.ss. of the Oyle of Camomil of Lillies, and of Dill. ana. ℥.i.ss. of Amoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax,

Serapinum. ana. ℥.ss. of new waxe. ℥.xx. of Saffron. ʒ.ii. Turpentyne. ℥.ii. make it in an emplaster accordingly. This emplaster doth mollify al hardnes of apostumations.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum ad stomacum
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of lignum Aloes,, Wormewood, gumme, Arabyke, Mastike, Cipers, Coste, Ginger. ana. ℥.ss. Calamus Aromaticus, of the finest, Frankinsence, Aloes, ana. ℥.iii.ʒ.iii. Cloues, Mace, Cynamum, Spicknard, Nutmegges. the confection called Gallia Muschata, Squinantum▪ ana, ʒ.i.ss. mingle al these togeather, with the confection called Mina Aromatica which is made of Quinces, Peares, and such other byndyng thinges, lay al vppon a cloth, and perfume theym with a wood of Aloes. This emplaster doth comfort the stomake and Liuer, it increaseth also heat in them and maketh digestion perfect.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum de granis lauri?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of fyne Frankensence, Mastike, Mirhe▪ ana. ℥.l. of Baiberries. ʒ.ii of Cipers, Coste· ana. ℥.ss. clarifyed hony, asmuch as wil suffice to make it, then spreade it vpon a cloth, and so lay it to the soare. This is a very excellent plaster agaynst the Dropsy, and wil asswage al swellynges of Wynde, if you triple the quantity of Cipers, and put vnto the plaister a litle quantitye of Cowes Dunge, or Goattes dryes: it doth also asswage all griefes, which come of colde wynde, and chiefly the payne of the stomake, bellye, raynes, matrice, and Blader.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Emplastrum de Melilote?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke Melilote, and Fenegreeke. ana. ℥.vi. the flowers of Camomil, Baiberies, the roote of Holioke, Wormewood. ana. ℥.iii. Smallagesede, wild Carrowaies, Flowerdelice, Cipers, Spicknarde, Casiafistula, Anisseede ℥.ii.ss. Margerum. ʒ.iii. Amoniacum. ʒ.x. Storax Calamita, Bdellium. ana ʒ.v. Turpentyne. ℥.i ss.xii. Fyges, the Fat of a Goate▪ Bucke, Reisons, ana. ʒ, ii.ss. Waxe. ℥.vi. Oyle of Mergerum. Oile Spyke, as much wil suffice of
                           •
                        o beate them in. This emplaster doth mollify the hardenes of the stomake, Liuer, Spleene, and all inward partes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Emplastrum. coroneum a plaister of great vertue
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the Pitche, whiche is aboute shippes, pressed or strayned waxe. ana. ℥.ii.ʒ.iii. of Serapinum, ℥.ii. of Amoniacum Turpentyne, drye Pitche, Saffron, ana. ℥.i.ʒ.iii. of Aloes, Frankensence,

Mirrhe ana. ℥ i. Opoponax Storax Calamita, Galbanū, Mastike, Alume Fenegreeke, ana. ʒ.iii. of ye Dreges, of Storax liquida, which the Apoticaryes cal stacte, Bdellium, ana. ʒ.iii. of Litharge▪ 
                        ʒ.i.ss. Make it after this fashiō: beate your Serapinum, Galbanum, Opoponax and Amoniacum a little, and temper them with wyne, then boyle them vnto the wyne be halfe consumed, then set it on the fyre in a vessel of Tinne. and when it shal begyn to boyle, put vnto it your Pytch and stir it wel, vntil it be melted, and whē it is melted, put waxe vnto it, and that beyng also melted, put in drye Pitch whiche is called Colophonia, the Storax beaten small with an hoat pestell must be put thereto, afterward Mastike, Frankensence, Myrrhe, Bdellium; and sone after these put in Turpentine, Alume Litharge, and at last of all Fenegreeke: when it is sodden, powre it vppon luke warme water, and than incontinently take it forth agayne, and presse it with your handes, til all the water be forth, this done, make your pouder of Aloes myngled wt the Oyle of Laurell, vppon a Marbel stone. Then make of all myngled togeather, baules or greate peeces, with pouder of Saffron, your hand beyng annointed with the same Oyle of Laurel. This emplaster taketh away al payne which is caused in spittyng, the griefe of the stomacke, which commeth of cold, it doth also dissolue congealed humours in the stomack, and ye hardnes of the splene, it helpeth the dropsy which commeth of Coldnes of ye Liuer, and also the coldenes of the Matrice, if it be layed vpon it, it is excellent.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Emplastrum Oxycroceum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke you Pitche which is aboute shippes, Saffron, Colophony of Waxe, ana ℥.iii. Turpentine, Galbanum▪ Amoniacum, Myrrhe, Frankensence, Mastike. ana. ℥.i.ʒ.iii make it thus, breake the Galbanum, and Amoniacum a little, then lay it in Uineger by the space of a night, in the morning set them on the fyre, and melt them, and when they be melted, strayn them, and seeth them agayne, til the third part of the Uineger be consumed, then put in your pitch beynge pressed or strayned before. When as this is melted, put in Waxe, the which also melted, put in Colophony, and Turpentine, and sone after Mastike, Frankynsence and Myrre, styrryng it alwayes from the begynning to the ende, when it shalbe sodden, put in cold water, afterward washe it vppon a Marbell, anoynted with Oyle, and make it soft and gentle, then cast vpon it the pouder of Saffron, and so make it in great peeces. This cureth broken bones, asswageth all griefes in what part soeuer they be of the Body, it doth also mollify hard impostumes, in any part of all the body of man kynde.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Emplastrum de Ianna.
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     TAke of the iuice of Giloflouers, Plantain, Betony & Smallage ana. li. i. of Waxe and Pytch, Rosen, and Turpentyne, ana. li. ss. make of these an emplaster, sodden on a softe Fyre, vntill the iuice bee

wasted, then put in your Turpentyne, but stirre it wel, that it burne not.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum Gratia Dei?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Turpentyne. li. ss. Rosen li. i whyte Waxe. ℥.iii. Mastike. ℥.i. of Ueruin, Betony, Pimpernel, ana. M.i. beate these herbes, and boyl them in strong whyte wyne, vntil the third part be consumed, then strayne them & cast away the substaunce of the herbes, put into this iuice, the waxe strayned with the Rosen and Mastike, & lette them boyle, styrryng them till they be thicke, take them of, and put in Turpentyne, and mingle al togeather, and make your emplaster, sayth Nicholas.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum contra rupturas?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take of Pytch about shyppes, of Aloes, ana. ℥, of Litharge of red waxe, Colophonye Galbanum, Amoniacum, ana. ℥.i. Misseltoe of the Oke, ℥.vi. of Chalke or Plaster,Misseltoe is called Uiscum or Mislen ye groweth on ye Oke or thoru. of both Aristologia, Longa, and Rotunda, Myrrhe, Frankensence, ana. ℥.vi. Turpentyne. ℥.ii. of comon earthe wormes, of Oke Apples, ℥ iiii. of Campher, and of Daisye, of Bole Armoniake, ana, ʒ iiii. of the blood of a man. li. i. Make it thus,Blood of mā is to be had at Barbars, or blood letters, it must be dryed in the Ouē
                         put the Misseltoe fyrst into the water, and suffer it to boyle long in a decoction wherein a Rammes skyn was sodden, and let it seeth by the space of a day & a nyghte then take it from the fyre, & put vnto it Turpentyne, Litharge, Colophony, Mastyke, the whytest Frankensence, Myrrhe, Galbanū, Amoniacū, & sone, after Comfery and Dayses, Chalke or plaister, and Bolearmoniake, after this set it on the fyre agayn, and put in the bloud of man, & both Astrologies, and last of al Alloes, you must stir it continually: when it is wel sodden, take it from ye fire, you shal know it to be wel sodden, when it wil not cleaue nor sticke vnto your fyngers, then lay it vppon a Marbel stone, anoynted with oyle of Uyolets, and make it soft with woorkyng and labouryng of it with your handes, after this you must beate it agayn in a morter continually by the space of two or three dayes, then reserue it.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum pro Matrice?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of the Roote of Sinkfolye. li. i of Lignum Aloes. yellowe Saunders, Nutmegges, Barberyes, of the flowers of Rosemary or Roses ana ʒ.i. of Cinamum, Cloues, Squinātum, Camomil▪ flowers, ana. ℥.i.ss, Masticke, Frankinsence▪ the confection called Alipta muschata, & Gallia Muschata, of Storax liquida, which is called also Stacte. ana. ʒ.iii. fine Musk. ʒ.ss. of waxe. li. i.ss, of pitch about old ships. li. ii. make an emplaster
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Emplastrum Diuinum
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of Galbanum. ℥.i.ʒ.ii, of Ammoniacū. ℥.iii▪
                        ʒ.ii. Opopanax ʒ. of Litharge. li. i of new Waxe. ʒ.viii. of Oyle Oliue li. ss. Frankinsence. ℥ i ʒ i. of Myrre, ℥.i ʒ.i. of Uerdigrease ℥.i. of Bdellium ℥.ii. of Aristolochia longa ℥ i. of Amentis, which is a kynd yf Chalke. ℥.iiii. mingle al these together and make an emplaster.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Emplastrum de minio.
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     TAke of the oyle of sweete Roses. li. i.ss, oyle of Mirtelles, ye oyntment Populeon, ana. ℥.iiii. of Hennes grease ℥.ii. the Tallow of an Oxe or a Cowe, ana. li. ss. Swynes grease ℥, vii. Litharge of Gold and Syluer, ana. ℥.iii.ss of whyte Leade ℥.iiii. of Turpentyne ℥.x. of Waxe, as mutch as wil suffyce to make your emplaster, accordynge to the Arte somewhat blacke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Emplastrum de Cerusa?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the Oyle of Roses li. ii. of whyte leade. li. iiii. of whyte waxe. ʒ.vi. make an emplaster. This is a very pleasaunt emplaster, agaynste all soares which come by reason of the heate of the sonne or by any other hoote cause, agaynst rubbinges, gallynges, or excoriations of heate.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Emplastrum Palmeum
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        TAke Litharge of Gold. li. iii. of Oyle Oliue, yōg swynes grease ana li. i.ss. of greene Coporas. ℥ iiii. Buddes or toppes of the Date Tree seeth them altogether on the fyre, and styrre them cōtinually, with a sticke of the same Date tree, and if you cannot haue the buddes or tops of the Date tree, you may take the rootes of Reeds. This is a very excellēt plaster agaynst woundes, festered with blood, and agaynst greeuous impostumes, burnings, brusyngs, shoting, and prycking of humours.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Emplastrum Tripharmacon
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Oyle Olife. li. iiii. of Litharge of Gold li ii. of Uineger. li, ss make the plaster accordyngly. This emplaster doth bryng new fleshe agayne in woundes. and doth heale them.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Emplastrum Desiccatiuum rubrum?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke Litharge of Gold. ℥.iii Oyle of Roses, oyle of Uyolets, ana. li ss, of waxe li. xii. the stone called Lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata, of redde leade, ana. ℥.iiii. of Camphur. ʒ i. make ye emplaster. This doth drye vp Byles, and soares clensed.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make your Hiera Picra Galeni?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take of Saffron, Spicknarde, the wood of Balme, Casiafistula, Cynamome, Masticke. ana. ʒ.vi. of Aloes a hū
                        dreth ʒ. and take of Hony asmuch as wil suffice, beate them & worke them al in the Iuice of Colewortes, Wormewood, or wyne that they may be so mingled togeather, as Leauen in dow, put vnto theym Scammony, that they may the better cleaue togeather, and also purge the body of Choler: if you will put thereunto Agarike, & the inner part of Coloquintida, then it wil purge phlegme, and if the flower of harder Tyme be myngled with it, then Melancholy is thereby purged. To make it the more gentle in operacion, and leasse noysome to the Stomacke, the Potecaryes put vnto this composition, twyse so much Aloes, as of al the other kyndes. Youre Aloes must bee broken and washed, that it may the better goe to the Botome of the water, and the drosse which swymmeth aboue, ought to be cast away with the water, and this muste be done twyse or thryse: when it is wel washed▪ then it wil be a very holefome medicyne for the Stomake, and nothing hurtful to the inward partes: after this the other Symples and medicines ought to be mingled, and so it shalbe a very good purgation for weake stomackes. This purgation which is made with Aloes, doth remedy the Iliaca passio, and consumeth superfluous humours, in the stomak, it doth amend the palenes of the face, the eye sight which is dymmed with grosse humours from the stomacke: it prouoketh a man indifferently vnto the stoole, workyng and purging from the Liuer, it doth hurt those which haue a hoat Liuer, but the stomake therby is helped which is cold and flegmatike.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you a Iulep of Roses?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     Fyrst take of Rose water li. iii. of fyne Suger sodden and clarifyed. li. ii. make your Iulep with a soft fyre. Thys quencheth the thirst in hoate Agues, and doth asswage the heate both of the liuer and of the harte: it doth also resyst corruption of humours, and keepeth a man in health.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you a Iulep of Uiolettes▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of the water of Uiolet flowers. li. iii. of Fyne suger sodden and clarifyed li. ii. myngle them and seeth them with a soft fyre. This is a pleasaunt remedy in al burning agues, and for those which haue a hot liuer or hart: it helpeth also those, which haue anye roughnes in the wynde pype or throate, it helpeth the pluresy, and dry cough.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Lohoch de Pino?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the kirnels of the Pine aples. ʒ xxx. of sweete Almonds, Walnuttes made in pouder, the gumme Tragantum, gumme Arabike, Liquorice, the iuice of Amilium, Mayden here, Lilly rootes. ana. ʒ iii. of Dates. ʒ.xxxv. of bitter Almondes. ʒ iii. Hony mingled with the iuice of greate Raysens, fine Suger, fresh butter ana. ʒ.iiii. of the best Hony asmuch as wil suffyce. This doth heale old coughes, shortnes of breath, and causeth a man to auoyde grosse spittle.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Lohoch de Squilla, or Scilla
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take the iuice of Squilla and of clarifyed Hony. ana. li. ss. seeth it vntil it shalbe thicke. This purgeth grosse and tough fleame, congeled in ye wynd pype, & causeth it easely to auoyd, it cureth also shortnes of winde, and the payne of the breast and syde.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Loche sanum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Cinamō, dry Hysope, iuice of Liquorice. ana. ℥.ss. of Iaiubes, Sebesten, ana, in nomber xxx. Reysons of Coranes. pycked Fygges, Dates, ana. ℥.ii. of Fenegreeke. ʒ.v, of Maydenhere, M.i. of anisseede, Folium Indicum, Flowerdelice, Calamint, Linfede. ana. ʒ.iiii. seeth al these in foure pound of water, til halfe be consumed. Then put into this li. ii of Penydies with a confection of Suger, seeth it vntil it be as thicke as Honye, then mingle with this of Pineaples pared. ℥.v. of blaunched Almondes, Liquorice, the gūme Arabyke, of Amilium, ana. ʒ.iii. of Flowerdelice ʒ ii. labor this confection vntil it shalbe thicke and whyte. This cureth the cough & hoarsenes of the voyce, which commeth of cold and fleugmatike humoures which be in the breast and Lunges.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Lohoch de Caulibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     FIrst take of redde Colewort. li. of Saffron. ʒ.ii of Suger, Hony, ana. li, ss. make, your syrupe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Lohoch de pulmone vulpis?.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke the Lunges of a Fox dryed, the iuice of Liquorice, Mayden haire Fenell seede, ana. ʒ.iiii. make it wyth Suger, sodden in water, asmutch as wyll suffice. Some make it wyth the iuice of Mirtes, and then it is both Laxatiue, and also a comforter of the stomacke Thys is a pleasaunt remedie in all consumptions and diseases of the stomacke, it doeth both comofte and clense the lunges.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Mithridatum Manardi?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the Duckes and Drakes bloud, the bloud of a Goose, and of herbe Grace called Rue, Fenell, Dill, Nauewes, ana. ʒ.iii. the roote of Gentian, Trifoly, Squinantum, Frankensence, dry Roses, ana ʒ.iii. whyte and longe Peper, Coste, Ualerian, Anysseede, Cinamom, ana. ʒ.ii. Myrrhe, Spicknard. ʒ.vi. Tormentill, Asarabacca, Amoniacum, ana. ʒ iii. Mace, Agarike. ana. ʒ.ii. Balmeseede. ℈.i. Flowerdelice, Saffron, Rhaphonticum, Mastike, ana ʒ.i. of Stichados. ʒ.v. make a fyne pouder of all these, and put fower tymes so mutch Hony as of the other, and myrt them, beat your poud
                           •
                        rs fynely, and seeth them softly.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Mithridatum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Storax Calamita. ʒ.i.℈.i. of Cloues, Spycknard, ye wood of Balme, Orobus, Louage, the Gum Tragantum, Mastike,This is an excellent Mithridatum. that is of Andromachus, but the best is made at Bisance. Galbanum, Sandarike, the sweete thorne Aspalthus, the Otters stones, the Gumme of Iuie, Bdellium, Terra sigyllata, and Lemnia, Melilote, the Gumme of Ladanum, Opopanar, Ammoniacum, Opium, Brymstone vnsl
                           •
                        ked. Liquerice, Salte Peter, Hipoquistis, Acacia, Roses, Germander, saynct Iohns worte, Sotherne wood, Pionye, Hysope, Organye, Enula campana, Sauyn leaues, the leaues of Baye tree. Aristolochia Longa, the flowers of harder Tyme, Worme seede, Rosemary. Centaury, Scaholme, the flowers of the wyld Pomegarnet, the inner rynde of the Mertyll tree, the flowers of Pomgarnet, Raddysh seede, Squilla, Anisseede, Balme seede, Gette, Henebane, Fenell, Comyn, Cardamomum, Sylecmontan, whyte Mustardseede and Parsley seede, Rue, whyte Popye, Smalage yellow Carets, Clarye, longe Peper, Basyll, Amomum, ana. ʒ i. Gladium, the common Burre, Swynes Nuttes, Capars, Tutsan flowers, the horne of the Red Deare, ana. ℈.ii. of the iuice of Balme, or of Myrte tree, Cynamom, Saffron, Coste, Squynantum. Gynger, Folium Indicum, and in steede of it, Cloues or Spyckenard, Turpentyne washed, Myrre, Frankynsence, Cassiafistula, Agaryke, Spyca Romana, Rhaponticum, Flowerdelyce, Asarabacca, Dyttan, Horehound, the inner rynd of Coloquyntida. Styca, dos, Mugwoort, Calamynte, Pelletarye of Spayne, Grounde Pyne, blacke and whyte Peper, Manna or sweete dewe, Cresses, Synkefoly, ana. ℈.i. of Bayberies. G. vi.ss. of stronge and old Wyne. ℥.i. of Honye asmutch as wyl suffyce, Thys doth cure all diseases of the head, whych come of Colde, and chyefly Melancholy, and fearefull persons, the fallynge Euyll,

the Mygram runnyng eyes and all other diseases of them, the toth ache, and all gryefes and sores of the mouth and iawes, if it be layed on the place infected, if any Reume distill from the head then it must be layed to the Tē
                        ples, after the fashion of an emplaster, it cureth also the Quincie and Apoplexie, whych is whan a man can neyther feele nor moue, it helpeth also the Coughe, shortnes of wynd, spytting of bloud from the Lunges, and all inward diseases, it cureth also stifnesse of members, when the sinewes bee so stiffe that the parte cannot moue, it also helpeth the Crampe, Conuulsions, Palses, diseases about the Mydrif, Raines and the bladder, it breaketh the stone, prouoketh the Flowers stopped, and healeth all diseases of the Matrice, it mollyfieth all hardnesse, and cureth the Goute, and it is a chyefe remedy for all poysons, and agaynst the byting of a mad dogge, or any other beast, if it be layed to the place or drūken, it cureth also Quarten Agues and Quotidiā taken with it luke warme wyne, an hower before ye fit commeth.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Micleta?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the three fyrst kyndes of Micobalans dressed and made in pouder. ʒ ii.ss. Cummin, Anisseede, Folium, Indicum, Amios, Carowayes. ana, ʒ.ii.ss. Cresses seede. ʒ, ii.ss. Bellericum, the fourth and fifte kynd of Mirobalans made in pouder, ana. ʒ.ii. infuse all these in Uineger a day and a nyght, afterward make them in pouder, then myngle with them Spody, the flowers of the wild Pomgarnet, Mastike. Gumme Arabyke, Manna, or sweete Dew, ana. ʒ.ii. stampe them all wyth the Oyle of Roses, and temper them wyth the syrup of the Myrtle tree. This confection hath ben proued agaynst the Emeroides. gnawyng and gripyng of the belly, the bloudy Fluxes of the body, and is to be gyuen in the Syrup of Planten. ʒ.iiii. in the Nyght.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Miua simplex seu Aromatica?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke a hundred. l i. of the iuice of Quinces, put it into a cleane vessell of stone, and let it boyle softly, scumyng of it tyll it be halfe consumed, then strayne it, and let it stand .iiij. howers, and cast vppon it, lx.l i. of olde Wyne, thys done set it on the Fyre and seeth it vntyll it be thycke, some Potycarpes make it wyth these spyces whych follow, & some wythout: they take of the best Cinamom, the lesser Cardamom, ana. ℥.iii, of Cloues ʒ.ii. of Gynger, Mastyke, ana ʒ.i.ss. of Saffron. ʒ.ii of lignum Aloes, Mace, ana. ʒ.ss. stampe all these grosely, except Saffron, and hang them in a clothe, and make them sweete wyth. ʒ.i. of Muske, and wyth. ʒ.ii. of the confection called Gallia Muschata, there be also some other Poticaryes whych make thys confection wyth Suger. Thys confection fortefyeth the stomack. liuer, and all the pryncipall partes, it causeth good appetyte and digestion it stoppeth also vomyting, and fluxes of the body.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Mel Rosatum.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of Red Roses prepared and dressed, as in the Conserues before, ana. ii. partes, of good hony, vi. partes, seeth them wyth a gentle fyre accordyngly, some Poticaries put in equall partes, both of Hony, and of ye iuice of Roses wythout any leaues, some other put also of ye leaues .i. part and ss. and of the iuice .i. part ss. of Hony .iii. partes. This comforteth the stomacke, and doth digest and purge Flegmatike humours conteyned in the Stomacke, or in the Ueynes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Mel violatum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the Flowers of Uyolets .i parte, of good Hony .iii. partes, seeth them with a a softe fyer. Thys is a singuler good remedy in hoat Agues, because it maketh the body moyst and also laxatiue, it asswageth the drynesse of the stomacke and breast.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Mel Anthosatum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Rosemary flowers .i. parte, of Hony .iii. partes, make it as the other before.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Manus Christi?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Suger claryfied and melted in the Water of Roses. l i.ss. seeth these two tyll the water be consumed and the Suger hard, in the end of your decoction put in. ʒ.ss. of Perles or precious stones, made in fyne pouder, then lay it vpon a Marbell stone anoynted wyth oyle of Roses or Uyolets, or Rose water.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oximel simplex?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of good Hony .ii. parts, of Uineger .i. part, of well water .iii. parts, your Hony and water ought to be sodden together, so that no fome be suffered to abyde aboue, then put in your Uineger, and let it seeth well, vntyl your Hony sease fomyng. This doth purge grosse and Flegmatike humours, by makyng of them thinner by dissoluyng them, by opening, and breakyng of them, it doth also disgest the matter whych remayneth of longe Agues.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oxymel Diureticum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the rynde of the roote of Smalage and Fenell, ana. l i.i. Parsilye, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Sperage, Smalage seede, Fenegreeke seede, ana. ℥.i. seeth these rootes and seedes in one. l i▪ of water, and one. l i. of Uineger, vntyll they come to the halfe and a lyttle more, then take of Honye asmutch as wyll suffice, and seeth it well, and make a sirupe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oxymel Squilliticum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of clarifyed Hony. l i.iii. of Uineger of Squilla. l i.ii▪ seeth it sufficiently. Thys dissolueth grosse, toughe, and Flegmatike humours, it cureth also belching which commeth of raw and vndigested homors it healeth also the Bladder exulcerated in mollifying of it.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Oxysaccara simplex?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Suger. l i.i. of the iuice of Pomgarnets. ℥.viii. of Uineger. ℥.iiii. seeth it on the fyre, tyll it come to the forme of a Syrupe. This is very good in Terciā, Quartan, and burnyng Agues. In the sprynge tyme, it purgeth choler in the stomacke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oxisaccara composita?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Maiden hayre, C
                           •
                        teracke, Hartes tongue, Liuerwort, Uiolets, Fenell, Sperage, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Stichworte, ana. l i.i. make it after this fashion: lay your herbes and rootes in the iuice of Pomgarnets by the space of three dayes, vpon the fowerth day, boyle thē a lyttle, and strayn them well. Afterward put vnto them asmuth Suger as wyll suffyce, seeth them tyll they shalbe thycke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you oile of sweete Almonds?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke Almonds and blanch them, and take away also ye inner Rynd, then stampe them well, and make them in massie pieces in a boate place, by the space of fyue dayes, then beate & stampe them together agayne, & then presse them, so that the oyle may issue forth, and if you wyll seeth it agayn in a vessell, set wythin an other, by the space of an houre, and then presse it, it wyll runne mutch better: you shall haue mutch plenty of oyle, if you fyll bagges wyth Almondes stamped, and then lay them vnder hoate ashes or sande, betwene a cloth, and afterward presse them. Thys oyle mollifyeth the roughnes of the throat, the hardnes of the Lunges, and of all the inward parts, it healeth consumpcions, and encreaseth seede in mē, it asswageth the heat of the matrice, and of the priuy parts of a woman, and also the heat of the reynes, and of the bladder, if it be layd to the place.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you oyle of bitter Almondes?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     THis oile must be made in all things lyke vnto the other before. This openeth all obstructions and oppylacions, and causeth wynde to auoyde, maketh the flesh smothe and fayre, it doeth also take awaye spottes, and deformities in the face, ache in the sinewes, and all hardnes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you oile of Baye?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take rype Bayberies, and stampe them well in Water, and straine them, when they bee colde gather of the fat, whych swymmeth aboue, and it shall bee your oyle. This oyle bryngeth heate and mollyfieth, in so mutch that they, whych bee troubled wyth scabbes, ringwormes, or anye sutch sores, be cured therewyth, if they be anoynted, when they bathe them, Cholerike persones, and all those whych be suspected to. haue the Leprosye or any part thereof, must eschue and auoide this oyle: it is a synguler remedy agaynst colde complexions, moist and flegmatike, and those whose ioyntes be affected with cold, it cureth falling away of the haire, taken with the water of Saltpeter: this done, you must also wash your head, with wine and Honie, and with the flower of Fenegreeke, howbeit, if your head bee vexed wyth any gryese of heate, then you must vttrrly eschue this oile
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oleum Sesaminum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take and wash the lyttle grayn Sesamum, from all fylth, then sprynkell vpon it a lytle water with Salte, and rubbe it wyth youre handes, then cast Water vpon it againe, tyll it be moyste, afterward lay it forth to dry, whych thing done, you must take it againe, and dry it better by the fire, so moderately as you can, and after this put it into a bagge of course cloth, and rubbe it again with your hands, til the huske go of, whē the huske is taken of, you must then grynd it, and presse forth the oyle as you dyd in makyng the oyle of Almonds, you may make after this fashion oyle of Lineseede, Popie seede, or Lettyce seede, sauyng that your Lyneseede, may not haue the Huske taken away. This oyle encreaseth fatnes, and seede in a man, it mollifieth the throate, you may also mingle this oile, with many other.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you oile of Spike?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Spike. ℥.iii. of wine and water ana. ℥.ii.ss. Oleum Sesaminum, 
                        l i.ss. seeth these in a double vessell, that is, one set within an other, with a soft fier, by the space of fower houres, and stirre it continually. This is a very good oile against all diseases of colde winde, grieues of the sinewes, stomacke, liuer, splene, reines, bladder, and matrice, the head ache, & megrim.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oleum de Costo?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of drye Coste. ℥.ii. of Cassiafistula. ℥.i. the buddes Toppes of Mergeram. ℥.viii. of sweete wine, asmutch as will suffice to lay the stuffe in two Nyghtes, take of the Oyle of Sesaminum, l i.iii. seeth it as the Oile before. This oile engendreth heate in the sinewes, and in all parts

of the body, it openeth obstructions and opilacions, it fortifyeth ye stomack and Lyuer, it keepeth the hayre from fallyng of, & the head from horenesse, it causeth good colour, and sauour in all the body.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oyle of Rue?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke oyle Olyue, li. iii. the leafe and iuice of Rue, ana. ℥.ii. make an oyle accordyngly. This doeth heale and dry, therefore it is a present remedy against all distillacions and reumes, it asswageth griefes of the breast, and bryngeth heate to colde members.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you the oyle of Dyll?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of oyle Oliue. l i.ii.ʒ.ii the flowers of Dill. ℥.xi. lay the flowers of Dill three dayes in Oyle, and seeth them the fourth, wyth a soft fyre a lyttle, and then take them of, thys done put in to the same decoction. ℥ iii. of Dyll flowers, and seeth it in the same, and kepe it. This oyle asswageth all griefes and aches, it openeth, looseth, and prouoketh a man to sweate, it doth mitigate the colde, and shakyng in Agues, if the backe bone be therewyth anoynted, it causeth sleepe, and cureth the head ache.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you oyle of Camomyll?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Oyle Oliue. l i.iii. of the flowers of Camomill. l i.i. make it as the oyle of Dyl. This doth mitigate al aches, it stoppeth fluxes of humors, bicause it doth loose, and not bynde. Paulus Aegineta doth take. ℥.ii. of the drye flowers of Camomill, without the whytes, and doth couer the vessell with a lynnen cloth, so that the ayre may pearse through, & then doth set it in the Sunne, by the space of fourty dayes, after thys the mouth ought to be wel stopped, and so kept, and if you cannot haue greene flowers, you may take dry, and seeth them in a double vessell, that is, one set within an other, howbeit, the oyle shalbe of lesse strength and efficacye. This oyle is electuarius to the teeth anoynted by it selfe, or by some other temperate thyng, doth open the poares, and causeth the skyn to be thyn, it cureth longe Agues, and all griefes, if the place bee anoynted wyth it, and sweete Wyne.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you oyle of Mirtes.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Salet oyle. l i.iii. of Mirtes stamped. l i.i. of the best UUyne l i.ii. myngle theese togeather, and suffer theym to boyle, vntyll the Wyne bee consumed, then strayne theym, and so reserue it. Thys Oyle doeth refrigerate and bynde, and therefore it cureth the fluxe, whych commeth of weakenes of the stomacke, burnynges, pympelles, Kibes and gaulynges, if the place be therewyth anoynted, it healeth clystes about the Fundament, and the broad piles, the weakenes of the Members, it stoppeth also vomytyng and sweatyng.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you oyle of Flowerdelice?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the Rootes of Flowerdeluce. ℥.ii. and of the flowers. ℥.iiii. and of the Decoction of the Rootes. l i.i. of oyle Olyue. l i.ii. let theym boyle in a double vessell, vntyll the water be consumed, after thys strayne them, and chaunge the rootes, and flowers, and decoction, thys ought to be twyse, and then strayne them, and reserue them: the Poticaries commonly make it after this fashion, how bee it, you shall reade in Dioscorides another forme of makyng this Oyle. This Oyle scoureth, purgeth, loseth, openeth, ripeth, and aswageth aches of colde, it rypeth rawe humours in the Breast and Lunges, it taketh away payne in the ioyntes, and mollifieth the hardnes of them, all impostumes and swellyngs about the necke, or in any other place, it asswageth payne of the Matrice of colde, the Crampe and payne about the Reynes, and the stenche also of the Nose.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Oyle of Roses?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take oyle Olyue, or the oyle of the graine Sesamum, wash it of
                           •
                         wyth well water, then take a sufficient quantity of Leaues of young and red Roses beaten, and couer them wyth the oyle wherein they were washed, and stop the mouth of the vessell, and set it in the Sun by the space of .vii. dayes, afterward seeth it in a double vessel, by the space of three howers, then chaunge agayn the Rose leaues, and take fresh and set theim in the Sunne other seuen dayes, after this seeth them againe, and chaunge them as you dyd before, and put vnto them infusion of Roses, asmutch as of the oyle, and stop the mouth of the Uessell, and set it in the Sunne, by the space of fourty dayes. This oyle (as Mesue wryteth) doth comfort, lose, open, and asswage all aches, it is also good agaynst inflacions, and fluxes of Humours, therefore beyng drunken, it is a present remedy agaynst the bloudye fluxe, and all other fluxes. There be two kynds of thys oyle, the one is made of rype Roses, Leaues▪ and the other of oyle Oliue, and Rose leaues: the first kynd doth moilify, and make the skyn thynne, it openeth, and asswageth all manner of griefes: The second kinde doth refrigerate and binde, and therefore it cureth the headache in Agues, or of the heate of the Sunne, it asswageth burnyng▪ which is engendred of wynde, in a full stomacke, and finally it cureth all aches of the head, if the place be there with anoynted, it is also a present remedy against payne in the stomacke, or Bowelles commyng of sharpe humors, if it be mixt wyth. ℥.ii. of Mastike, and with a 'ytle quantity of Waxe, it aswageth all red inflamacions, if the place be anointed wyth it.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you oyle of Uiolets?
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     FIrste take Oyle Oliue. l i.ii. of younge Uiolets stamped. ℥.iiii. put them into a Glasse, and set them in the Sunne by the space of .vii. daies, afterward

boyle them in a double▪ Uessell by the space of three howers, then streyn and reserue them. Paulus Aegineta doth call this oyle, Iaton and wryteth that it is made eyther of Purple Uiolets, or els of yelow Uiolets, whych many iudge to be Hartesease: he wylleth also that the Uyolets shall stande .x. dayes in the Sunne and be thrise chaunged▪ and the vessell to bee so stopped that no ayre may enter in, and in the meane time you may put in dry Uiolets. This asswageth all inflamacions in what part so euer they be, it mollifyeth exulceracions and horsenes of the breast or lunges, it mitigateth hoat apostumes, and the pleuresies.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oyle of Quinces?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of the Quinces whych be not fully rype, and stampe them, and of the iuice of them, ana, equal parts, of the oyle of vnripe Oliues. asmutch as wyll suffyce, put it into a Glasse, and set it in the Sunne by the space of .xv. dayes, then set it in a double Glasse, whych is one vessell set within an other by the space of foure howers, then chaunge your Quinces, and the iuice of them once or twise, and make it as you dyd the other, after this streyne it, and reserue it. Dioscorides doth shew an other and a better way to prepare this oyle, Paulus Aegineta doth call this oyle Melinon, and maketh it after this sorte: he doth take of Quinces vnpared. ℥.iii. of the oile of vnrype Oliues. ℥.xviii. and doth sette it in the Sunne .xl. dayes. Thys Oyle fortefieth the stomacke, and the pryncipall members. and the sinewes which be lose and weake, it prohibiteth ouermutch sweating. it is also a present remedy against all Fluxes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you oyle of Masticke.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        This Oyle is so good, that it is called the second, that is fewer better, for the vertue therofTAke of Masticke. ℥ iii. oyle of Roses. ℥.xii. of good wine. ℥.viii. seeth thē in a double vessell accordingly. This Oyle, as Mesue writeth, is the second for hys vertue, for it comforterh the stomacke, sinewes, lyuer, and ioyntes, it doth mollify hard apostumes, and asswageth aches.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Oleum Castoreo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take. ℥.i. of the Otters stones, and seeth them in one pound of oyle Oliue, vntyll the thyrd part be consumed, then keepe the oyle in the pouder of the O
                           •
                        ters stones.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Oleum de Euphorbio.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Euphorbe. ℥.ss. of Oyle of Hartes ease. ℥.v. of sweete Wyne as mutch, seeth it tyll the Wyne be consumed, and then reserue it. This oile is very good against cold diseases of the sinewes, the ache of them▪ and of the ioinctes, the paine of the Liuer and spleene, the head and the

Reume, the Uertigo and forgetfull diseases. Galen doth make thys Oyle Oliue of Euphorbe, accordynge to the Pacients infyrmitie, as it doth appeare in the second booke De composicio Medicamentorum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Oleum vulpinum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke a whole Foxe, except the vowels, and put hym in a vessell, and powre vppon him Welle water, and salte Water. ℥.xviii. of olde oyle. l i.iii. seeth thys ouer a softe fyre, wyth. ℥.iii. of Salte vntyll the Water be consumed. then put it into a vessell, and powre to it sweete Water, wherein the herbes were sodden. l i.ii. and Time. M.ii. seeth them agayn, tyll the water be consumed. Thys oyle is a chief remedy agaynst the payne in the ioynctes, that is called Arthritica passio, agaynst the Goute in the feete, & payne in the raynes, and backe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Oleum de Tartaro?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the lies of whyte wyne. l i.ii. or els asmutch as you iudge beste, make it in pouder, and wrape it in a lynnen cloth, or in towe, then myngle it agayne wyth stronge whyte Uynegar, afterward drye it agayne vnder hoate ashes, vntyll it shalbe very black, then make it in pouder agayne, and set it in a Uessell in a colde place, and so let it stand by the space of .viii. dayes, tyll it shalbe resolued into oyle and runne, and if it wyll not runne of it selfe, then presse it wyth your handes into a Glasse. Wyth thys oyle women doe anoynte theyr faces, to make them smothe and faire, for it clenseth the face merueilous well wyth Camphere.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Oleum de Scorpione
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take twenty Scorpions, more or lesse, accordyng to theyr quantity, put them into a vessell of Glasse,Dry your Tartar in an Oucu. and powre vpon them l i.ii. of oyle of bytter Almondes, stop the mouth, and set it in the Sunne .xxx. dayes, and so vse it. Thys oyle is the most present remedy, to breake the stone in the reines, or the bladder, chiefly if the reynes or the necke of the bladder, or the places there about, be anoynted wyth it, or els it be ministred in by the yerde, it is also made wyth olde oyle, and mixed wyth many other medicines, whych be good agaynst poyson: it is also a present remedy agaynst the pestilence, or stingyng of Scorpions.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oyle of garden Lillies.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of oyle Oliue. l i.i. of flowers of whyte Lylles.You shal haue Scorpions at the Poticaries. ℥.iiii. make this oyle, as you dyd the oyle of Camomill, Paulus Aegineta doth shewe another way of makyng of thys Oyle. This Oyle is very good against womens diseases, runnyng soares of the head, the scurfe, or any other breaking forth, if yt place be therwith anointed, it is also good against al

diseases, and aches of colde, and inflamacions, also anoynted with Saffrō: if it be drunken, it wyl purge choler but it is noysome to the stomacke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oleum de Papauere?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        Nenuphar, is the water 
                              〈◊〉
                           , whyte or yelow.FIrst take of the flowers and greene heads of Popie stamped ana. ℥..iii. of oyle Oliue not rype, l i.i.℥.iii. make your oyle accordyngly. Thys oyle asswageth headache, and causeth a man to sleepe when the cause of wakyng commeth of heate or vapours ascendyng to the head, if the temples, nose, eyes, or forehead be therewyth anoynted.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oleum Nimphaeatum album?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of oyle Olyue not rype. l i.i. of the flowers Nenuphar whan they be fresh, and stamped. ℥.iiii. kepe them in a vessell of glasse and repare it as you dyd the oyle of Uiolets, both for settyng in the Sunne, and for the seethyng and chaunging of the flowers, and the mixing of the decoction. This oyle hath almost the vertues of the oyle of Poppie, but because it is not so cold, and doth not so mutch dulle senses therefore we myngle wyth it the Oyle of Popie to cause a man sleepe the better, it altereth a hoat complexion, vnto what parte so euer it be layed.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oleum Menthae?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Mintes leaues, and of the iuice of it. ana. ℥.iiii. vnripe oile Olyue l i.iii. put these into a vessell of Glasse, and set them in the sunne by the space of .xv. dayes, stoppyng the Mouth of it, thys done boyle them .iiii howers, then strayne them wel, this beyng don, afterward strayne it, and so let it be kept. Thys oile is good for a weake and a cold stomacke, it stoppeth vomyting, and causeth digestion, it moueth a man to his meate, and mollyfieth all hardnes in what part of the body so euer it be.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Oyle of Wormewood?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the buddes, toppes, and iuice of Wormewood, ana. ℥.iii. of oyle Olyue. l i.iii. you shall make thys as you dyd the other. Thys doth comforte and bryng heat to cold members, it fortefyeth the stomacke, and causeth good appetyte, it openeth obstructions and healeth diseases whych come of a cold cause, it destroyeth wormes and doth bryng them forth, if it be mixte wyth oyntments and plasters and layd to the place.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Oleum Lumbricorum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of earth wormes l i.i.ss. of oyle Oliue. l i.ii. of wine. ℥.ii. boyle them all together, and make an oyle accordingly. This is comfortable to the sinewes vexed wyth cold, and good for the ache of the ioynctes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Oleum de Cherua or alba viola?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Flowers of Hartesease. ℥.xii. of Oyle oliue.This sweete herbe grow-vpon walles and in Gardens▪ it florisheth in Apryll and Maye. 
                        l i.ii. the flowers of Hartesease must be layed .iii. dayes in Oyle, seeth them well on the fourth day wyth a soft fyre, this done, put vnto the decoction. ℥.iii. of the flowers of Hartesease, then set it in the sunne and reserue it. Thys oyle openeth, loseth and asswageth payn of the Ioyncts and Sinewes, Breast, Reines and Bladder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a Pomander?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Storax Calamita. ℥.i.ss. of Beniamin. ℥.ii. of the gumme Ladanum. ℥.ss. of Cloues, whyte Saunders, ana. ʒ.iii. of Roses, Mergeram, ana. ℥.ii.ss. mingle wyth these pouders of Musk and Ambergrice, ana. ℈.i. make your baule wyth the infusion of Rose water and Sinet, in a morter somewhat warme.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diahyssopus Nicholai, which is greatly cōmended of Cordus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     IT is a very holsome medicine, and must be thus made as foloweth, take Hysop, Yreos or Flowerdeluce roote. Time, blacke Peper, ana. ʒ. —xxx. Puliall roial, Sauory, Rue, Commin. ana. ʒ.xx. ye Fruict of Dates, Tragagant, Liquerice, fat Fygges, Raysens of the Sun wythout stones, Fenell, ana. ʒ.x. Ginger, vncollered Caro waies, Louage seede, ana. ʒ, v. and Suger, beate your dryed thyngs in a brasse morter, and your moyst thyngs in a stone morter. and then temper them together according to arte as Manus Christi or softer. Thys Dia is good to be eatē for the coldnes of the head, and fastneth vp the vuila, purgeth the arteirs, stomacke, Lunges, Cough. & helpeth Pleurises, and thys is good for thee, for thou arte mutch troubled wyth these euyls.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diacostum, after Mesue?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     YOu must make it thus. Take sweete Cost Arabicum, or for that Costmary the whytest, the wood of Cassia, Cinamom, ana. ℥, v. the seedes of Smalage, of Anisseede, & Rubarbe and Squinans ana. ʒ.iii. Azarabacca rootes, Saffron, Aristolochia, Myrrhe, ana. ʒ.ii. and Suger as mutch as wyl suffice, stampe youre dried things in a morter, and serse them and stampe your moyst in a stone morter, and myngle them together, and seeth your Suger wyth Rose water, put in your receiptes in the ende, and make ir as hard and as soft as you wyll, thys helpeth Dropsyes, and stoppings of the Guts, wynd, cold or rawnes, paines of the collyke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Diatrion Sandalon Nicolaj?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the three kyndes of Sanders, whyte, red and yellowe, of red Rose leaues, fyne white Suger▪ ana. ʒ.iii. Rubarbe, Spodium the Sprupe

of Liquerice, Purslen seede, ana, ʒ.ii.℈.ss. G. v. Amyle, gumme of Arabike, and of Tragaganth, the seedes of Melons, Cucumexs, Gourdes, Citrons Succorie. or Endiue, ana ʒ.i.ss. Camphire. ℈, i. and Suger to seeth it in, when the pouders be fynely serced, and the Gummes resolued, and so temper them in your panne, hauing Endiue or Burage water: this is most holsome against all the sickenes of the lyuer comming of heate aboue nature, and helpeth the yellow Iaundice and causeth sleepe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you that most worthy and excellent Cordiall, Diamuscum dulce?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     YOu must vse these simples folowyng Take Saffron, Doronike, Setwall, wood of Aloes, Mace. ana. ʒ.ii. whyte fine perle, rawe white silke dryed and beaten into pouder, Carabe or Crabfysh, red Corall, Gallia Muschata, sweete Basell, or Balme, the whyte and the red Ben, or the flowers, Spicknard, Cloues, ana ʒ.i. whyte Ginger, Cubebes long Peper. ana, ʒ.i. sweete Muske, Ambergrice, ana. ℈.i.ss. beat these finely in pouder, and with Suger and Rose water seeth them accordyngly into a thickenes, tē
                        per it still, and powre it vpon a Marbie stone. This is good against the passions of the heart, in swellyng of the stomacke, lacke of sleepe, fallyng sickenes. and shortnes of breath to be eaten mornyng and euenyng. You maye make an other good Diamuschum Amarum, of a stronger effect, against the Dropsy, to dry moyst hūmours, and to clense corruption, or putrifaction wt
                        in the body: if you adde these thynges. Take dry Wormewood, fine yellow Aloes, Castor whych be Beuers stones, and Louage seede ana. ʒ.iii.ss.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pouder of Uiolets?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of flowers of Uiolets. l i.ss. of Roses. ℥.iiii of Cipers. ℥.ss of Merg
                           •
                        rā, Cloues, ana. ℥.i. whyte Saunders, Beniamin, ana. ℥ iiii. of Storax Calamita. ℥.i.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Puluis contra Pestem?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Sinkefolie, Dittan, Tunis, Scabious, Buglosse rootes, ana. ℥.ss. the kernels of Pomcitron, Sorell, ana. ʒ.iiii. of Coriander ʒ.ii. of red Roses. ʒ.i. of Purselin seede. ʒ.ii the shauyng of Iu
                           •
                        rie. ʒ.ii. of whyte and red Corall▪ ana. ʒ.i.ss. of Terra Sigillata, ℥.ss. of Bole Armoniake ℥.ii. mingle them and make a pouder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Puluis de Boloarmenio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of ye thre Saūders, Galāga Aloes, Cinamō, red Coral, red Roses, the seede of Melons, ana. ʒ.ss. the rootes of Tunes and Sinkefolie. ana. ʒ.iii. the shauing of Iuerie, of Hartes horne, ana ʒ.ss of Anisseede, Fenell seede, Ginger ana. G. xv. of Sorell seede, of the Kirnels of Pomecitron, Iuniper

seede, Cloues, ana. ʒ.ss. of Bolearmoniake. ʒ ii. make a pouder thereof.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Puluis contra Lumbricos?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Wormewood. ℥, i. of Lupynes. ʒ.i.ss. myngle them and make a pouder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Puluis bezoardicus?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of Bolearmoniake. ℥.ii. of red Roses, or Sorell seeede, of the Kernelles of Pomecitron, of Hartes horne made in pouder, Rue seede,Let this Bolearmoniake bee put in a little Uineger. and to dryed the roote of Doronike, Amber seede of Sowthistel or Carduus Benedictus. ana. ℈ iiii of both Corals, of lignum Aloes, of rawe silke, neither coloured, nor dyed. but as it cometh from the silkeworme, of the thre Saunders, of Perles, of the bone in the Hart of the red Deare. ana. ʒ.i. of the Emerode. ℈.ii. of the pouder of Perles, of Sinkefolie, Dyttan, Tunis, Scabious, Coryander, Terra Sigillata, ana. ʒ.ii. of Camphyre. ℈.ii. of Saffron. G. xv. of Amber, ℈.ii. of Muske. ℈.iiii & make a pouder, if it be put in the syrupe of Ribes, it is a goodly Cordial.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Penides?
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     
                        TAke of the Best Suger. li. i or .ii. and at the most three, and put it into a vessel of Brasse, beyng couered within with Tinne or els into an earthen vessel, one of Brasse is better for this purpose, wet your Suger with such a quantity of sweete water as wil couer it, and if youre Suger bee very good and stronge, mingle with it for euerye pound of it ℥.i. of Hony, then sprinkle vpon it oyle of sweete Almondes, and if you haue not thys Oyle, you may vse some other in the steede of it, set your vessell on a fyre of coales without smoke, and seeth it vntil the water be almost consumed, you shal know whether it be sodden ynough or no, thus: take a dropof it, and lay it vppon a Marble stone, and touch it with your finger, if it appeare lyke threads, and wil cleane, and sticke vnto your fynger, then take it from the fyre, and lay it vppon a Marbel stone, and draw it abroad after that ye haue mingled it with the Oile of sweete Almonds, or of Sizamin, after this gather it togeather agayne, as hote as your handes wil suffer, afterward draw it forth agayne with your handes, as sweete Elec
                           •
                        uaries be drawen, and then sticke a croked naile very hygh in the wall▪ and cast it vpon the croked nayle, and so draw it long til it be whyte, you must keepe it by the fyre, as long as you do draw it, that it may be hote, and more gentle to draw, when you iudge it to be whyte ynough, then cut it with sheres in peeces, if you make this confection roundelong, or otherwyse, then take of whyte Amilum▪ breake it and stampe it, and lay it vppon the Marble stone, and then cast vpon it the paste of Penidies. and rolle and cut it,

and so make it in what kynd so euer you wil, how be it, you must make it quickly, least it waxe cold betweene your handes, this done, lay it in a siue, or in some other lyke thing ny
                           •
                         the fyer, by the space of an hower, then take it away, and reserue it: This is good for the Lunges or Cough.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Pignolatum?
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     THis confection is made with Sugar, dissolued in Rose water, and wel clarifyed, and when it is sodden ynough, put in Pineaples pared, and let it stand and coole, til it come to the forme of a hard confection, and then reserue it.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you piluliae sine quibu
                              •
                            esse nolo?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrste take of Alo
                           •
                        s washed ℥.xii of the fyue kyndes of Mirobalans, Reubarbe, Mastik▪ Roses, Wormewood, Uiolets, Sene, Agarike, Doder, ana. ʒ. temper them with the iuice of Fenel, into the which you shal put ℥ vi. of Scamony wel broken, how be it, myngle youre Scamonye wt the iuice of Fenel, then presse forth your iuice with the Scamony, so much as wil suffyce for the c
                           •
                        nco
                           •
                        tion, then make your pilles with your handes, anoynted with ye oyle of Uiolets, or Oyle Oliue. These be present Pilles to purge Choller, Fleume and Melancholye agaynste euil sighte whiche commeth of aboundaunce of humours, agaynst payne of the Eares, and of Iliaca passio.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae Aureae?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana. ℥.v. of Roses, Smalege seede. ana. ℥.ss. of Anisseede, Fenelseede, ana. ʒ.i of Mastike. ʒ.i. of Saffron, of the inner part of Coloquintida, make your pilles, with the infusion of 
                           •
                        um 
                           •
                        ragan
                           •
                        um, these be very excellent pilles to purge the head, & to amend the Eye syght, the wynd in the stomacke or Bowelles, and they purge without any payne.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Pilulae Cochiae?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of ye pouder of Hiera picra ℥.x. of Coloquintida. ℥.iii.℈.i. of Scamony ʒ ii of Turbith, Sticados, ana. ʒ, v. myxe it with ye syrupe of Sticados & so make your pilles. These do purge the hed marueilously wel, but chiefly of grosse and cold humours, they asswage the head ach & reume.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae de octo rebus?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana. ʒ.ii. of the inner parte of Coloquintida, and of the flowers of harder Tyme, Agarike, Mastike, the thyrd kind of Mirobalans, Wormwood, ana. ʒ.i. temper theim with the iuice of Nyght shade.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae de Mirobalanis?
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     FIrst take of the fyue kynds of Mirobalans, Agarike, Diagridion, Coloquintida, Sene, ana. ℥.ss. the flowers of the harder Time, Turbith, Anisseede, Fenel, Mastike, ye stone Lazuli. ana. ℥.iii. of Aloes. ʒ.i. make these Pilles with the iuice of Wormwood, and if you mingle a little Ginger with them, your pilles shal be the better. These pilles be very good agaynst the ache of the Hyp or Huckel bone, the Goute and ye spleene. They doe clear the syghte, and purge burnt choller.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you pilulae Elephanginae
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take of Cinamom, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus, Mace, Nutmegges, Cardamom, Cloues Asarabacca Mastike, Squinantum, Spicknard, the fruite of Balme, ana ℥ i, of dry Wormwood and Roses, ana. ʒ.v. stampe them, but not small, and then put vnto them. li. xii. of water, seeth them til two partes of the water be consumed, then rubbe them with your handes, and strayn them, and presse forth the water, this done, take of Aloes Succotrine. li. i. washe it in a Skillet, or such lyke vessel of stone, couered, or els with glasse: you must wash it oft, & with rayne water, then dry it, and cast vppon it. li. ii. of that which you did presse forth before, drye it in the Sonne, then myngle it with youre Aloes of Myrrhe, Mastike, ana. ʒ.v of Saffron ʒ.iii. beate them wel and cast vppon theym the residue of that, whiche was strayned, and rubbe theym with your handes vntil they be broken: manye Poticaries wash Aloes wt infusion of Rubarbe. These pilles asswage payne of the stomacke very wel, the brain, and the instrumentes of the senses, from grosse and corrupte humours.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae Aggregatiuae?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of the fyrst kynd of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe, ana. ʒ iii. of ye iuice of Egrimony and Wormwoode, ana. ℥.ii of Diagridion, ʒ vi. of ye thyrd kynd of Mirobalans, Coloquintida, Polipody, ana. ʒ.ii, of the best Turbith▪ of Aloes, ana ʒ.vi. of Mastike, Roses, Salgem, the Flower of harder Tyme, Anisseede, Ginger, ana. ʒ.ss. of the Electuarye of Roses, as

much as wil suffice to make it thicke. These pilles be verye good agaynste long Agues, and those which be vexed with superfluous humours, ache of the head, stomacke and Liuer, they purge corrupt Choler, Melancholy and Fleume, they quicken and refresh the instrumentes of the senses.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilles of Reubarbe.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Liquorice, iuice of Wormewood, Mastike, ana. ʒ.i. of the first kynde of Mirobalans.Citrine Mirobalans bee taken for the first kynde 
                        ʒ.iii ss. of Smallage seede, wylde Lillies, Fenel, ana. ʒ.ss. of Trochiscie Diarodon, ana. ʒ.iii.ss. of Hiera Picra ʒ.x. of Reubarbe. ʒ.iii.. make theym with Fenell water. These Pilles cure long Agues, and those, which be also engendred of dyuers grosse and corrupt humours, they asswage the payne about the liuer, and chieflye they cure the dropsy: some Phisitions vse these in the end of a mixt tertian, you may make theym stronger with other Symples as you iudge best for the pacient, take of these in the morning. ʒ.ii. or ʒ.i.ss.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae de Sarcocolla?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the gumme Sarcocolla ʒ.iii. of Turbith. ʒ.iiii of Coloquintida ʒ.i.ss. of Salgē. ʒ i. dissolue the Sarcocolla in Rose water, and mingle all the other with it, & so make your Pilles, these purge Fleume, how be it, few Phisitions do vse them.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae faetidae maiores?
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe
                     
                        FIrst rake you of Serapinum, Amoniacum, Opoponax, Bdellium, Coloquintida, wyld Rue, Aloes, the flowers of the harder Tyme, ana. ʒ.v. of Spurge, Scammonie. ʒ.iii. of Cinamū, Spicknarde, Saffron, the Otters stones, ana. ʒ.i. of Turbith. ʒ.iiii. of Gynger. ʒ.i.ss of Euphorbe. ʒ.ii. dissolue your gumme in the iuice of Leekes, and so make your Pylles. These Pilles purge grosse humours and be very good agaynst ache in the ioyntes and gout in the feete. agaynst payne in the backe, knees, stomacke, the Colike, why
                           •
                        e Leaprey and Poxe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae de Eupho
                              •
                           bio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Euphorbium, Coloquintida Agarike, Bdellium, Serapin. ana· ʒ.ii. of Aloes. ʒ.v. Make Pilles with the iuice of Le
                           •
                        kes. These purge fleame, and do also mollify, they cure the Paulsey, and purge grosse humours,A good pil for S
                              •
                           ta
                              •
                           ica. which haue course to the ioynts and sinewes, they cure the ach & payne in the Hippe, and Huckle bone of humours.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae lucis maiores?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health
                     
                        FIrste take of Roses, Uyolettes, Wormewoode, Coloquintida, Turbythe, Cubebes, Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegges, Spicknarde, the Flower of harder Tyme, the seede and wood of Balme. Siler Montanum, Rueseede, Squinantum, Azarabacca. Mastyke, Cloues, Cinamum, Anisseede, Fenell, Smallage, Casiafistula, Saffron, Mace, ana. ʒ.ii. of all the kyndes of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe. ʒ.vi. of Aloes Succotrine asmuch as of them al, make them with the iuice of Fenel. These be present remedies against dimnes of the syght, they purge the instruments of the senses, and superfluous humours, they kepe the body strong and in health,
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae Lucis minores?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the wood of Balme, and the seede of Balme, ana. ʒ.i. of Selyden. ʒ.v. of Roses, Uyolets, Wormewoodde, Eybryght, ana. ʒ.iii. of Sene, the flowers of harder Tyme, of all the kyndes of Mirobalans, of Agarike, Coloquintida, Squinance, the stones Lazuli and Licius, ana. ʒ.ii.ss. of Aloes succotryne, as mutch as of them all, make theym with the iuice of Selendine or Fenell. These do purge Melancholy better then the other.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae de Lapide lazuli?
                  
                  
                     Healthe
                     TAke of the stone Lazuli washed. ʒ v. the flowers of harder Tyme of Polipodye, ana. ʒ.viii. of Scammonie, of Salte, ana. ʒ.ii.ss. of Agarike, ʒ.viii. of Cloues, Anisseede, of Hiera Picra, ʒ.xv, make them with the iuice of Endiue. These be excellent Pilles agaynst long diseases of, Melancholy and burnt choler,
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae de Bdellio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Bdellium. ʒ, xii. of Anisseedes. ʒ.iii. of al kindes of Mirobalans of Amber, ana. ʒ, ii.ss. mingle your Bdellium with the iuice of Lekes & so make the Pilles. These Pilles haue bene proued agaynst rūning Emeroides, and the soares of them, and to stoppe the termes menstruall in women.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae de Hermodactylis?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of wyld Lillies, of Aloes, of yelow Mirobalanes, of Turbith,Hermodactile be 11. kindes one lyke a Lilly hauyng one rote the other lyke Saffron both roote and flower, but wer 
                              •
                           ut greater, but this is called in the Greeke Ephemeron. Coloquintida, Bdelium, Serapium, ana. ʒ.vi. of the Otters stones, of the

gumme Sarcocolla, Euphorbe. Opopanax, wyld Rue, Smallage, ana. ʒ.iii. of Saffron. ʒ.i.ss. Mingle these with the iuice of Colewortes, and make them in Pilles.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae Arthriticae.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Ephemeron, Turbith, Agarik, ana. ʒ.iiii. of Casiafistula, Spicknard, Cloues, the wood and seede of Balme, Ginger, Mastike, Fenel▪ Anisseede, Sarifrage, Sperage Kneeholme or Buchers Brome, Roses, Gromel seede, Salgem, ana ʒ.ss. of Aloes succotrine, as muche as of them all, make them with the iuice of Fenell. These Pilles cure the gout of the ioynt of the feete.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilulae stomachisae?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Aloes. ʒ vi. of Masticke, of Roses, ana. ʒ.iii. make them with the iuice of Nightshade.Mesues pilles for the stomake. These purge the stomack and head. You maye make them with mirobalans Citrine, Aloes, Turbith, ana ʒ.x. Roses, Spicknard, Mastike, ana. ʒ.ii.ss. Anisseedes ʒ.i.ss sal Gemme, and Saffxon ana. ʒ.i. make this with Syrupe of Wormwood.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Pilulae ante cibum
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of lignum Aloes, Cloues, Folium Indicum, Mastyke, ye wood and seede of Balme, Cassia wood. Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamum, Cuvebes, Saffron siler Montan, Spicknarde, ana. ʒ.ii. of Reubarbe, & Aloes succotrine, as much as of them all, myngle them with sweete wyne, and make your Pilles. These pilles cause good digestion, & distribute meat vndigested, and must be taken before meate.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pilles of Agarike, or Agarici.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Agarike, Mastike, ana. ʒ.iii. garden Lylly rootes, horehound ana. ʒ.ii. of Turbith ʒ.v. Hiera picra ʒ.ii. of Coloquintida, the gumme Sarcocol, ana ʒ.ii of Myrrhe. ʒ.i make these with the iuice of Herbes or frutes fyned eyther in the sonne or by the fyre, and this iuice so fyned, is called of the Pothicaryes Rob. These Pilles purge the stomacke frō grosse and corrupt humours, and they be very good agaynst shortnes of ye wynd, and old coughes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Pilles of Fumiterre,
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the fyue kyndes of Mirobalans, ana. ʒ.v. of Aloes. ʒ.vi. of Scammony. ʒ.v. mingle them with the iuice of Fumiterre, and let them stand til they bee dry, then sprinckle on agayne the iuice of Fumiterre, and suffer

them agayne, to drye and so do the thyrd tyme, then let them stand vntill they bee thicke, and then make your pilles.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you pilulae communes?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Aloes. ʒ.ii. Saffron, Myrrhe, ana, ℥.i. make them with sweet wyne.This pille is agaynst the pestilence, and called Ruffi. These Pilles be much vsed of the Phisitions if they be taken in sommer, and if you take them in the plague time, then you must put vnto them as much Bolearmoniake as of Aloes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae Assaieret?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     Fyrst take of Hiera Picra. ℥.i. of Mastyke, of yellow Mirobalans ana. ℥.ss. of the best Aloes. ʒ.ii. make your Pilles with ye iuice of Sticados. These Pilles be a present remedy agaynst headache.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Pilulae Bichicae
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of the iuice of Liquorice, Amilum, Tragantū. gumme Arabyke, sweete Almondes, ana. ʒ.i. of Sugar. ʒ.iii. make them with the slimy sappe of the seede of Quinces.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you pilulae Imperialis?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Cinamom, Amomum, Anisseede, Mastike, Cardamom, Ginger, Setwal, Mace, Nutmegges, Cloues, Saffron, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Turbith Manna, or sweete dew, Agarike, Senecods, Spicknard, of the fiue kyndes of Mirobalans, ana, ℈ i. of Reubarbe, as muche as of them al, of Aloes asmuch as of al the other, make them with the syrup of Roses or Uyolets,
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you pilulae de Hiera picra?
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     TAke of the pouder of Hyera picra simplex. ℥.i. make them with the conserue of Roses as much as wil suffice.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     SOme tyme the bodyes of men, women, and children, be so weak▪ & feble, that they be not able to receyue purgations by Electuaryes, Pilles or Clisters, what easy meanes is then to be founde, to purge the belly, I pray you tel me?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        
                        THere be dyuers meanes to be found, as appeareth by Nicolaus Myrepsy, whereas he teacheth how to make Suppositores, as for example here is one of them. R. Elleborus the blacke.To make good suppositories laxa
                              •
                           iue. 
                        ʒ.ii. and good yellow Aloes. ʒ.i. and Mousedung. ʒ.iii beate these in pounder, seth them in Hony, vntil the thicknes of a Suppositorye, then make one or two in the forme of a long smal fynger, then put a little fyne Cotten vpon the end thereof, and so put it in the body, and this wil bryng forth both Choler and fleume: also here foloweth an other to pul doune the swellyng of the belly, wynd in the great guttes, Cholike or such like, take the seede of Rewe, called herbe Grace or of wyld Rue,Suppositories to helpe Colike of Agarike, ana ʒ.iii. Commine wel dryed, Turbite, ana. ʒ.ss. Diacridium. ʒ.ss. G. iiii beate these fyne in pouder accordinglye, then put in salt Peet
                           •
                        r, or comon salt. ℈ iiii. and seeth it in Hony, as is aforsayd. Here also doth follow the making of an other, to relaxe the Belly take of the iuice of Rapes, or Panis Porcinus, ℥ i. and salt of the Earth, or common Salte. ℈ iiii, and Hony asmuch as wil suffice, as in the maner aforesayd. But if you wil purge Choler adust, fleume, or wynde, in the belly, R. Colocinthidis, called Coloquintida, the inward part therof, but not the seedes. ʒ.iii Polipody cleane washed ʒ.iii. Bulles or Oxe gaule. ʒ.i. & Hony, as example before. I haue shewed you ye way of purging suppositers, now shal I shew you ye maner to make some suppositers to heale Dysenteria, or fluxe of Bloud, commyng from the apostumations bred in the Liuer,Suppositories to stop flu
                              •
                           es. and somtyme a perilous fl
                           ••
                        e, with rasyng or excoriation, continual tormentes, and most greeuous parties in the Guttes, with casting out yellow choler, sharpnes of bloude, choller adust, salt fleume, which sicknesses haue slayne many men, women and children, for lacke of helpe.
                     R. Opium, which is ye iuice of Poppye dryed, Mirrhe, Castorium, which 
                           •
                        e the dryed stones of Beuer,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            is Beuers stones Saffron, Frankensence, Hypocistidis, ana. ʒ.vi 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ʒ.iii and a little wyne and Hony accordingly, and so seeth your suppositer to the thicknes, and roule it thre fynger lengthe. An other for the same.
                     R. Opobalsamum, and the fyne lockes of Woll, roule them togeather in the maner of Suppositer, this hath a marueylous workinge, sayth Nicolaus Myrepsus in this case: an other for the same.
                     R Opium, Myrrhe, Saffron, Dragons bloud, Bolearmoniake, Lemmy, called Terra sigillata, Mastike, ana. ʒ.i. the iuice of Planten, and of Knotgrasse and a little Goats milke, as much as wil suffice, puttyng in a little of Aca
                           ••
                        a, or the iuice of Slose, or wylde Plummes beaten together in a mort
                           •
                        r, and then seeth it in a little pan, powryng in a fewe droppes of vineger, & when it is thick, r
                           •
                        ule it in a suppositer: Prouided yt your said suppositers be ℥.i in wayght, and those be best, sayth that learned man▪ Nicolaus Myrepsus, also his counsel is, to make them in length more than three fyngers. Now shal I shew you the manner of an other laxatiue suppositer, and so I wil make an end of them.
                     R. Mercury, and wormwood, dryed and beaten in Pouder, the rynde of Colocinthida, Agarike, and Hierapicra, ana. ʒ.i. Comon salt, or salt Peter

℈.iii. and Hony as much as wil suffice, and then make your Suppositer.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     OFtentymes chaunce greate perilles among women, when as eyther Nature is to weake whereby Menstruall, termes are stopped, or the Chyld within the Bellye dedde, whereupon women oftentymes do dye, I pray you tel me some spedy remedy, and approued medecine that wil so open the matrice, wherby the deade chyld may come forth, to help the Woman.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THere is no better medicine, then this folowyng,Opophalion is an excellent Emplaster, to deliuer or bryng forth a dead child frō the mother. called Opophalion. R. Rapeseede, Sal Niter, Elleborus, the whyte, and the blacke, Colocinthidis called coloquintida, Staphesacre ana. ʒ.iii. Scamonie ʒ.ii. the iuice of Elaterium, whiche is a wylde cucumber, or Cucumeres anguini. ʒ.ii.ss. beate youre dryed thynges into pouder, and put theym into the Oyle of Iroes, and the gaule of an Oxe or Bull, ana. ℥.iii. mingled togeather wyth the pouder of Carthamus. ʒ.iii. also dissolue in your sayd Oyle Armoniac. ʒ.iiii. thē stampe bitter Almondes. li. ss. with your foresayd receiptes in a stone morter, then spread it vppon a peece of leather, and make a greate broade plaster, and apply it vpon the belly of a woman, for suche a case as I haue sayd, and it wil worke accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Pomatum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the fat of a yong Kyd. li. i. temper it with the water of Musk Roses, by the space of foure dayes, then take fyne apples, and dresse them▪ and cut them in peeces, and lard them with Cloues, then boyle them altogeather in the same water of Roses, in one vessel of Glasse, set within another vessel, let it boyle on the fyre so long vntil all be white, then wash them with ye same water of Muske roses, this done, kepe it in a glasse and if you wil haue it to smel better, then you must put a little Ciuet or Muske or of them both, and Amber grice: Gentilwomen doe vse this to make theyr faces smoth and fayre, for it healeth cliftes in the lyppes, or in any other place of the handes and face &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Rosata nouella?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of Roses, Suger, Liquorice, ana. ℥.i.ʒ ii. of Cinamom. ʒ ii.℈.iii. of Cloues, Spicknard, Ginger, Galinga, Nutmegges, Setwal, Storax Calamita, Cardamomum, Smalage, ana. ℈.i. G. vii. make these in Pouder. This pouder stoppeth vomitting and casting of the stomacke, it fortifyeth those which haue bin long sicke, and letteth ouer much sweatynge.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Syrupus acetositatis citri?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        TAke of the Tarte and sower iuice of Pomecitron. li. xii. seeth it in a vessel of Glasse▪ on the coales with a soft fyre, til the third part bee consumed, then strayne it, and let it stand til it be cleare, and take of that which is cleare. li vii. and then power, vppon it fined Iulep li v. seeth these vntil they be thicke, if it be in Sommer, then let it stand in ye Sonne til the water be consumed. This is a present remedy agaynste all diseases, which come of grosse humours, agaynst the pestilence and al poysons, it doth also quench thirst.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Syrupus de Acetosa?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the iuice of Sorel clarifyed. li. iii. of Sugar clarified. li. ii. make of these youre Syrupe. This Syrupe is good agaynste Cholerike personnes, and Tertian Agues, the burning of the stomacke and the hart. it is a synguler remedye in plages, and in Agues of corrupt
                           •
                         humours.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Syrupus de Agresta labrusca, or vnrype Grapes?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst make this syrupe of vnrype Grapes, as you did the syrupe of Pomecitron. This cannot be made, but onely in Sommer, because ye iuice of the vnrype Grape cannot be gotten, but at that tyme.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Calamyntes, or de Calaminta?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke both of the Garden and wilde Calamyntes, ana. ʒ.ii· of Louage, yellow Carots, Squinantum, ana. ʒ.v. of Raisons of Corans picked. li. ss. of Hony li. ii. and so make it, you muste take. li. v. of Water, to boyle your Raysons in them, then this beyng cast forth, take asmuche agayne, and let it seeth till the halfe be consumed, afterwarde put your Hony vnto it, and make youre Syrupe accordinglye. This Syrupe is a presente medecine agaynst all diseases of the Spleene, and chieflye if it b
                           •
                        e made harde, it doth comforte those which haue theyr inwarde and principal partes, Colde, or bee shorte wynded, or haue anye Coughe, for it doth purge the stomacke, breaste, and Bowelles marueylous wel of grosse and corrupt humours.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Syrupe De menta?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of the iuice of Quinces, and sower Pomgranets, cast vpon these iuices of drye Myntes. li. i.ss. of Rose leaues. ℥.ii let it stand a day and a Night. then set it ouer a soft fyre, with hony & Suger, vntil the halfe be consumed: mingle with your syrupe the confection called Gallia Moschata to make them pleasaunt. This syrupe is good for a cold stomacke, it stoppeth vomitynge, and the disposicion vnto it: it taketh away the hycket, and Flaxes, and cold or wynd in the guttes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe de Absinthio?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Wormewood. li. ss. of redde Roses, ana. ʒ.ii, of Spickenarde. ʒ.iii. of good old wyne and new, of the iuice of Quinces. ana. li. ii.ss, let it stand a day and a nyght in a vessel of stone, then seeth it with a softe fyre, till the halfe be consumed, with. li. ii. of Honye, and then make the syrupe. This is an excellent medecine to fortify the stomacke, and to cause good appetite, to make strong the bowels and Liuer, and chieflye when the diseases come of a cold cause, it helpeth also in hoat diseases, if it be tempered with cold thinges.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Fumitarye?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of al the kyndes of Mirobalans, ana. ʒ.xx. of the flowers of Borage, Buglosse, and Uiolets, of Wormewood, Doder. ana. ℥ i. of Liquorice, Roses, ana, ℥.ss. the flower of Garden Tyme, Polipodye. ana. ʒ.vii▪ of Prunes, a hundred, of Raysons of Corans piked, ana. l i.ss. of ye fruit Thamarind, Casiafistula, ana. ʒ.ii. let these boyle in li. x of water, till it come to .li. iii. make youre syrupe with the iuyce of Fumitary, sodden, and sined wyth. li. iii. of Sugar, seething them accordyng to the arte. In this syrupe makyng, you must obserue thys order, in puttyng of your Symples▪ because some requyre more tyme and some lesse, therefore fyrste of all put in Polipodie, then Prunes▪ Raysens▪ Liquorice, Wormwood, Roses, Doder & Borage Flowers, afterward Uyolets, Mirobalans, Flowers of harder Tyme, Casiafistula, Thamaryndes, which after som Phisitions iudgemēt should not boyle, because they be very tender, how be it, other learned men thinke it best to put them in the latter end of the decoction, and so to suffer it to boyle once, that it may the better be myxed wyth the other: and i
                           •
                         a mā would contend, that soft and tender Symples do leese theyr moystnes in boylinge, then we must answear that they lese not their natural moystnes but the vnnatural and accidental, and you muste also obserue this order which foloweth, if you wil make your syrupe wel, when youre decoction is made, then clarify your Sugar with well water, the which beyng sodden and clarifyed, put into it ye iuice of Fumitary, when it cometh nye to the fashion of a Syrupe.
                     
                        The same decoction must be sodden oftentymes, by lyttle and lyttle, tyl it shal be wel and perfectly sodden, then put in youre fruite Thamarinde and Casiafystula, and so make an end of your decoction. This syrupe openeth, and taketh awaye all obstructions both of the Stomacke, and of the Liuer, and fortefyeth all the members, it cureth all the soares aboute the inward partes, which come of Salte, and burnt matter, as the scabbe, leapreie, and french Pockes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you sirupus de Fumoterrae simplex?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrste take of the iuice of Fumitarye, wel fyned. li. iiii. of Suger clarify
                           •
                         i.ii.ss. make a syrupe thys clenseth the Liuer.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a syrupe of Liquorice?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Lyquorice, ℥.ii. of Maydenhayre. ℥.i. drye Hysope. ℥.ss. cast vppon these. li. i. of Water, and let it stande a Day and a Nyghte, then seeth it tyll the halfe be consumed, this done, put these vnto the decoction of Sugar, Honye, Penidyes ana, ʒ.viii. of Rose water. ℥.vii. make of these a syrupe. This is a present remedy agaynst the Pleuresye, olde coughes, to purge ye stomacke and lunges.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Syrupe of Hysope?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of dry Hysop, the roote of Smalage, Fenell, Liquerice, ana. ʒ.x. of barly the huske taken of. ℥.ss. of the seede of Malowes, the Gum Tragantum, the kirnels of Quinces, ana. ʒ·iiii. of Maydenhaire. ʒ.vi. of Iuiubes, Sebesten, ana. xxx. of Raysons of Corans, picked. ʒ.xii. of Figges, Dates, ana x of whyte Penidies, l i.ii. make a Syrupe. To this sirupe making take. l i.viii. of water and seeth it vntyll it bee come to three, then presse it, and let it boyle wyth Pendies. vntyll it come to the forme of a syrupe and in makyng of it you ought to kepe thys order for your Simples fyrst take Iuiubes Sebest. Raisons Fygges, Dates, the roote of Smalage, Fenell, then Barly, Malowseede, kirnels of Quinces, the Gum Tragantum, Hysop, Maidenhaire. This syrupe cureth diseases of the stomacke-the coughe, Pleurisie, shortnes of wynde, and all griefes of the body.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Syrupus de Marubio?
                  
                  
                     
                     Healthe
                     
                        FIrst take of greene and young Horehounde. ℥.ii. drye Hysope, Maydenhere, ana. ℥.vi. Liquoris. ℥, i of Calamynt, Anisseede,A good medecine for old men to clense Fleume. the rootes of Smalage, and Fenel, ʒ.v. of Mallowes seede, Fenegreeke, Flowerdeluce, ana. ʒ.iii. of Lynseede, Kernels of Quinces, ana ʒ.ii. of Raisons or Corans picked ʒ.v. Fygges .xv. of Penedies, li. ii. of Hony. li ii. make of these youre syrupe, you must take to the making of this sirup. li. x. of water which shal boyle til the half be consumed, because the hony and Penedies requyre much seethynge. This syrupe cureth old coughes, long diseases of the Breast & Lunges, shortnes of the wynd, and chiefly in old men, if it come of Flegmatike humour, grosse, corrupt, and hard to be dissolued.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Syrupe de Epythimo?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of harder Tyme of the garden. ʒ.xx. of the two fyrst kynds of Mirobalans, ana ʒ.xv. of Doder, Fumirerre, ana ʒ.x. of Tyme,There be v. kyndes of M
                              •
                           
                           robalans, whose names be Citrine Chebuli, Indi. Bellerici, Emblici. Buglose, Calaminte, the fourth and fyft kynd of Mirobalans, of Liquorice, Polipodie, Agarike, of Stycados. ana. ʒ.vi. of Roses, Fenell, Anisseede, ana, ʒ.ii.ss. of Raysons, of Coranns, ℥.iiii. of Thamarinde, ʒ.ii▪ss. of. Sugar. li. iiii. and here you must put to the makyng of this. li. x. of water which must be sodden to three. li. this must be kepte: Now as concerning the putting in of your Symples, fyrst take Polipodie, Agarik, Raysons, Liquorice, Fenel, Anisseede, Sticados, Fumiterre, the Roses, Doder, Buglosse, Myrobalans the stones taken out, and the Flowers of ye harder Tyme, dissolue your Thamarinde in one part of the decoction, and let your Suger boyle with new wine, boyled to the thyrd part, when your decoction shal be as thicke as Hony, yet seeth it a little more,To helpe a cō
                           mon knowen malady both in England & Fraunce called the poxe. and in the end put in your Thamarinde, and let them boyle once or twyce, til they come to the thicknes of a Syrupe. This is approued medecine agaynst the French Pockes, Cankers, fallyng of the hayre, greate and depe woundes, Lepres and al diseases of Melancholy and burnt Choller. This doth purge meruelous wel, if a man take therof a good quantity, comonly we ought to take frō. ℥, iiii. to vi.ʒ.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you sirupus de Eupatorio?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the rotes of Smalage, Endyue. ana. ii, ℥ Liquorice, Squinantū, Doder, Wormewood Roses. ana. ʒ, vi. of Maydenhayre Carduus Benedictus the flower, of Rootes of Buglosse, Anisseede Fenel seed, Agrimony. ana ʒ.v. of Rubarbe, Mastike. ana. ʒ.iii. of Spicknarde. Asarabacca, Folium Indicum, seeth thē in. li. viii. of water, vntil the third part be consumed, and make a Syrupe with. li. iiii. of Suger, and with a sufficient quā
                        tity of Smallage, and Endiue. This sirupe is good in longe Agues, chiefly to fortify the weaknes of the Liuer and Stomacke, it cureth the dropsy, and euil Lyking of the Body, old and almost vncurable sores,Agaynst dropsye. deliuereth ye Stomacke from wynd and coldnes, it aswageth also the payn of ye midref

and swellyng thereof.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupe of Sticados?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of ye flowers of Sticados. ʒ.xxx. Tyme, Calamint, Organy, ana. ʒ.x. of Anisseede, Pellitary of Spayne, ana, ʒ.vii. long Peper. ʒ.iii. Ginger ʒ.ii. of Raysons, of Corans. ℥.iiii of Suger, li. v. put also vnto thē these pouders following, Cinamon, Calamus Aromaticus, Saffron, Ginger blacke Pepper, long Peper, ana, ʒ.i ss. bynd them in a thin cloth, & hang them in ye syrupe. This hath bene proued agaynst all cold diseases of the synewes, as the Paulsye, fallyng euil, crampe, shakyng, wrything of the neck on the one syde, reumes from the head to the breast, and doth comfort the stomacke, and the inward partes of the bodye.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Syrupus de Violis or Uyolets?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke. li. v. of the infusion of Uiolets, of Sugar clarifyed li. iiii. myngle them togeather, and seeth them with a soft fyre, and keepe them. This is a present medecine against hoate Agues and heate of the Liuer and hart, the pleurisye, drye coughes, the roughnes of the wynd pype & throate.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe de Papauere simp. or Poppye?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the heads of whyte and blacke Poppy, ana. lx.ʒ. seeth them in li iiii. of Rayn water vntil it come to li. ss. and with ℥.iiii. of whyte Suger, and Penidies make your syrupe. This syrupe causeth a man to sleape, and quencheth the thyrst, it stoppeth reumes running to the breaste and doth myttigate the payne, this is not so colde, as the compounde Papauer
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupus de Papauere Compositus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of whyte and Black Popye. ana. ʒ.l. of Maidenhayre. ʒ.xv. of Sugar. ʒ.v. of Iuiube .xx. of Lettice seede. ʒ.xl. of Malowes seede, of ye kernelles of Quinces ana. ʒ, vi, seeth them in. li. iii of water, vntil the halfe be consumed, then make your syrup with ℥.viii. of Suger and Penidies. This Compounde syrupe hath the same vertue, which the Symple hath, but it causeth greate cold, and asswageth payne better. Mesue doth iudge it to be good agaynst a dry coughe and a consumption.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Syrupe of Mirtes compound?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health
                     TAke xx. Mirtes, of Saunders whyte and red, of Manna or sweete dew of heauen, the Flowers of wilde Pomgranets, Barberies, ana ʒ.xv. of Medlers. ʒ.l. of Wel water. li. viii. boyle them all to the halfe, then strayne them, and put into the strayning, the iuice of Pomgranets, & Quinces, ana. ℥.vi. of Sugar clarified. li. iii. mingle these, and seeth them vntil they come to the fashion of a syrupe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Syrupe of Myrtes, simp.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the iuice of Myrtes, li. xii. seeth them in a vessel of Glasse with a soft fyre, vntil the third part be consumed, then strayn it, and let it stād vntil it be clarifyed, then take li. viii. of that which is clarifyed, and put vnto it. li, v. of Hony, seeth it, til it come to the thicknes of a syrupe. ʒ.i. if it bee Sommer, set it in the Sunne, vntil the Water bee consumed. This comforteth the Stomake, and all the inwarde partes, and cureth also an olde Coughe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupus Acetosus simplex?y
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe
                     TAke of good whyte Sugar li. viii and put it into a Uessell of stone▪ and cast vppon it. li. iii. of cleare Wel water, seeth it with coales, or els with a little fyer, without smoke, alwayes scumming it, seeth it, til it shalbe cleare, and vntil the Water be halfe consumed. Then put vnto it of Uineger, of whyte wyne very stronge, li. iii. seeth it vntil it bee enoughe This is a present remedy agaynst all hoate diseases, subtil or grosse matter▪ it prouoketh Uryne, quencheth Choler, & doth extenuate and make grosse thinges soft, and clenseth stinking matter in the stomacke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupus Acetosus compositus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Well water li. x. put vnto it the rootes of Fenel, Smalage, Endiue, ana. ℥.iii. of Anisseede, Fenell seede, Smalage seede, ana. ʒ viii. of Endiue seede. ℥.ss. seeth them with a softe Fyre, vntil they come to. li v. then strayne it, and put to the decoction. li. iii. of Suger, let it be clarified as before, & mingle with it a sufficiente quantitye of Uineger, according to the forme of the syrupe before. This Sirupe purgeth grosse humours, and fleume, it scoureth and openeth Opilations, and obstructions, which bee aboute the Liuer, Splene, and Reynes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe de succo Endiuiae? or of Endiue simplex.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke the iuice of Endiue fyned. li. viii. of Sugar clarifyed. li. v.ss. make your syrupe, seething. This is a principall medecine to asswage the heate of the Liuer, the hart, and the other chief partes, and it cureth the Pleuresye.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Endiue compositus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Healthe.
                     TAke the iuice of Endiue and Fliworte. ana. li. iii. these Iuices must be clarifyed, then take of Roses, Uiolets, Lettice, Borage, Egrimon, ana. ʒ.ss. of Maydenhayre, Barly the huske taken of, of the foure great cold seedes, ana. ℥.i. of Sugar as much as wil suffice, make the syrupe, and pouder it with whyte and red Saunders, Barberyes, kernels of Quinces, lignum Aloes, Cynamon, the rynd of Pomeritrone, ana. ℈.i. This asswageth the great heat of the liuer and hart, and of the other principal partes, it is very good for all hoat complexions, it loseth and openeth all opilacions, and obstructions, it doth comfort weake members which be troubled with heate, it doth also digest cholericke, and sharp matter.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupe of Suckery, or Cichorii?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke both of the garden and wylde Suckery, and of both Endyues, ana M.ii. of Gourdes, Lyuerwort, whyte Endiue, Lettice Fumiterre Lupulus, ana. M. Barley the husk not taken of, Alcakengi, ana. ℥.iiii. of Lyquorice, Maydenheere, Ceteracke, Tentworte, Dodder, ana. ʒ.vi. the rootes of Fenel, Smallage, and sperage, ana. ℥.ii. boyle them in a sufficient quantity of Water and strayne them, and make your syrupe with good suger, and for euery pounde of Sugar take ʒ.iiii. of Reubarbe and. ℈ iiii. of Spicknard bounde in a thin cloth which shalbe often tyme pressed, til your Syrupe be wel sodden, the quantity that a man shall take at one tyme is. ℥.iii. with the water wherin the foure comon cold seedes were strayned.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Quinces?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of the iuice of tart Quinces, fyned, and clarified, partes .x. Sugar partes ii. make a syrupe according. This stoppeth vomittyng, quencheth the thyrst, and doth comfort the stomack.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Nenuphar, or water Lillies?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take. li. ii. of the flowers of Nenuphar, and seeth them once, then presse them, and put into the iuice pressed, li. ii. of Sugar, and seeth it til it come to the forme of a syrupe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes
                     How make you syrupe of Barberyes.
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of the iuice of Barberies fyned li. iii. of Sugar clarifyed. li. iii make a syrupe accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of tarte Pomgranets?
                  
                  
                     Healthe
                     FIrst take of the iuice of Pomgranettes. li. ii.ss. of sugar clarifyed. li. iii. make this syrupe as before. This syrupe is good agaynst hoat Agues of choller and fleume.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupus de Bizantijs?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of the iuice of Endiue and Smalage, ana. li. ii. of Hops, the garden or wyld Borage, and Buglosse, ana. li. i boyle them once, and then straine and fyne them, this done, take li. iiii. of the iuice clarifyed, or fyne Suger. li. iii. seeth it with a gentle fyre, vntill it bee thicke as syrupe. This is very good against Agues, which come of obstructions and of choller, of Fleume, and also the yelow Iaundice.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you syrupus de infusione Rosarum viridium, or greene Roses?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrste take of the infusion of yong Roses. li. v. of Suger. li. iii. mingle theym, and make a syrupe. This is good for the thirst in burning Agues, and to asswage the heate, it doth comforte the Stomacke, Harte, and Liuer, beynge troubled with heate, it preserueth the Bodye from all corrupcion, and from the Pestilence, it resisteth poyson.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupus de Rosis siccis? or dryed Roses
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take you of the infusion of dry Roses, and sugar ana. li. ii. mingle them and make a syrupe. This doth comforte the stomacke, and bynde marueilous wel.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you syrupus de succo rosarum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take the iuice of Roses fyned. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li. i.ss. make a syrupe accordingly.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes
                     How make you syrupus de Iuiubis?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke 
                           •
                        x. Iuiubes, of Uioletes, Malowes seede, ana. ʒ.v. of Maidenheyre. ℥.i. the kernels of Quinces seede, of white Poppy, Mallowes, and Lettice. ℥.i. the gumme Tragantum, ana. ʒ.iii. of Liquorice, Barley▪ the huske taken of, ana. ʒ.viii. seeth theym in li. iiii. of Well water or els Raine water, vntil the halfe be consumed, then strayne it, and put vnto the iuice strayned. li. iii. of Sugar clarified, make your syrupe accordingly. This is very good agaynst horsenes of the voyce, and the cough, the pleuresy and exulcerations of the bladder.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you syrupe of Maydenheire comp.
                  
                  
                     Healthe
                     FIrst take of Maydenheire .M.ii. of Tentworte, Ceteracke, ana. M.i. of Iuiubes, Liquorice, ana, ℥.ii, make a decoction, puttyng vnto it. li. iii. of Sugar, make your syrupe, then take of Maydenhayre. li. iiii. of Iuiubes. li. iii. liquorice ʒ.iii of sugar. li vi. and this syrupe is iudged to be the better. This purgeth grosse humours, loseth and openeth obstructions▪ scoureth the raynes, and clenseth the breast of grosse humours.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupe of Maydenhayre symp.
                  
                  
                     Health
                     FIrst take of the decoction of young Maydenhayre. li. iii. of Sugar. li. i make youre syrupe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you an other syrupe of the same?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Liquorice scraped. ℥ ii. of Maydenhayre. ℥.v. cast vppon them, li. iiii. or Wel Water, and so let them stand a day and a nighte, then boyle them vntil the halfe be consumed, and strayne theym, and put vnto the decoction ℥.viii. of Sugar clarifyed, Penedyes and Maydenhayre, seeth it til it come to the forme of a Syrupe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you syrupe of Mugworte?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Mugwort. M.ii. of Calamint, Folium indicum, Sauerie, Organy, Time, Quikebeme, Sticados, ana. M.i. of Camomill, Melilot, Mergeram, Roses, ana. ℥.i. of Unguis odoratus Calamus Aromaticus ana. ʒ.iii of Spicknarde. ʒ.i. Germander, Motherworte Geloflowers, Sothernwodde, ana. M.ss Gladien, Hor hound, Madder leaues, Siler Montan, ana ʒ. Azarabacca,

Squinantum, Anisseede, ana. ʒ.vi. Fenel, Smalage, ana. ʒ.vi. boyle them 
                           〈◊〉
                         a sufficient quantity of water according to the arte, then put vnto them as much Hony as wil suffice, and make your syrupe. This is a presente remedy to prouoke the naturall Terms in women beyng stopped.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you syrupus de Limonibus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the iuice of Limondes. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li. iii. make your syrup. This is very good to consume grosse and corrupt humors, and Wormes, it asswageth heate in Agues. and purgeth rawe humours.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Syrupus de Cetrach?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Cetrach, Hartestonge, Endyue, Liuerwort, Wormewoode, Sichory, ana. M.ss. of Dodder, Linseede. ʒ i. the fower common great seedes, flowers of Borage, Buglosse, Langdebiefe, ana. M.i. Maydenhayre, rootes of Fenel, Persely, Kneeholme or Butchers Broome, ana. M.i.ss. make youre syrupe, and cast on these pouders, Foliū indicum, Spicknarde, the gumme Lacca, Casiafistula, ana ʒ.ii. binde these in a thinne cloth, and boyle them in the syrupe and reserue it. This doth comforte the Liuer, scoureth the reines, and deliuereth the spleene from al obstructions.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     Haw make you the syrupe of Buglosse?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the infusion of the flowers of Buglosse, or Langedebiefe. li. iii. or Sugar li. ii. make a syrupe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you an other of the same.
                  
                  
                     Heatlh.
                     FIrst take of the iuice of Buglosse,A present syrupe for the stomacke. fyned. li. iiii. of Sugar. li. iii. make your syrupe. This syrupe doth comfort the stomack, and maketh a mā mery, it is also ministred agaynst sounyng and fayntyng of the harte, and frensey.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Sapo Moschatus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke white Uenice Sope. li. iiii. cut it into smal peeces, and ye pouder of Cloues, Iuncus, Odoratus, Spicknard, white Saūders, ana, ℥ i.ss the pouder of Beniamen and fine Masticke, & Sto
                           •
                        ax Calamite,A very sweet
                              •
                            Bauic to clense the skin. ana ℥.i. 
                           •
                        ine Muske, G. xxx. Amber greace. G. xxiiii. Ciuet. G. xvi. put these in a morter wt some Rose Water, or els sweete compounded water: you maye put in Oile of Bee
                           •
                        , or els a little oyle of Almonds or Ienuper: and so make this sweete baule and washe therwith.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     Howe make you Theriaca Galeni?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health
                     TAke of Trochisci, Squillini or Scillini, 
                        ʒ.iii. of long Pepper. ʒ.ii. Trochisci Theriaci. Diacorallion, ana. ʒ.i. of the wood of Balme. ℈.iii. ye iuice of black Poppy, Agarik, wild Rapes seede, Cinamom, ye iuice of Balm, ana, ℈.ii. of Reubarbe, Saffrō, Spicknard, Yereos, Roses, Calamus, Cost, Squinantum Ginger, Cassia lignea, Storax, Calamite, Mirre, Turpentyne washed,Nicholas prepost
                              •
                           us doth put in white Copeta. whyte Frankensence, Calamint, Diten, Sticados, wilde Tyme, rootes of Sinkfolly, Persely, whyte Pepper, ana ℈.ii. Folium Indicum, gumme, Arabyke, Serapin. Terra Sigillata, Hipocistis Spicknard, Gladium, Germander, Gentian, wylde Fenell, the seede of Balme, Smalage, Amomum, Fenel, wylde Carowayes, Siler montan, Cresses, Anisseede, S. Ihons herbe, wylde Aspaltum, which is a thing compounded and made of Iewes Pitch, Castor Opopanax, Galbanum, Mummy, Centauri, Aristologia longa, wyld yellow Carettes, ana. ℈.i, of Hony, as muche as wil suffyce, This is iudged to be the chief and principal of all medecines because it bringeth quietnes,This is a Triacle of an incomparable vertue against poyson, pestilence and venim. and doth cure the greatest diseases and griefes in euery part of the body, as the fallyng sicknes, and insensibilitye, whiche is a disease, when a man can neither moue, feele, nor vnderstand, it healeth conuultions, the head ach, payne of the stomacke, Megrim, Horsenes of the voyce, and straytnes of the breast, shortnes of wynde, diseases of the wynde pype, spittyng of Bloude, yelow Iaundice, Dropsye, and the diseases of the Liuer, Iliaca passio, woundes exulcerated in the Bowelles, Frensinesse, the stone, it prouoketh the Termes stopped, and deliuereth Women of deade Children, it cureth Lepreies, mesels, and old diseases: It is a present remedy agaynst cold, and al poysons, stinging of venemous beastes, and here you must vnderstand, that the quantity ought to be chaunged in ministryng of it, according to the quanty, and quality of euery disease, this doth refreshe also and comfort the sences, hart, brayne, Liuer, stomacke, and doth keepe all the body, safe, and pure from all corruption.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Trifera?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke the iuice of blacke Poppy. ʒ.ii. of Cinamom, Cloues, Galynga, Spicknarde, Set wall, Ginger, Coste, Storax Calamita, Calamus Aromaticus, Cipres, Flowerdelice, Worm seede, Gladien, Mandrake, Spicknarde, Roses, Pepper, Anisseede, Smallage seede, Perselye, yellowe Carotes, Hennebane, Comine, Basell, of Hony, as mucthe as wil suffyce. This is a presēt medicine agaynste al inwarde diseases of Women, and agaynst the payne of the Stomacke, taken with decoction of Anisseede and Mastike: It cureth also al diseases of the Matrice, which come of cold, taken with wyne, wherein Muggeworte was sodden, and if you make a rounde thinge of sylke, or wolle, to seene after the fashon of a fynger, and anoint it with ye Oile of a Wesel, or such other Oile, & put it into ye Matrice, thē it wil moue ye flowers of women which do not cōceiue. It is also a singuler

remedy for children, which speak in theire sleape, or can not sleap, if it be taken with wyne, wherein Mandrake or Elder hath bene sodden: it wil also helpe them, if it be taken with Womens Milke, according to the quantity of the little grayne Cicer.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Diatrion Sandalon?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of whyte, redde, and yellow Saunders, of sugar. ana, ʒ.ii. som Poticartes, take Fleawort for sugar, which is though to be better. And Gallen doth make composition, after this sort. Take of Reubarbe, Spodie, Liquorice, Purselin seede, ana. ʒ.i.ss. of Amile, Gumme Arabyke, Tragantum, of the foure common great seedes, whyte Endiue seede, ana. ℥ i.ss. of Camphere ℈.i. so put vnto these fowre tymes as many Roses, as of al the other, and of the syrupe of Roses as much as wil suffice. This doth cure the payne of the Liuer and stomacke, and those which be in a Consumption, or haue the yellow Iaundice.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci Diarhodon Abbatis?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Roses, lignum Aloes. ʒ.ii. of Mastyke ʒ.i.ss. Wormewood, Cinamom, Spicknard, Cassia lignea, Squinantum, ana. ʒ.i. make youre balles with old wyne, and with the decoction, of the common rootes as Smallage, Percely, Louage. These Balles be very good agaynst old Agues, and those which come of dyuers causes, agaynst the quotidian, & al other Agues, by the which the beauty and form is corrupt, and this is put into great confections sayth Nicholas,
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci de violis?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of the yonge flowers of whyte Uiolets. ʒ.v. of Amilum. ʒ.iii. the seede of whyte Poppy ʒ.iii. of Reubarbe. ℈.v. the seede of Planteyne. ʒ.i. of Balme. ℈.i. of Rose water, as much as wil suffice, make it after the forme of the balles before, this is not vsed, but when it is mingled wt other compositions.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de Squilla?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take one whole Squilla, and bake it wel in paste and cast away the outward rind, beate the substaunce of Squilla in a Morter, and put vnto it as much of the fyne flower of Orobus, & temper it with wyne and Hony, and if you haue not Orobus at hande, then take asmuche breade, wel and fynely broaken: make your lyttle balles, and dry them in the Sunne. Som Poticaryes, take in this confection one part of Squilla, and two partes of Barly flower.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenesse.
                     Haw make you Trochisci theriaci?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst take a yong Adder, of the length of a spanne, with redde iyes, a shaking toung, and hornes lyke the grayne Sesamum, cutte aaway the head and tayle, about thre fyngers, that which is in the middes must be dressed, the skin taken of, and the inward parts cast away, wash it oft in sweete water, and seeth it so longe, til the fleshe fall from the backe bone, and temper the flesh and the iuice of it togeather, put vnto it as much of Orobus, or of Breade, make little balles of the weight of. ʒ.ss. drye them in the shadowe. These be not taken, but when they be vsed with other great compositions, except it be in curyng the Leapreie.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci Diacorallion
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of redde Coral, Cinamom, Mirrhe, Amomum, Popy ana. ʒ.iiii of Squinantum, Saffron, ana. ʒ ii. of Calamus Aromaticus, the woode of Balme, Casiafistula, Folium indicum, Mastike, wylde Tyme, Ualerian, Azarabacca, herbe Robert, ana. ʒ.i. and these beynge fyrst made in pouder, forme your little balles with wyne. These are a presente remedy to staunch the bloudy fluxe, they doe also fortefy the stomacke, and cause good digestion.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci de Camphire?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     TAke of Rose leaues ʒ.iiii. of Spodie. ʒ ii of yellow Saunders, ʒ.ii.ss. of Saffron. ʒ.ii. of Liquoryce. ʒ.ii of lignum Aloes, Cardamom, Amiliū, Camphyre, ana. ℈.i. of Sugar, of Manna, or swete dew, ana. ʒ.ii. make your balles with ye sappy part of Fleawort, and Rose water. These be very good in hoat Agues, and to quenche the thyrstines and burninge of redde Choller, or Bloude: it asswageth the heate of the Stomacke, Liuer, of all the inwarde partes, it cureth the yellow Iaundice and those which are in a consumptiō.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci de Alcachengi?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        TAke of the Beries of Alchachengi, three of the fowre greater colde seedes, ana. ʒ.iii, ss. of Bolearmoniacke, Gumme Arabyke, whyte frankynsence, Dragons Bloude, whyte poppye bytter Almondes, Liquorice, Tragantum, Amilum, the kernelles of Pyneaples, ana. ʒ.vi. of Smalage seede, Amber, Henbane, the iuice of blacke Poppye, ana. ʒ.ii, make youre Balles with the sappye Iuice of the Beryes of Alchachengi▪ These bee 
                           〈◊〉
                         presente medecine agaynste Exculcerations in the Reynes, and the bladder, and the payne in pissing.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de Myrrha
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke Mirrh ʒ.ii. of Lupus ʒ.v. ye Leaues of Rue, wilde Mint Penerial, Comine, Mader, Pellitary of Spayne, Serapin, Opopanar, ana. ʒ.ii. make balles of the weight of. ʒ.ii. of which let the paciente take. ʒ.i. on the day time, in the water wherein Iuniper seede was sodden. These be so strong a medecine, to purge the termes in women, that they wil cause the child to discende: if they vse them oft, the termes shal bee moued very wel: also in boxing the Crookyng, and bowing of the ham, or in cuttyng the veyn, which lyeth by the ancle, you may also vse boxing aboute the thies.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de Musco?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of the Wood of Aloes, ʒ v of Amber ʒ ii. of Muske. ʒ.i. the gumme of Tragantum, with Rose water asmuch as will suffice to temper them together, so make your balles. These do comforte the stomacke, harte, and liuer, and bee vsed with greate medecines.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci de Rubarbaro?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Reubarbe. ʒ.x. the iuice of Egremony. ʒ.iiii. of Roses. ʒ.iii. of Spicknard, Anisseede. Madder, Smalage seede, worm wood, Azarabacca. ana, ʒ.i. bytter Almondes. ʒ.iiii. make your balles of the wayght of. ʒ.ss. These do asswage the payne of the Liuer, and do deliuer it from obstructions, they cure inwarde impostumes, old griefes, the dropsy, and yellow Iaundice, and resstore good coloure, to drynke them is a present remedy for those which be of euyl lykyng or in consumption. Many Phisitions do vse them in hoate Agues, and when the body beginneth to fall into consumption.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de Spodio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the red Roses. ʒ.xii. of Spody ʒ, x. of Sorel seede. ʒ.vi. of Purslayne seede, of Coriander seede, infused in vineger and afterward dryed the rynd of the Frankensence tree, ana. ʒ ii. Amile made in pouder, the flowers of wyld Pomgranets, Barberies ana. ʒ.ii. gumme Arabyke made in pouder. ʒ.i. make these with the iuice of vnripe grapes. These Baules taken with the iuice or seedes of Sorel bee very good agaynst Agues of Choler, which haue a continuall fluxe, they asswage the burning of ye stomack and liuer, and quench also the thurst and drynesse.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        How make you Trochisci de Absynthio?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Roses, Wormwood, Anysseede, ana ʒ
                        ▪ ii. of Rewbarbe, the iuice of Egrimony, Azarabacca, Smalage, bytter almondes, Spicknarde, Masticke, Folium indicum, ana ʒ.i. make your balles with the iuice of Endiue. These be good in long Agues, and deliuer the stomacke and liuer from obstructions, and strengthen the principal partes and doe cause good appetyte, if they bee dronken in long Agues they profyt very much.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de Eupatorio
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Manna or sweete dew, the iuice of Egrimonie, ana. ʒ i, of Roses ʒ i.ss. of Spicknard, ʒ.iii. of Reubarbe Azarabacca, Anisseede, ana ʒ.ii of Spodie. ʒ.iii.ss. make youre balles with the iuice of Egrimonye. These be necessarye agaynst long Agues, and the cold and shakyng of them, agaynst obstructions of the Liuer and spleene, and inward impostumes, the yellowe Iaundice, and the dropsye, if they be taken at the begynnynge.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Trochisci de terra sigillata?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TAke of Dragons bloud, gum Arabike made in pouder, Ciuet, Rose seede and Leaues, Amylum made in pouder, Spody, Acatia, Hipoquistis, the stone which doth stanch blood, the flowers of the wild Pomgarnet, Bolearmonye, Terra sigillata, Hempseede, Cokel, Perles, Amber, ana. ʒ.ii. Tragantum, black Poppy. ana ʒ i.ss. Purslein seede made in pouder. Frankensence, Oke apple, Saffron, ana. ʒ.ii. make youre balles wyth the iuice of Plantayne. These bee excellente balles to staunche spittyng of blood, and chiefly if they be taken with the water of Plantayne: if the forehead bee therewyth annoynted, they stoppe the secrete termes. and to conclude, they stoppe the Fluxe, if so be that the place be therewith annoynted.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Trochisci de Ambre?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     Fyrst take of Amber. aure, vi. of Hartes horne made in pouder, gumme Arabyke Coral in pouder, Tragantum, Acatia, Hypoquistis, the flowers of wild Pomgarnets, Mastick the gum of Ladanum washed, black Poppy made in Pouder, ana, aure. ss. make these vp wt the slymy iuice of Fleaworte·
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Tela Galteri
                              •
                           ?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke of common sallet Oile. l i.i. of Ceruse. ℥.iiii. of Litarge. ℥.iii. Mirrhe ℥.ss. make these lyke a ceare cloth, whych is made of waxe. This doeth heale and dry vp sores.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Vnguentum Apostolicum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Turpentine, whyte Waxe and Rosē. ʒ.xiiii. Opopanax, the pouder of Brasse, ana ʒ.iii Amoniacum. ʒ.xii. Aristolochia Rotunda, white Frankinsēce, ana. ʒ.vi. Mirrhe. Galbanum, ana. ʒ.iiii. Opopanax, Uerdegres. Bdellium. ʒ.vi. of Litarge. ℥.ix, infuse your Bdellium in good Uineger, and so dissolue it, and seeth it in Sommer with. l i.ii. of oyle, in Winter in three. This cureth easely olde Fistulaes, swellyng, and hard kernelles, it eateth away deade flesh, and clenseth the Wound.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Rosarum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of young swines grease, as mutch as you wyll, and washe it in hoate water .ix. tymes, and as oft in cold, then stampe it with a great quantity of young Roses, and let it stand by the space of seuen daies, afterward seeth them with a soft fyre, and strayne them, then take agayne as many Roses, and stampe them with the grease and so let them stand by the space of .vii. dayes, then cast vpon them one part of the iuice of Roses, and of the oyle of Almōds .vi. partes, seeth all together with a soft fier vnto the iuice be consumed, and if you wyl put vnto this Vnguentum Rosarum a little quantity of Opium, then it wyll proue a very excellent medicine to coole heate, and to anoynt the backe▪ wyth all,
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse▪
                     
                     How make you Vnguentum basilicum maius.
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of whyte waxe, Rosen, Talow of a Cowe, dry Pitche, the Greeke pitch, the fat of the belly of the Seale, fyne Frankensence, Mirrhe, ana. ℥.vi. of liquid or moyst pitch. ʒ.iii. of all the other ana. ℥.ii.ss. This is a present oyntment agaynst wounds inflamed and wounds in the sinewes, it doth clense them and brynge new flesh agayne. The learned Surgens, thynke this oyntment ought not to be layd to hoate sores or wounds, because it is of his nature also hoate, and so shall cause greater inflamacions, wherefore vse it rather in wounds without all inflamacions of heate.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Vnguentum aureum?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of yelow waxe. ℥.vi. good Oyle. l i.ii.ss. Turpentine, ℥, ii. Rosen dryed, Pitche, ana. ℥.i.ss. fine Frakensence, Mastike. ana. ℥.i. Saffron. ʒ.i. make your oyntment. This hath ben proued for to heale bruses and strokes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum basilicum minus
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Rosen, Pitch, Waxe and Oyle as mutch as wyll suffice, and make your oyntment.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Populeon?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke buddes of Poplar tree. l i.i.ss. black Popie, Mandrake leaues, the b
                           •
                        ddes of Bramble, Henbane, Dwale, Stoncrope, Lettice, Howseleke. Burre. Uyolettes, Maydenhayre, ana ℥.iii of young fresh swines grease l.ii. dry all your herbes and boyle them with the grease, and so make your oyntment accordyngly. Thys is good to anoynt the temples, pulses, the palmes of the hands and the sooles of the feete in hoate Agues.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Martiaton?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of white waxe. l.ii. of oyle. l.viii of Rosemary, of Bay leaues, ana. ℥.viii. of Rue. ʒ.viii. of Quickebene. ℥.vii. of Sauine, Watermints, Sage, Basell, wylde tyme, Calamint, Mugwort, Enula Campana, Gelouflowers, Brankursine, goose grease, Paritorie, Pimpirnell, Egremony▪ Wormewood, Primerose, Borage, younge Buddes of Elder, Orpin, Millefolie, Houslyke, Germaunder, Centaury, Strawbery leaues, Synckfoly, herbe Iudaice ana. ʒ.iiii. the roote of Holy oke, Comin, Myrtell, ana. ℥.iii. of Fenegreeke. ℥.i.ss. of fresh butter. ℥.i.ʒ.ii. of Nettels, Uiolettes, red popy, of the thyrd kynde of Myntes, of Balme, Dockes Maydenhayre, Walethistle or Carduus Benedictus, Woodbine, Ualerian, herbe Robert, Sorell de Bois, Hartes tongue, Oxe eye, Camphire, Storax, Dearesuet, ana. ℥.ss. Mastyke, and fat of a Beare, and of a whelpe, ana. ℥.i. of Frankinsence. ℥.ss. oyle of Spyke. ʒ.ii. let all your herbes be gotten in May, in one or two Dayes together, if it may be, and from .iii. of the clocke in the mornyng vntyl .xii. thē stampe all your herbes together and infuse them in sweete wine .vii. dayes on the eyght day seeth them ouer a soft fyre, and whan your wyne doth begyn to consume, then put in your Oyle and boyle them all together vntyll your herbes begyn to consume, then strayne them, and caste away ye herbs, and set the iuice strayned on the fyer agayne, and when it boyleth, putte in Storax, and soone after the Butter and the Grease, the oyle of Spike, Mastyke, Frankensence, Waxe, and whan the Waxe is melted, then take it from the fyre, sturryng it alwayes tyll it shalbe thycke, and then reserue it. Thys is a synguler oyntment for a colde headache, the payne of the breaste and stomacke, and agaynst hardnes of the breast, the spleene and the Lyuer, it cureth, Iliaco passio, if the place be anoynted wyth the Oyntment hoate, it healeth the Paulsie, the ache of the Hyppe, and the Goute in the feete, the frensye, swelsynges hardened kirnelles, the Crampe, the conuulsions, and all other aches of colde.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum aregon?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     TAke Rosemary. Mergeram, the roote of wake Robin, or Kucko prycke, wyld Tyme, Rue, wilde Cucūmer rootes, ana. ℥.iiii.ss. of Bay leaues, Sage, Sauin, ana. ʒ.iii. of Horsemints, Laureola ℥.ix. of Brionie rootes ℥.iii. of Neppe, wilde Cucumer leaues, ana, l.ss. of Mastike Frā
                        kensence, ana. ʒ.viii. of Pelletarie of Spayne, Euphorbe, Ginger, Peper, ana. ℥.i. oyle of Wesel. ℥.ss. Olei Petroli, the Grease of a Beare▪ oyle of Bay, ana ℥.iii. of Butter. ℥.iiii. of Salet Oyle▪ 
                        l.v. of Waxe, l.i.℥ iii. gather youre herbes in May, and vse all other thyngs, as in the oyntment before. 
                           •
                         stamp them well and lay them in oyle in a Morter by the space of .vii. dayes, and on the eyght day set it on the fyre vn
                           •
                        yli the herbes go downe to the bottome, afterward strayne them and then set the iuice strayned on the fiec agayne, and whan it begynneth to boyle, put in your oyle of Bay, Butter, the Beares grease and waxe, the whych beyng melted, put in Mastike, Frankensence, at the last▪ Ginger, Peper, Pelletarie of Spayne, Euphorbe, and when they be well sodden, then take all of and reserue it. Thys cureth cold aches anoynted after this fashion, take an Eggeshell and warme the oyntment in it at ye fyre, then anoynt the place, whan the place is anointed, lay also the shell vnto wherein the oyntment was warmed. It helpeth the Crampe and conuulsions, and whan a man is so styffe for cold that hee can not moue his Necke: it is good agaynst ache 
                           •
                        and payne in the Hyppe and ioynctes, and against a quarten Ague, if so be the backebone be therewyth anoynted before the fitte come.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     Haw make you Vnguentum Dialthaea?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Holioke rootes. l.ii. of Linseede, Fenegreeke, ana l.i. of Squilla l.ss. of Oyle. l.iiii. of Waxe. l.i. of Turpentine,To cure aches in the ioynctes, commyng of cold. the gumme of Iuie, Galbanum, ana. ℥.ii. of Colophonie. Rosen ana. l.ss. washe the rootes well, and beate your Fenegreeke, Lineseede
                           •
                        , and Squilla altogether, afterward put them all into. l.vii. of water, by the space of three dayes. and on the fourth day, boyle them tyll they be thycke: then put them softly into a bagge and strayne them, puttyng vnto them a lytle hoate Water, to cause the iuice to straine the better, after this take. l.ii. of that iuice, and boyle it wyth oyle, vntyll the iuice be consumed: Then put in the waxe and when it is melted, put in Turpentine, Galbanum, Gumme of Iuie, and at laste Pouder of Rosen, and dry Pitche, when it is thycke, take it from the fyre, and make your oyntment. This asswageth paine of the stomack of cold, and the Pleurisie, if you anointe the place thererewith, it doeth also brynge heate, mollifieth and causeth moystnes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Howe make you Vnguentum Agrippae?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Brionie rootes l.ii. the rootes of wilde Cucumer and Squilla. ℥.vi. of Flowerdelice. ℥.iiii. of Ferne rootes. ℥.ii. of Walwort, & Seathistell ana. ℥.ii. washe the rootes twise or thrise & beat them in a morter

of Marbell, then put them into. l i.iiii. of oyle Oliue, and Masticke. l i.ii. by the space of seuen dayes, to increase the better their heate, sauour and efficacie, boyle them on the eyght day, vntyll the rootes be softe, then strayne them,An oyntment agaynst the Dropsie and swelling. and when they be strayned, set them on the fire againe, and when it beginneth to boyle, take. ʒ.xv. of whyte Waxe, and when it is melted, take it from the fire, and make an ointement of it, when it is colde. This is a present remedy agaynst the Dropsie, and all swellynges, in what part so euer they bee: it asswageth paine in the sinewes, prouoketh vrine, causeth a man to be laxatiue, and cureth paine in the raines of the backe.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum diapompholigos?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of oyle of Roses. ℥.x. of whyte Waxe. ℥.v. of the iuice of Nyghteshade beries. ℥.viii. of whyte Lead. ℥.iiii. of commmon Leade made in pouder, of Tuthie a kynde of Leade, ana. ℥.i. of Frankinsence, ℥.i. make those simples in pouder, whych be fyt to be made in pouder, seeth the iuice of Nyghtshade, with the Oyle of Roses, vntyll the Iuice be consumed, then myngle the waxe with the pouders,Erysipelas to a red inflamation in ye body, with a Feuer or horror. and beate them in a morter, and then make your oyntment. This dryeth Erysipelas and olde stinkyng soares in the Legges and Thighes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum de Enula campana?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Enula campana rootes sodden in Uineger, and afterward well dryed.Anoyntment agaynst ext
                              •
                           eame itche, scabbes, and Poxe. 
                        l.i. of swines grease, oyle Oliue, ana. ℥.iii. of new waxe. ℥.i. of sal
                           •
                         made in pouder. ℥.ss of quicke Siluer, & Turpentine washed, ana. ℥.ii. make this oyntment accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Vnguentum contra Scabiem?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Swynes grease. ℥.v▪ oyle of Bay, Quicke Siluer sleked, of Waxe washed,Another for the same. of Frankensence made in pouder, ana. ℥.ii. of Salte. ℥.vii. of the iuice of Planteyn and Fumiterre, asmutch as you iudge sufficiēt. Make it after this fashion, set the iuices with the waxe, oyle of Bay, and Swines grease on the fier, and let them boyle vntill all bee melted, then put to Salte, Frankinsence, Mastike, and boyle them all vntyll the iuice be consumed. Then take them from the fyre, and put vnto them ye Quicksiluer 
                           ••
                        eked as you dyd in the other Oyntment before and so vse it. This is a very stronge Oyntment and therefore you muste take dilygente heede, least that you touch any pryncipall Member wyth the Oyntement, because of your quicke Syluer, you must also myngle a great quantitie of Mastike wyth it.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Vnguentum pro pueris scabiosis?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Terebintyne washed. ℥.iij. of Butter washed. ℥.ij. of salt ℥.i. of the Iuyce of Pomecitrons, the yolkes of .iiij. Egges, of Oyle of Roses. ℥.i. mingle all these together, and make an oyntment.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum desiecatiuum Rubrum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke the stone called lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata ana. ℥.iiij. Litharge of Gold, whyte lead. an̄. ℥.iiij. of Campher. ℥.i. of Waxe. ʒ.v. oyle of Roses, oyle of Uyolets. ana. ℥.vj. make the Oyntment accordingly. Thys wyll dry moyst humours.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum contra Lumbricos?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of bitter Almondes, and the Iuyce of Peache leaues, and Motherworte, ana. ℥.ss. of Roses, Lupine flowers, the pouder of Hartes horne. ana. ʒ.i. of Aloes succotrine. ʒ.ij. some put vnto these. ʒ.ij. of Oxe Galles. Take a little quantity of Uynegar, and as mutch Hony as wyll suffyce, thys applyed to the Belly, wyll kill Wormes.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Resumptiuum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Swynes grease. ℥.iiij. of Hens grease, Goose grease, & Duckes grease. ana ʒ.ij. of Hysop. ℥.ss. oyle of Uyolets, Camomil and Dill ana. ℥.ii. of freshe Butter. l.i. of whyte Waxe. ℥.vi. of Tragagātum, of the slimy sap of ye kirnels of Quinces, Lintseede, and Holyoke, of Gum Arabike, ana. ℥.ss. myngle them together and make an Oyntmentment.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Album?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Oyle Olyue. l.ii. of fyne whyte Leade. l.i whyte Waxe. ℥.vi. some Poticaries put to these. ʒ.ii. of Camphyer, make the Oyntment accordyng.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Matritum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Litharge of Golde. ℥.iii. of Salet Oyle. l.ss. of Uyneger. ℥.iii. make the Oyntmen in a Leaden Morter accordingly: Thys cooleth, and dryeth, and killeth Itch.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     How make you Vnguentum Aegyptiacum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health,
                     FIrst take of the Flowers of Brasse, called Uerdigreace. ℥.v. of Hony. ℥.xiiii. of stronge Uyneger. ℥.vii. seeth them vntill they bee thycke, and

make your Oyntment. Thys is a synguler good Oyntment agaynst olde Woundes and Fystulaes, whych stande in neede of clensing. It doth also eare away dead Fleshe, and purgeth also from all corruption.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Citrinum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Borar whych is a kynde of Salt Peter. ʒ.ii. of Camphire. ʒ.i. of whyte Corall. ℥.ss. of Sea glasse burnt. ℥.i. of the Gum Tragagantum, Amilū, Merbull, Cristall, of fyne Frankinsence & whyte, of Salt peter, ana. ʒ.iii. of whyte Marbell. ʒ.ii. of Serpentarie, white Lead. ʒ.vi. make it after thys fashyon: stampe your Tragagantum, and the Marbull stones in a Morter wyth an Iron Pestell, stampe the other alone in the same Morter, and searse them through a Syne wyth a fyne cloth, wyth. l. of fresh Swynes grease, and Goates grease, and of Hens grease. ℥.i. These greases must be put into a Skyllet, or some other sutch lyke Uessell, the whych Uessell oughte to hange ouer the Fyre, in a Cauderne full of water, let the water in the Caulderne so boyle that the grease may be melted, by the heate of the water in the Caulderne. Whan ye grease is melted, strayne it through a fyne clothe into a Dyshe, & put vnto it all ye pouders, except Camphyre and Borax, stirring it continually, vntill all goe together on a lumpe. Thys done, myngle wyth it two Pomecitrons or moe, stirring it all wayes, & whan it beginneth to boyle, put in Camphyre and Borax, it must be continually stirred tyll it be cold, after that it bee taken from the fyre the whych done, make the oyntment. And here you must note that one pounde of pouder, wyll requyre. l.viij. of grease.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Neapolitanum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     FIrst take of Oyle of Camomill, Dyll, Spicknarde and Lillies, ana. ʒ.ij. of Swynes grease and the fat of Ueale.These Ointmēts be good for the butt
                              •
                           s of Naples, Soares, Aches. &c. ana. l.i. of Euphorbe. ʒ.v. of Frankensence. ʒ.x. Oyle of Bay. ℥.i.ss grease of Uyper. ʒ.ii.ss. of quick Frogs of earth Wormes washed in Wyne. ʒ.iij.ss. Iuyce of Walworte, and Enula Campana rootes. ana. ʒ.ij. of Squmantum, Stichados, and of Motherwort, ana. M.ii. of sweete Wyne. l.ii. boyle them al together vntill the Wyne be consumed, then strayne them & put vnto the strayning, Litharge of gold. l.i. of Terebintyne washed. ℥.ii. make thys Oyntment or searecloth with whyte Wax, putting vnto it, whan it is almost sodden. ℥ j.ss. Stacte, or of the saftest & tendrest part of Myrrhe, thē take it from the fyre & styrre it till it be luke warm, after this put vnto it. ℥.iiij. of Quycksiluer sleked wyth your spettell, styrryng it tyll the Quycksyluer bee run together on a lumpe wyth other Symples, and so make your Oyntment.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Another. &c?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of Oyle of Spyke. ℥.i. Olei de Tartaro, Oyle of Baye, Olei Petrolei, and Swynes grease, ℥.iiij. of Frankensence. ℥.ss. of Euphorbe. ʒ.i.ss

the oyntment of Holioke, and of Agrippa, ana. ℥.j. of Quycksyluer. ℥.iiij. myngle all together and make your Oyntment.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum Galeni?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke of whyte Waxe. l.i. oyle of Roses.A good cold
                              •
                            vnguentum▪
                         
                        l.iij. let theese bee melted all together, and washed well and ofte wyth cold water, vntill they bee whyte, it were the better that they be washed wyth a little Uyneger.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Vnguentum ad Combustionem ignis, to heale burning wt fyre?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     IT is an Oyntment whych I haue oftentymes proued to help many, whose vertue excelleth in healing the flesh,An oyntment for burning. whan it is combust or burnte wyth Fyre, and it must be thus made. Take of the Rynde or tender bark of Elder, & the Pyth or Cork of the same Elder. ana. ℥.ij, boyle it in three pyntes of water vntill halfe be consumed, then strayne it and put in Oyle of Nuts. ℥.iiij. and seeth it softly in a cloase vessell vntill your water bee wasted, then put in new cleane clarifyed Waxe. ℥.ij. myngle them togeather, and so is your Oyntment made.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Suger Roset?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke fyne Suger and dissolue it wyth Rose water, and seeth it well, then cast it on a Marbell stone, till it be cold and hard, afterwarde cut it in great peeces. Thus you may also make Suger Uyolet, & Buglosse.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     
                        I Haue ben troubled wyth a bloudy Flyxe many a long day,Here 
                              〈…〉
                            describeth the flixe with the effectes. wyth paynefull turments in my Guttes, and runnyng oute of yellow Choller, excoriation. or as I thynke the scrapyng of my Guttes, wyth pourynge out of bloud, my body is cleane wasted, my flesh consumeth, I cannot tell what to do, I take no rest in my bed, I haue a continuall drynesse, thys payn hath brought vnto my mynde, an infinite number of cares, & miserable afflictions of the soule: I haue ben wyth many, I haue sought euery where for help, but I haue found none. I pray thee, deare Health, bestow vppon me some worthy medycine whych may recouer me, and heale me of this sore, & great disease.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THys assure your selfe, I haue helped many, and hyndered none that haue vsed it, for I my selfe haue oftentymes proued it, euen so do you. Take the Iuyce of Planteyn, of Kno
                           •
                        grasse,A Clister to stop yt blouddy flixe. of Sheapperds purse, of Nightshade, of Ribwort, ye water of Roses. an. ʒ, ii the whytes of .iij. Egges, the seede of Ryse, ye flowers of Pomgranets, ye rynde of Pomgranets, the wylde whyte Rose, finely beaten in pouder and searsed, ana. ℈.ii. Acatia. 
                        ʒ.i. clarified Oxe tallow▪ ℥.ii. Goates milke pynte ss. seeth al these together, then put in Terra Sigillata fine in pouder. ʒ.i.ss

put these all into your Clister bladder, and receiue it luke or more than bloud warme in at your fundament, and lye downe vpon your bed and rest, hauyng the lower partes of your belly warme anoynted with Oyle of Rue: and afterward take Wormewood, Sothernewood, Rose leaues, Sauery, Puleole, Rosemarie, ana. M. the beries of Myrtels, the pouder of the barke of Pomgranets, ana. ℥.ii. wheate Bran .M.ii. seeth all these in raine water, and whyte wyne, ana. l i.iiii. vntyll p
                           ••
                        t be consumed, then wyth warme clothes be washed,Bullein
                              •
                            hath vsed thys oftentimes to his friendes. and after apply all these thynges to your Raynes of youre backe and belly, then drynke Red wyne, wherein tarte plumbes haue bene sodden, Planten water, and vnripe Mulberies: and thys is myne aduice, Sickenes, to make the whole, for wyth this I haue helped many withall.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you an Epithema to stop the flixe.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     I Shall teach you a very good holsome Epithema, whych hath helped many a hūdred make it and proue it as occasion shal moue thee. Take a Lynnen bagge a foote square, put therein Red Rose leaues, red Briar leaues, Myrtyll beries wyth the leaues, Polei of like quantity to fyll this bagge, accordyng to greatnesse of the body so make this Bagge, but commonly .xii. inches is vsed, let thys seeth in Red wyne, thē apply it to the belly very warme, and make it warme agayne, yea .x. or▪ xii. tymes, and keepe it to the belly: and sometyme there appeareth knottes lyke lyt
                           •
                        le Figges in the nether partes, through the aboundance of humours, in sutch cases: wyth a Sponge washe that place often tymes with the decoction of the Epithema aforesayd, and dry Mulberies, and Briar bearies which be skant ripe, make them into pouder and burne Hogges hayre, and the ashes thereof put into this pouder, and .viii. graines of Masticke in pouder, cast or rubbe youre sore placee therewyth,
                           Epithema to stop Fluxes. foure tymes a day, and hereafter foloweth a moste excellent Epithema for that same purpose. Take Gumme Arabike, Frankinsence, Mastike, Aloes flaua or yellow, ana. ʒ.ii. Dragons or mans bloud, the stone called Hematist. ana. ʒ.i ss. the burnte pouder of the cloue of a Crab or any shell fish. ℥.ss. with twoo hard rosted Egges, this gumme dissolued wyth a lyttle Red wyne tempered wyth the rest of these pouders and Egs, make them warme and in a lynnen longe bagge apply it to the raynes, and so make it warme betweene two platters vpon the Coales, and geue the sycke Theriaca. ʒ i. mingled with Red wyne. ℥ iiii. warme to drynke at that present tyme, and thys wyll stop any extreame fluxe: if you wyll make a glister to helpe the Colyke or wynde in the Guttes,A Clister for the Collycke. Take Hysop, Centauri, ana. ℥.i▪ and one good-white Colaquintida, seeth it in a cloase Uessell in two quartes of Water vntyll halfe be wasted, then strayne it, and take a pynte or more of thys decoction,This did docter Mansfield vse to his▪ pa
                           
                              •
                           ients at Norwiche, many 
                              •
                           ymes. and put thereunto oyle of Rue. ℥.i. and warme let it be ministred, if thys be somewhat weake to a very stronge body, adde to thys Hony. ℥.i. Hie
                           •
                        a simplex▪ 
                        ʒ.i. and common Salte, ℥.i.ss.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes▪
                     
                     How make you Collyria whych be vsed for sore eyes?
                  
                  
                     
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Collyria which be vsed for sore eyes?
                  
                  
                     Health?
                     THey be made of two kindes,
                           Collyrium, Sieff.
                         the one liquid or moyst called Collyrium, the other dry, made in forme of a Suger loafe, called Sief, but in wayght not. ʒ.ss. and of them speaketh Galē, lib. 4. medic. localium cap. 4. and Paulus Aegineta in libro septimo. Cap. 16. They be made of iuices liquors, seedes, fruicts, parts of Plants, Mettals &c. But I wyll shew thee how to make some for the comfort of eyes: and fyrst whan the eyes begyn to be sore, hoate, red, dymme. &c. Take the whyte of an Egge well beaten, and oftentimes drawne through a strayner with the lyke quantitye of cleane Rose water, and Planten water myngled together, and drop parte of this into your eyes. Another, take Tuthia or Lapis Tuti prepared,Uery good Col
                              ••
                           ries. for sore eyes. & the stone called Calaminaris, ana. ℈.iiii, the whyte of an Egge, Rose water, womans Milke, the decoction of the Kernels of Quinces, ana. ℈.iii. myngled together, you may put in fine cleare yellow Aloes. ℈.i. if you wyll. Thys Collyrium will dry vp watry and gummy matter in the eyes.
                     Another to quycken the syght. Take the stone Tuthia or Tuti prepared, Amoniacum, Bras burned or adust, lapis Calaminaris, ana. xii. pennye wayght, Myrrhe, the stone called Hematist, Opium, ana. vi. peny waight,The best learned of the Greekes and Latines vse this for sore eyes. yellow Aloes called Hepatyca, Bulles gaule, Galbanum, gum Sagapena, ana. iiii. peny wayght, Salt Armonyake, the iuice of Chelidon, ana. iiii. peny wayght, and thereunto adde Rosewater, and beate it in your Morter, then rowle them in small sharpe pieces, and dry them. keepe them vntill you haue neede: and whan occasion shall serue, dissolue one of these pieces in Rose water, the whyte of an Egge or womans Milke, and put it into your eye. This is most excellent to make cleane the eyes, sharpe the syghte, and make it beautifull.
                     Another for the same. Take Ceruse washed in Rose water .viii. sundry tymes in seuerall waters. ʒ.i. whyte Gum, Sarcocol of Persia. ℈.ii. Amylū, Traganth. ana. ℈, i. Opium. G, iiii. all lightly beaten or ground on a Stone put thereunto a lyttle of the Mussege or thicke decoction of Fenigreeke, and so fashion them and make them dry, and keepe them cleane,A Linament for Pleurisie. you maye put some of this into your waters for the eyes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a Liniment to put away paine in the Pleurisie.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TAke oile of Camomill, the fat of a Capon, ana ℥.i. of fresh Butter newly made. ℥.iii. and a little piece of new waxe, so make your Liniment to anoynt the stomacke.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you a Frontale or a Foreheadcloth to quench heate in the head, in the time of a Feauer, and to cause sleepe
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     AFter the mynde of Galen prepare a double cloth of Linnen three Fyngers broade,A fronta
                              ••
                           e for hedache. and in length from one Eare▪ to the other Eare, put into thys clothe as followeth. Take Red Roses or theyr Leaues, Lettyce leaues▪ Poppy leaues or the seedes, and quilt it, and make thys Frontall warme betwene two broade Plates or Platters, wyth Rosewater & Uynegar▪ and then bynde it to the Forehead. An other for the same. Take water Lyllies, Uyolets, Mellilot, Lettice flowers, whyte Poppy heads, ana. M.
                           q
                           quarter
                        . bruse all together,For sleepe. & put them into your clothe. If the head be cold, & haue no warmenes, thē make your Frontale thus. Take Sage, Rosemary, Camomill, Betony, Bryonie, Melilote, Basill, Sauory, or sutch lyke Herbes brused, and put into your clothe: And in hoat paynes of the head, poure water of Roses and Uynegar together, vpon a hoat Tyle stone, and receyue the Uapour or Smoake into your Mouth.Uapour to smell vpon. In colde causes poure Aqua vitae, & Sage water vpō a burning Tyle or stone, & receyue ye smoake. Cōmonly Galen in .12. of hys Therapeutice, dyd anoynt sycke Folkes heads wyth Oxyrhodinum, whych is made of Oyle of Roses. ℥.i. & Uynegar. ℥.ij. mingled & shaken in a Uyal of glasse, & cold, anoynt ye Forehead therewith.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How prepare you a Gargarizme or washing Gurgle, for the Mouth and Throate?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        A gargarizme to gurgull in the mouth and throate.
                        YOu shall doe thus. Take the stilled waters of Roses, Planteyn, Uynegar, Hony, Lettice, Strabury, Nightshade, water Lilly, & of Burnet, ana. ℥.i. Diamoron. ʒ.vi. the Iuyce of Raspes, of Barberyes. ana. ʒ.vj.ss. syrupe of Poppy. ℥.ss. of Strauberies ℥.iii of Uynegar. ℥.ss. myngle them well, and thys is a Gargarizme, to skowre the throate in all hoat dyseases, and in the tyme of Angina. And here foloweth an other for the same. Take Planten, Burnet, Strabury leaues, Knotgrasse, ana. M.i. Sorrell, Sage, ana. M. red Roses. M.i ss. long Pepper, Pellitory, ana. ʒ.ss.℈.ij. boyled in a Pottell of Water, till the halfe or more be consumed, then strayne it, and put to it Hony of Roses. ℥.i.ss. Oximell Scilliticum. ℥.i. myngle them together, & then it is perfitly made. An other very good, whych hath done mutch good, as Doctor Leonard Fuchsius reporteth. Take Hiera Picra simplex. ℥.ss. Oximell Scilliticum. ℥.ij. the stylled waters of Hysop, Betony, and Organie. ℥.i.ss. myngle theym, and make your Gargarizme.A gargarizme must be giuen warme to draw humors from ye heade. Mustard, Uynegar, Pepper and Hony myngled together, doe make a good ready Gargarizme. Prouided that you mynister your Gargarizmes warme, to draw humours: But when you stop thē, vse cold things, taken cold in your mouth, as Uinegar, foūtayne water. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Nasalia, or to stop bloud in the Nose?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     WHhen the bloud doth aboundantly flowe out of yt Nose, it is good to open the Lyuer veine in ye right arme,
                           Nasalia.
                         to take the aboūdance away, & somtime smal stringes or veines wil break in such cases moderat

diate and colde thynges, are good to bee vsed, and this pouder to be put into the Nose. Take the Kaies or woly knottes growyng vpon Sallowes, commonly called Palmes, beyng dry, Bole Armonie fyne,To stop bloud in the nose. that wyll cleaue to the tongue, and Dragons bloud, ana. ʒ.i. beaten into Pouder, and finely sifted, and the fyne haire of a Hares belly. ʒ i.ss. cut or mynsed most short lyke pouder, put these together, and stuffe them into the bloudy nostrell▪ or els dissolue them wyth the whyte of an Egge, and so draw them into the Nose:The profit of neesing. Often tymes the head is stopped, and the stomacke so disquieted, that sternutacions or neesyngs wyll helpe. And also the sayed sternutacions wyll helpe Women to quycke deliueraunce, in the time of their trauell. Then do thus. Take Margerum, Nigella, Cloues, whyte Peper, Ginger, ana. ℈.ii. Castor, Condisi, ana. ℈.i. make them in fyne pouder, and put them into ye nose. Or thus. Take Nutmegges▪ Ireos rootes, ana. ʒ.i. Elleborus Albus, called neesyng pouder roote. ℈.i. white Peper, Pellitorie. ʒss. Calamus. ʒ.i.℈.i. beat them in pouder, and keepe it to vse, as a mornyngs, & in childe birthes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Reumes, weakenes of sight, dulnes of hearyng, slownes of speach, ouer mutch sleepe, sometime trouble me with foulenes in my mouth what helpe then to clense, or draw forth fleume?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     MAke a prety lynnen bagge of fyne cloth, put therein Mustard Seede,Apophlegm
                              •
                           
                           tismi, to put in the mo
                              •
                           th to draw forth filth. Hysoppe, Ginger, Peper, Pelletorie, Stauesagre, Mastike, Organ, ana. ʒ.i.ss. beaten together, put part of this into this bagge, or els into your mouth, without the bagge, or els tempered with the iuice of Beates and Hony, and so make your mansill or bityng thyng. It wyll draw fleume, clense the eyes, comfort memory, and quench the salte fleume, that make the face high coloured, vse it a mornyngs often times.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How make you Pessis to mollify, to vnbynde, and to restraine, to be put into the secret place of the vrine of women?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TRuly the makyng of them whych doe mollify is in this. Take Oesipi▪ whych is an oyle sodden out of the wolle that is clypped or shorne from the Neckes or flankes of sheepe,Oesypi is an foule Oyle made of wool but very good for Pessaries and other medicines. Hartes tallow or the marth called Mary, Goose grease, Capons or Hens grease ana. ʒ.i ss, Flax or lynt seede, Fenegrekee in pouders, ana. ʒ.ii. Melilot. ʒ.i. Masticke. ʒ i.ss. the yolkes of Egges, Oyle of Roses, and the Oyle of Flowerdeluce, ana. ℥.i.ss. fresh Butter. ʒ.iii. put to a piece of waxe, melt them together, and prepare woll rowled together in the forme of a fynger or sutch like, dippe it in thys liquor,A mollifying Pessary. whan it is styffe let it be vsed, I meane into the secret place of Conception, retaynyng it in the place .iiii. or .v. howers wyth a threade in the end thereof,How to vse 
                              〈◊〉
                            Suppositor. it may be made with a Sponge. To prouoke termes menstrual. Take Mugwort Sothernewood▪ Dyttan, Calamus odoratus, ana. ʒ, ii. the Seede of Nigella. ʒ.i, ss. Bay beryes. ℥.ss. dry Rue. ʒ.i. Sauen. ℈.ii. Myrthe, Styrax liquid, ana. ʒ.i.ss. Sagapine, Ladanū, ana. ʒ. beatē in a Morter with Hony, & rowle it in the Pessary, and apply it accordingly.
                     
                        Sometyme immoderate flux or termes passeth so mutch and so painfully,Pessaris to restraine. that in sutch cases, Pessaries restrictiue be very holsome, as exāple. Take the pouder of Hartes horne, Olibanum, ana. ʒ.ii. Dragons bloud, Balaustia, ana. ʒ.i ss. Damaske Roses. ʒ, ii Acatia, or iuice of sower Plumbes dryed, Hypocistidis, Mastike, ana. ʒ.i. Bole armeny. ℈.ii. Bistorta, Comfory, ana. ʒ.i.ss. bruse and stampe them well in a Morter, put in the iuice of Planten, and Oyle of Roses, as mutch as wyll suffice to rowle in your woll and make your Pessarie.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Agaynst the foule stynke of a corrupt ayre, a fylthy house, and coldnesse of the brayne, what smoke, fume, or sauour is then good?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        How to receiue fume or vapor.
                        NOt onely for a colde brayne, but also agaynst rawe humours, and vomyting of Bloud. &c. If the Pacient haue a few coales betwene the Legges, stoupyng downeward, wyth clothes cast loose about the naked body, as a mantell, Gowne &c. receiuyng the smoke, at the mouth, through some Trunke or hollow thyng. Take the wood of Aloes. ℈.ii, Gallia muschata. ℥.i. Sage, Margarū, Rosemary, Maces Bay leaues, ana. ʒ i stamped in a morter into fyne pouder, put in fyne Muske. G. viii. and cast part of this or all this, by lyttle and lyttle on the coales, or thus as foloweth.
                     Take fine Frankinsence, Cinamon, Cloues, Maces, the rynde of a Pome Citron. ana. ʒ.ss. the wood of Aloes, Myrthe, Mastike. Trochisces of Gallia Muschata. ʒ.ii. beate all in a morter, and put in some Styrax liquide, and your morter partely warme, beat altogether and make your sweete Fume, puttyng in if you wyll Muske, Amber grece. ana. G. iiii. Here is a good one. Take Ladanum. ℥.i. Frankinsence, Mastike▪ ana. ʒ.i. Styrax Calamita. ℥.ii. Cloues, Cinamom, Nutmegges, ana. ʒ.i. wood of Aloes, Myrrhe. ʒ.ss. deade coales of Salow, Cyprus. Fur, or Genuper, ℥.ii. beate them all in a Morter somewhat warme, put in a lyttle Uenice Turpentyne, and cleane Rosewater, and worke all together wyth your Pestil, and make your parfume, and thys shall suffyce: but when Women do sodaynly fall sicke wyth swellynge of the Matrix called ye Mother then it is perillous to vse sweete parfumes,Perfumes for ye mother. but then vse to parfume with Galbanum Asa foetida, Castor, Fethers, the paring of Horshoues. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sickenesse.
                     How make you Sacculum or Scutum, the shilde or twilte for the breast?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     THey be very comfortable for the breast and stomacke, to stoppe vomits, and be good for the Hart,
                           Scutum.
                         Spleene, and Belly, and thus it is made. Take flowers of Rosemary, Lauender, Camomill, Betonie, Roses, ana. M.ss. or Sage, Margarum, Mellilote, Myntes, ana. M.ss▪ or Leaues of Sene▪ 
                        ʒ ii.ss. Stichados. ʒ iii. Cloues, Nutmegges, ana. ℈.ii. and Maces. ℈.iii. stamped in a Morter and twylted in a sylke or fyne lynnen cloth, made

in the forme of a Sheelde or a square Trēcher. Another. Take flowers of Buglosse, Roses, Balme. ʒ.iij. Cloues, Maces, wood of Aloes, Cardamon, ℈.ij. Saffron. ℈.j. Galanga. Spycknarde, the Bone of Hartes heart, an̄. ℈.j.ss. Muske, Ambergreece. ana. G. x. beate in a Morter, and wyth soft Cotton quilted and applyed to the breast. You may put in warme herbes, as Sage, Wormewood, Mynts, Horehound, Sothernwood. &c. put in a Quilt, or Stomycher with the pouders of Calamus, Cloues, and Comen, quilted & made very warme wyth Wyne or Aqua vitae betwene two Platters, and so applyed to a weake feeble Stomacke:Thys is an Emplaster, if oyle be put in, and thus I ende of Sacculum, or Quyltes.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How is a Cerote made?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THey be made of Waxe, Oyle and Pouders in a Quylt, in forme of a Shooe soole, or an Oxe tongue,A Cerote and howe to make it, and are thus made. Take Cinamon, Cloues, ana. ʒ.i. Galingal, Maces. ana. ʒ.ss. sweete Calamus. ʒ.i.ss. woode of Aloes, Gallia Moschata. ana. ℈.i. Flowers of Pomgranettes, Mastike, Ladanum, ana. ʒ.i. oyles of Mastike, Roses, Myntes, ana. ℥.i. wyth Waxe. ℥.i. Terebintyne, beate your dry thyngs in pouder and put your Waxe to them, and so melt them, and so to keepe your Cerote. You may make ye same in Leather or Silke. You may for the Splene put in Mellilot, Lintseede, Fenegreeke, Capper barkes, Calamus, Nutmegges, Waxe, Terebintine, accordinge to Arte, putting in Oyle.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Insessus?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FOr lacke of a Bathe, these are good for the Belly, & raynes Take Filipendula, Saxifrage, Mallowes, Holihoke,Insessus. water Cresses, ana. M.i. the seedes of Flax, Smalage, Fenegreek, seeth all together in sufficient Water to the thyrd part, and so vse it for the stone. Another. Take Mugworte, Sage, Betony, Calamint, Organie, Peneroyall, Camomill, Melilote, saynct Iohns grasse, Sothernwood, ana. M.ss. the Rootes of Yreos and Smalage ana. ℥ i. seeth your rootes soft & your herbes: thys is good for the Matrix, Belly, for the Chollicke, swelling wynde, Timpany, cold. &c. Another agaynst a blouddy flixe. Take Planteyn, Knotgrasse, the Ryndes of Pomgranets, Shepards purse, Horsetayle lyke a water sprinkle,A goodly remedy for the flixe. the flowers of Pomgranets, ana. ℥.iiij. seeth all in rayne water. Uynegar, or Red wyne to the thyrd part, & apply it to the lower partes of the Belly.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Fomentum?
                     
                  
                  
                     Health,
                     THere be two Foments one moyst, & th'other, dry as Hippocrates sayth lib ij. victu. acut. and now of a moyst one. Take Mallowes the Flowers,Fomentes moyst & dry.
                        
or toppes of Dyll, Camomill, Melilote, ana. M.ss. the seedes of Lyne, and Fenegreeke, ana. ℥.ss. sodden in. l.ij. of Fountayne water to the halfe, & so you may draw it through a Searse or a Strayner, and wyth a Sponge warme, you may washe the Belly, or any other greeued place.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Dropax to clense the head, and pull of scaules, and filthy Glewe that Chyldren are infected wythall?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        A Dropax for a scalde head.
                        DRopax wyll do many thynges to the body, it may bee made to humect, and to dry, to clense, to coole, and warme, but to your question to make a Dropax for an vncleane heade, called the scaule, or glewe, or els crust. Take Pix or Pitche, Waxe, Colophonie. ana. ℥.iij. Bitumen. ℥.ss. Brimstone. ʒ.iij. Peper, Pellitory. ana. ʒ.ij. Stauesagre.Where the he
                              •
                           rt is vnquiet, prosperous labour doth not goe foreward. 
                        ʒ.j.ss. Euphorbium, Elleborus the whyte, ana. ʒ.ss. beate your dryed thynges into pouder, and melt them together, spreade thys vpon a Leather warme layd on the fowle head, being fyrst shauen for .xxiiij. houres and so quickly rent it of, and thus I make an ende of these kyndes of Compoūdes. And when I haue more quietnesse, with conuenient leiser, I will say some thyng of Compounded waters: But it shall make no great matter if I geue place to them, whom no man can mende, that haue wrytten most plentifully, learnedly and compendiously, of the natures of Precious waters, both Symple & Compounde: yet shall I remēber some good waters shortly, because tyme, & place so mooueth me in that case.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     MIne Eyes begin to be dim, my syght fayleth me: I woulde learne to make a water, to keepe theym from vtter blyndnesse. For when the syght is decayed and gone, the Ioyes of thys Worlde are past, and nothyng is left, but misery & heauinesse of mynde, & continual musing.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        A goodly water for sore eyes.
                        A Merueylous water to conserue the Syght, I shall teache thee, whych I haue prooued my selfe, to haue helped many one: and the great learned Man in waters, called Euonimus, hath wrytten it, who in Distillations was equall to any, that euer practized the same, and it is thus made.
                     
                        Three rych waters, Siluer, Golde, and Balme.Take the leaues of Rue, Mynte, red Roses, Sage, Maidenhayre (other leaue out Minte, and Sage, and for them put red Fenel, Ueruyne, Euphrage called Eyebryght, Betony, Hony succle of the Moū
                        tayne, and Endyue) of euery one syxe handfulles, let theym bee put into whyte Wyne, for the space of .xxiiij. houres▪ then let them bee distilled in a Limbecke: the water that shall fyrst run out, is compared vnto Syluer, ye second vnto Golde, the thyrd vnto Balme, and thys must be close kept in a glasse: it is a water for all Dyseases of the Eyes, that bee curable, out of Aegidius, and Lullius, it is described Amongest the waters, composed for dyuerse inward dyseases by V'lstadius.
                     
                     
                        An other water for the eyes, about the beginnyng of Maie▪ gather 
                           •••
                        landine, Ueruen, Rewe, Fenell, beate them seuerally, and take. ℥.iii. of 
                           〈◊〉
                         iuice of euery one of them, then mixe them, put to a lyttle of the greene braū
                        ches of Euphrage, called, Iye bright, or Roses. ℥.iii of Sugar Candie. ℥.iiii. of the best Tucia, and as mutch of Dragons bloud, when all th
                           •
                        se are beaten, thou shalt mixe them together, and distille them in a Limbeck of glasse the liquor that runneth forth, thou shalt let it stand two or three dayes in a receiuer, and then vse it: it is of great vertue, for the eyes that bee da
                           •
                        ke▪
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         dimme, red, or haue the webbe in the eye. The water of the Uine, together with Hony sublymated by the fyre, cureth the blyndnesse of the eyes sp
                           •
                        cyally. The Monkes in Mesuen that is the water of the vine (sayd they) which in euery Spryng tyme, when the Uines are cut, for certayn dayes space wt
                        out any distillacion is pressed forth: this putteth away pryckynges, & heate of the eyes, and clarifyeth the syght, commyng by a hoat cause: if a Man put into both corners of the eye, one droppe of this water, it sharpeneth the syght, and cureth any disease of the eyes, within .v. dayes sayth Euonimus. &c. Reade after in the trymming waters, amongest them that be ordeyned to Dying of the haire. Here is also a water for the eyes in Sommer, to preserue the syght, described by Ioannes Mainardus, in his Epistelles, vi.iiii. three partes of Roses, the herbes of Fenell, and Rewe, of eyther one part, let them be well myx together, and after three dayes, let a water be distilled, other in only vapor of sethyng water, or in the Sonne, or in Balneo Mariae, as they call it, so that a handfull of the foresayed herbes,The maner of distil
                              •
                           ing the Water fore
                              •
                           es bee put into the receiuyng vessell, that the droppes may fall vpon them, and the mouth of the receiuer and the nose of the vpper vessell, must be diligently ioyned together, and closed, that the vapours may not get out, but be kept very close from ayre.
                     And hereafter foloweth an other water, of an excellent Uertue. Fyll a styll full of the leaues of Agrimonye, Ueruen, Euphrage, Fenell, Rue, red Mintes, and Louage, cut them. spryncle vpon them a litle white wine, and cleare wine, and distille them in a clay stillitorie,Goodlye waters for the eyes, whych excelleth in vertue. this liquor represseth the swellyng of the eye lyddes, of a colde cause, it dryeth vp the bleare eyednesse, it stoppeth the flowyng of teares, it cleareth the syght, it breaketh the blemishes, spottes, cornes, or pearles: if thou wylt haue it stronger to breake spottes or pearles, put vnto it Gallitricum, and Chickens weede, wyth red flowers. You may get a Water out of Fenell also for the same causes, for a liquor gathered out of the rootes and leaues of Fenell, sodde in Water, with a Basen layd vpon the water, whyle it yet seeth, and kept in a glasse, and one drop put into the corner of the eye euery day, mornyng and euenyng, for the foresayed causes, this is proued to be very good. To break the spot or Pearle, myxte wyth the foresayd waters, Mirrhe, and Aloes a poūd and put a droppe of the liquore strayned, in eyther corner of the eye, earely and late.
                     A Water distilled of the flowers of whyte Thorne, and Willow, putteth away pryckyngs, heates, or rednes of the eyes,The water of whyte thorne and Willowe for rednesse of eyes, cōminge of heate. it stoppeth teares comming of a hoat cause, and breaketh the spottes, or Pearles of the same cause. A Water of the Leaues (flowers) of Euphrage, stoppeth Teares, commyng

of a colde cause, and maketh slender the Eye lyddes, that swell of the same cause,Water of Euphrage called Eyebright, for swelling in the eyes, cō
                           myng of cold. Euphrage or Ophthalmica so named, because it is a herb for Eyes Gordonius water for Eyes. Gordonius water for a Fistula. and restoreth the same syght, that hath any impediment. Euonimus doth say, that Euphrage doth not heate, but is temperat, or els doth coole moderately in the fyrste degree, and dryeth in the seconde.
                     An excellent water for the debility of the syght, described by Gordonius, take Selandyne, Fenell, Rue, water of the Mountayne, Euphrage, Ueruen, red Rose wyth theyr Buds. ana. l.ss. Cloues, long Peper. ana. ℥.ij. when they are brused together, dystill them in a Limbecke of Glasse, with a slowe fyre, and put of it euery day in the Eyes.
                     An other of the same mans, for a Fistula, whych hee is certayne wyll heale it: two pounde of good whyte Wyne, dystilled in the same vessell, Aqua vitae is dystilled in: the waters of Rosemary & Sage. an̄ 
                        l.v. Sugar l.ij. when they are distilled, put agayne to them. ℥.j. of Sage, and asmuch of Rosemary, when they are steeped together viij. dayes, thou shalt straine it, and vse it. A canker in what part of the body so euer it be, the herbe called Canker, whych is also called Doues foote, the Flowers of Quinces, the Flowers of Cerifolium,Andreas Fornerius water for a Canker. the Flowers, or Leaues of the Bryer, called Idea, whych is lyke a sweete whyte Rose, & a fewe whyte Roses, Hony, and whyte Wyne, and the Alum whych is called Alum Glasse, let all these be dystilled together.
                     A good Water dystilled of a Molewarpe, for all kynde of Goutes, or Dropsies, noli me tangere, Scalles of the head, Saucie face, and the Wolfe. If you wyll haue a Water wythout dystilling, quickely to washe your Legges, or Feete, to make your sayd water to smell well. Set a vessell of running or conduit water on ye Fyre, seeth it well, and put into it the flowers of Lauendula, or Lauender, and mutch rather of that, whych is commonly called Spike, both greene, and dry Bayes, Basell, Sage, Fenel. &c. and so washe at nyght: put cleane runnyng or Conduicte water, & whyte Wyne into a vessel wel stopped, and set it in the Sunne, putting in Lauē
                        der, Spike, and Cloues, that they may make sweete the sayde Water, and Wyne wyth theyr smell, but yet if the Lauender be greene and moyste, it wyll turne the Wyne almost into Uinegar whych if it bee dry, it doth not so. The Lyquor shall bee made the more smelling, if the Flowers be dryed in the Sunne, in a Glasse closed, & afterward whyte Wyne to be put into it.How to make sweete water wythout stilling good for to washe the feete, or for Barbers. If so be it, a man desyre to haue a sweete water forthwyth, by and by, let hym put a drop of Oyle of Spyke vnto a good deale of pure Well, or Conduite water, and chafe it together, in a glasse wyth a narrow mouth, although thys be made wythout dystillation, the same notwythstanding, being ryght dystilled in the Sunne, specially if certayne other thyngs bee myxt wyth it as Muske, Ambre, Ciuet, Caphura, or meaner thynges, as Styrax, and Stacte, Myrhe, or any other Spyces, chiefly Cloues, or els thyngs of lesse estymacion, as Roses, the Barkes, Flowers, or Leaues of Orynges, Lymons, Bay leaues, common sweete Hearbes, Rosemary, Margerum, Bazill. &c. it shalbe made mutch the sweeter. But if you will haue a very pleasaunt water, take. ʒ.ss. of good Muske beaten in two. l. of Rose water, put in the belly of a Glasse Still, and distill it, by little and

little, then put it in a Glasse well stopt, wyth Ambergrice. ʒ.i. it is a Water merueylous sweete, and conuenient for fyne Persons,A pleasaunt sweete water that theyr clothes may be sprynkled there with: put. ℥.ss. of good Saffron, in. l.ij. of Rosewater (for the space of one day) and dystyll it, thys water is holsome to be mixt wyth Medicines: also for smell, and garnishing, put. ℥.ss. of Cloues beaten, in a pounde and a halfe of Rose water .24. houres, and distyll it, dystill Campher. ℥.i. wyth a pounde of Rose water, and vse it in medicines, for Noble persons. After the same manner is Rose water, made wyth Saunders, and other spices (sweete smellyng) what so euer a man wyll, some distill al thys in pure Water, in steede of Rose water, three leaued herbe, an herbe very sweete of sauour, whych they dystill for Perfumes and to make dyuers other prety sweet Sauours. The Monkes of Mesuen, make a water of sweete sauour, where wyth the head, heart, and stomacke are reuiued.
                     ℞. Four handful of the flowers of Lauendula, Roses whyte, and red,The Monkes water for correction of the flesh, better than holy water, and more costly. of eyther two handfull, Rosemary, Cloues, newe and freshe Ciperus, of euery one a handfull, Minte, Sage. Tyme, Bayleaues, or Peneroyal of euery one halfe a handfull. ℥.iiij. of Cloues, Galingal, Nucis Mosch, Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, Cinamon, of Flowerdeluce, of euerye one. ℥.ss. syxe poundes of whyte Wyne (asmutch as shal suffyce) when they are brayde and beaten in a Morter, let them bee put into a Glasse, wel closed, for the space of eyght dayes, afterward vse them, as occasion shall serue: it is excellent to washe the handes, if you myxe a lyttle of it, wyth a greate deale of pure water. A man may vse it also dystilled, and put in. ℈.i. of Muske. Epiphanius Empericus, wryteth an other of the same mans, delectable, wyth a merueylous sweetenesse of sauour: Ciuet, Muske, of eyther. ʒ.i. let it be tyed in a fyne lynnen cloth, and let it be set to soake in. l.ij. of Rosewater, a fewe dayes in the Sunne.
                     An other of the same Epiphanius, of a very sweete sauour: Bazill, Mynt, Marierum, Flowerdeluce, Hysop, Sauery, Sage, Melissa called Baulme, Lauender, Rosemary, of euery one half a handful, Cloues, Cinamon, Nutmegges, the Pomecitron, of yellow couler, three or four, let them bee beaten, and set three dayes in Rose water, then let them bee dystilled wyth a slow fyre: when the destillacion is finished, put to. ℈.i. of Muske, and set i
                           •
                         in the Sunne: you may adde Ambergrice. ℈.ss.
                     An other of ye same Epiphanius, of most excellent sauour. R. Three poūds of Rosewater, Cloues, Cinamon. Saunders. ana. ʒ.vj. two handful of the Flowers of Lauende
                           •
                        . ʒ.vj. of Assa dulcis, Malmsey, Aqua vitae. ℥.ij. let it stand a moneth to styll in the Sunne, well cloased in a Glasse,sweete water for linnen. or vpon the top of a Furneyce: then dystil it in Baln
                              •
                           o Mariae, and ad. ʒ i.ss. of Muske to the dystillation, then let it stande tenne dayes in the Sunne, or aboue the Furneyce, and so vse it. It is a marueylous pleasaunte Lyquor in sauour, a water of a wonderous sweetenesse, for the perfuming the sheetes of a Bed, whereby the whole place, shall haue a moste pleasaunte sent: put into a little Uyall of Glasse .xviij. or .xx. Graynes of Muske, & Ciuet

and a little of Ambergrice, after filled ful of Rosewater, set it ouer the fire▪ and when it is hoate, take it away, then let it stand to coole, well closed, after you haue done let it stand two dayes, you may vse it from thence foreward, it is as good as though it were distilled: when thou wylt perfume thy Napkins, or other linnen, put it in a vessell with a wyde mouth, & spred the clothes vpon it boyling, and that they may drynke vp the vapor and breth of it.
                     
                        Agalam, or Agalugun, is the wood of Aloes.An other maner of sweete water, is called the water of the casting glasse: put into some little vessel of Siluer, a litle Rosewater made with Muske, and a lyttle Ciuet, and Cloues, Agalam, Styrax calamita, when they are all pound agaynst a fire, mixe them, and perfume any clothes with the vapour or smoke thereof, it is a marueilous sweete sauour, if thou wilt keepe close the vessell diligently, and when thou thinkest good, put more Rose water vnto it, that it may be renewed.
                     An other. Thou shalt put into fower poundes of Rosewater, Assadulcis, somewhat grose beaten, Styrax, and Cloues, Camphire, Agalam, of euery sorte. ℥ i. Muske, Ciuet, of either of them G. xx. put these together in a glasse shut wyth a Parchement, pryckt through with ten or twelue smal hoales, and let the vessell boyle fower howers in a kettell, full of cleane water, as though it were in Balneo Mariae, after when it is colde, straine it throughe a fyne linnen cloth, and keepe it in a Glasse, in the whych Graynes .xii. of Muske shalbe put, whych beyng moysted, and steeped with Water, thou shalt stop the Glasse, and set it in the Sunne .viii. dayes, so shalt thou haue a wonderfull well smellyng water, a sweete water, and a secrete, whereof one part myxte wyth ten partes of pure Water, maketh the whole moste sweete: Graynes .xx. or there about of Muske, as the smell thereof pleaseth the more, or lesse, Nutmegges, Cloues, Galingall, Spicknard, Graynes of Paradise, Mace, Cinamom, of euery ana. ℥.i. all these beaten in a Morter, let them be put into a Glasse, fyt to distille in, with Rose Water l.i.ss. powred vnto it, let it stand so, for the space of fower or fiue Dayes, afterwarde put to it thryse asmutch of Rose Water, and destille all this in a Limbecke, set in a kettell full of water sethyng, as in Balnco Mariae. thou shalt keepe the water gathered together, diligently stopped for the same purpose aforesaid, that the former serueth for.
                     An other excellent water, two pound of the water, of the flowers of Citri,There be .ii. kindes of this Assa, one is called Assa foe. 
                                 •
                              ida, or Diuels dunge, ye other is called Assa dulcis, which comm
                              •
                           th from Syria, and is also named Syr
                              •
                           naicus liquor, or the iuice of Lasar pitium. one pound of the water of red Roses, of Mirtes. l.ss. of Muske Roses a good quantity, and lykewyse of the flowers, of Cloues, ana. ℥.ss. of Assa dulcis. ℥.iii. well beaten ana. ℥.i. of Stirax Calamita, and red Styrax, ana. ℥.ss. all these stamped, and mixte with water, thou shalt distille them in a Glasen Limbecke, the head and the receyuer dilligently closed with clay▪ with a soft fyre, or in a Balneo Mariae, or in a kettell of sethyng water: a Water of most sweete sauour, with the whych Oyle is stilled also, the last water being mixte, with a hundred tymes asmutch of pure Water, doeth sauour wt the sweetenes thereof, so is this folowyng of greater Uertue, health, and sweetenes,
                     Take a pounde of Mirrhe chosen, pure, new and fat, beaten into small

pieces, halfe a pound of the iuice of Roses, when they are myngled together in a Limbecke, let them be distilled in ashes: where fyrst thou shalt seperate the water, with a slow fyre: then make the Fier bigger,A water incomp
                              •
                           table▪ for the singuler goodnesse of the most excellent vertue thereof. and seperate the Oyle: and at last deuyde the water from the Oyle. It maketh the Face bryght, it closeth wounds effectually, as well olde as newe, the oyle is most precious, and doeth the same thynges that the water doeth, but mutch soner, as for example: it doth that in a hower that the water is about in. xxiiii. one vnce of this water distilled, mixt with a pottell of pure water, it doeth the same.
                     A goodly Rose water made with Muske, whych is requyred, and vsed also in other composicions, put. G. xii. or more of Muske, and. G xvii. of Amber grice.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THese waters be very pleasaunt and profitable,Of sleeping waters. but waters to make a man sleepe were comfortable, I pray you say somewhat of them.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        IF you wyll cause one to sleepe, then doe thus as foloweth: Take. ℥.ii. of Henbane. ℥.i. of the rootes of Mandragora.To cause rest and sleepe. 
                        ʒ.vi. of Popie, Lettyce. Orpin, Housleke, ana. ℥.ii. the water Lillie one handfull, when they are beaten, let them be put in two pound of water of Popie, wt. ℥.i.ss. of the seede of Darnell for the space of two dayes, and let them bee stilled, and this is perfect.
                     An other causing sleepe Take the seede of Darnell. l.i. of the seede of Henbane. li, ii. of the seedes of Purslen. ℥.iii of the seede, or roote of Mandrag, as mutch of Alkakengi, when they axe beaten, powre to them. l.i. of the iuice of Beanes, as mutch of the rootes, or leaues of Henbane. l.ss. of the iuice of the leaues of blacke Popye, minister. ℥.i. of thys water, when it is distilled, it is vehement, and of great vertue.A goodly water for the stone, & it helpeth the palsie and falling sickenesse.
                     
                     A water for the stone, made by Aegidius, bicause it breaketh the Stone, R. the seede of Pimpernell, Parsley, Smalage. Cokowprycke, Mustardseede, Burres, Masticke, of euery one lyke mutch, when they are wel beatē let them be myxte wyth the bloud of a hee Goate, and a lytle Uinegar poured to it, let them stand a few dayes in a Uessell well closed and then at the last 
                           •
                        et them be well stilled it is good for them that be troubled wyth the stone, what manner of stone so euer it bee, red, whyte, sharpe or playne, if so be it the stone be confyrmed, and gathered to some strayght, let the pacyent drynke of thys water eueryday, for so shall it bee broken and brought into Sande: if so be scabbed heades bee washed once a day with this water, they shalbe made hoale, and new hayre shall sprynge, and the Scabbes shal be cured within nyne dayes (otherwyse any kynde of Scabbes washt therewyth are made whole wythin three or fower dayes) if it be dronke fastyng, it maketh good Bloud, and good colour▪ more than any other Medicine) marueilously it maketh strong the sinewes, & taketh away ye falling

sickenes, if it be drunke twyse a day, otherwyse it is added: it healeth cleane the Palsie, if it bee not deade and radycated in the members. Thus sayth Aegidius
                        ▪ and Lullus, wyth other learned Clarkes, Also. R. Caudae equinae, Plā
                        taine, red Roses, the graines of Alkakengi, the rootes of holy Oke, shauen or scraped Liquorice, of euery one. ℥.i. Iuniper Sebestē, of eyther of them. ʒ.vi Bolearmoniake, ℥.ss. Cummen seede, the great cold seedes clensed, of euery one. ʒ.iiii. the seedes of whyte Popie. ʒ vi.℥.ss. of Quinces, or the thynnest of Goates mylke, l.vi▪ let them stand two dayes in the infusion, and after let them be distilled, gyue the sycke pacyent to drynke, ʒ.iiii. warme, so longe as the disease continueth Epiphanius Emper
                              •
                           cus.
                     
                     An other water composed of Aegidius, and it is commended of Lullus, of waters, R. Rue, Satyrion with the handes, and Satyrion with ye stones, Agrimonie, Chelidome, Sugar, and the stone called Calaminaris all of one wayght, and beate them in a Morter, it must be distilled with a slow fyre: this water excelleth in vertues, no disease of the eyes is so dull or dim, or great, but it wyll vanysh away, and gyue place to thys medicine: beyng drunke, it dryueth away all poysone, or taken with meates, for so it auoydeth the poysone by vomites, it cureth the Dropsy, it purgeth the stomacke from all euyll humours,
                           Sacer ignis.
                         it quencheth sainct Anthonyes Fyre in one day, if Flaxe dipte in it, be layed vpon the sore: it is good also agaynst the fyre of a blacke Melancholy, and whyte apostume wythout the Fyre, but if it appearered without, it shall in no wyse be conuenient, to lay on a plaster. It also healeth the Canker, if Aloes be myx
                           •
                        e wyth it, and a lyttle Towe or Flaxe dipte in it, and layed lyke a plaster vpon it twyse a day: this is a precyouse medicine, and neuer fayleth.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THese be excellent waters. Be there any good waters agaynst the fallyng syckenes, and resolucion of the sinewes and, Feuers? I pray you tell me them.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        HEre after I wyll shew thee goodly Waters, for the same purpose, as folow. Take Hysope, Peneriall, Cloues, Cicory▪ ana. ℥.i. let them be beaten in a Morter, and distilled in Sage water. l.vi. afterward take the stone Tutia, Persely, Rue, Setwall, Aloes, and the stone called Calaminaris, ana. ℥.i. and Ualerian. ℥.vi. when they are beaten in a Morter, seeth them in the foresayed water, tyll the thyrd part be consumed, and the liquor strayned wyth a cloth, thou shalt keepe in a Glasse, diligently closed nine daies, afterward let it be gyuen in drink, every day in the morning before day (by the space of ten dayes) to the sycke pacyent fastyng, it is profytable agaynst the fallyng sickenes. If he that taketh it, continue fastyng after it sixe howers.A goodly water for feuers. And truely it is a most effectuall remedy, it healeth all resolucions of the sinewes, and the members are strengthned thereby, if it be drunke wyth Castorium: it is good agaynst all Goutes, whych haue not taken Roote yet in the members, if it be drunk nyne dayes together fasting, it putteth away all maner of agues▪ what matter so euer they come of, if it

bee drunke Nyne dayes, euery morning earely. Thys Water is also most profitable to washe Woundes, in whych the Synewes are cut.generall.
                     
                     An other of Aegidius, the nynth in number, otherwyse they call it double: the seede of Smalage, ye seede of white Popy, Ginger, Sugar,Another water of Aegidius
                         Cloues ana. equall wayght, beaten in a Morter, put to it water (that is dystilled of Persely) and dystill it: this is the chiefest remeady for the cough, & breast payned, if a man drynke it cold in the morning fasting,Water against the Palsy, & to helpe the Brayne. and in the euening as hoat as he can: If it be drunk hoat wyth Castorium, it is good against the disease called Apoplexia: it healeth also the members sycke of the Palsy, if so be the Palsy be not deade in the members: it bryngeth sleepe and rest easely, it cherisheth all the members, it dryueth away euill humoures, and strengthneth the Head and the Brayne.
                     An other amongest Aegidius waters: Gladiolus, Hysope, Sauine, Sothernewood, or the seede of Sothernewood, leauing out Sauine, of euery one lyke quantity, beat them together, & let them stand certayne dayes,A water to be vsed wyth discretion. then dystil it. Thys water is of great strength, it wythstandeth all Agues, both hoat and colde: it prouoketh Womens termes, if it be drunk thryse: but it is hurtful to Women wythe chylde, it stancheth the bloudy flixe, and other flixes: It killeth wormes, being drunke fasting. It cureth al ye grief,There bee sōe that vse thys water to purge. whych wyth Beuers stones healeth the Palsy (if it be drunke dayly very heat) wythin three dayes: the same description is founde in the Booke of Lullus of waters most excellent.
                     Here after followeth a very good water. Take a Weather, that is all whyte, and fat fed in a good pasture, and well lyking, cut his throate, receyue his bloud, and stirre it while it is freshe and new, a good tyme, with a sticke of red Iuneper, and euer in the stirryng cast away the lumpes, that are gathered of the bloud, then cast in the shauinges of the same Iuniper, and the berries of Iuniper that be red, to the number of .xxv. and to this put a little, Agrimony, Ru
                           •
                        , Ualerian, Scabious and Ueronica, commō
                        ly so called, Pimpernell, Cicory, Peneroyall. ana. if so be it,Distill thys bloud, & keepe it close. the measures of the bloud exceede three quarters, thē put into it. ℥.iij. of Triacle of Ieane: but if it be lesse, according to the porcion of the bloud, thou shalt make lesse the measure of the Triacle. They must all be prepared ready at hand, that they may be put into the bloud, whyle it is yet warme: when they are all mixt, draw out a stilled liquor, which thou shalt keepe diligently in a glasse, and set it in the Sunne eyght dayes, for it will endure twenty yeres, it is knowen by experience, that this liquore is excellent, and good agaynst the Pestilence, the impostumes of the head, the sides, or ribbes, or agaynst the diseases of the Liuer, and Lightes, the inflacion of the Spleene, corrupte bloud, agues, swellings, tremblynges of the Heart, the dropsye,An excellente liquor against the pestylence and many other diseases. vnnaturall heates, ill humours, and chiefly agaynst poysone, and the Pestilent Ague. The sicke paciente that is taken wyth any of the foresayed diseases, shall drynke a Sponefull, or fower or fiue, and procure hymselfe to sweate, and shall be healed within hys sycke body.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What are composed Waters, I would gladly learne them?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        THey are to bee called composed waters, that are distilled of medicines composed, and steeped in Wyne, Aqua vitae, or other liquore: certayn composicions of spices and herbes, to restore the strength of the heart, and the spirites, are mixte wyth waters of Capons, drest by distillacions, accordingly: also wyth burninge Waters, or called Quintessence of Wyne, agaynst the Pestilence, and poysons, as we declared before, but also hoat medicines Electuaries, chiefly in the whych Diacridium, and other vehement thinges hurtfull to the stomacke, are receyued, mixte wyth the Liquores, specially wyth burning water rectified, or wyth Wyne (sometyme also wyth Milke, and Wyne, or wyth Whaye: also in hoat natures & dyseases, it should do well) and sometime let stande in infusion, or soakynge, they are artificially distilled,What composed waters be that they may be geuen to drynk to them that are weake or feeble, or as they call them daynty, or haue theyr Stomackes abhorring agaynst other medicines, which Lullus also prayseth greatly, and certayne Practicioners of Antiquity haue vsed it wyth prayse, and commendacion.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     I would learne to make Quintessence of Antimonie, if it would please you to shewe mee?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        
                           QVintessence of Antimonie, is thus made: incorporate, and mingle the pouder of Antimonie,
                        
                           Antimonium is called Stib
                              •••
                           , or a stone b
                              •
                           ight. & shyning found among 
                              •
                           yluer: this side doth 
                              ••
                           ense the Eyes. most fynely beaten, wyth most sharpe white Uinegar distilled, and let it stand vntill the vinegar be turned into a very red couller, then pour thys Uinegar out, and keepe it. And in a clene vessell, put other dystilled Uinegar, vpon the Antimonium, and set it ouer a little fyre till the Uinegar be coulered, this shall you chaunge so oft, till the Uinegar will be coulered no more, and so mutch of the Uinegar as is coulered, thou shalt distill it in a Limbecke in Asshes: fyrst the Uinegar it selfe wyll run out, after thys, thou shalt see a matter issue forth of sundry coullers, and thys is that Quintessence, whych is called of the Ph
                           •
                        losophers, the Philosophers Leade and of some called Uirgines Milke (it differeth not wythstanding from it) it is almost like blessed Oyle in couler:Philosophers Lead. put this in a Pellican to bee circulated by the space of Forty dayes, it dryeth vppe Woundes, and it is profitable for all Woundes, in steede of Balme, for it cureth all the sayde Woundes easely,A water that dryeth vp Woundes and healeth theym and quickely: it is marueylous good for all Impostumes, and Quintessence is extracted, and drawen out of whyte Leade, after the same maner, as out of Antimonie, powringe distilled Uinegar vpon it, that the Uynegar be ouer it foure fingers deepe, afterward let it bee digested in a Dunghill, as it is vsed in Quintessence of Hearb
                           •
                        s, and Flowers, then let it bee distilled and fyrste yee shall see the Uynegar it selfe ascende vp, after that a Lyquore lyke vnto Oyle, and also this is called Oyle of Leade, or Quintessence of Leade, and it hath in it a certayne sweetnesse▪ lyke as the Oyle of Antimonie: it is good agaynst all burnings with 
                           •
                        yre, & hoat water, as also against Itches, as Ringwormes, and Chollerike bladders, but a man must note that the white Lead ought

fyrst to bee washed often wyth water of Roses, dryuing it through a lynnen clothe, vntyll none of the pouder of the whyte Leade remayne in it,
                           Quintessene is drawne out of many meates. then when it is dryed, reserue it to your vses. So doth Bulbasus, and Ioan of saynct Amandus, vpon the Antidotarie of Io. Mesue, wyll to bee done: Of the drawing forth of quintessence, out of diuers mettalles, as Gold, Siluer, Lead, Tynne, Uitrioll, or Coporas, Iron, Coper, Brymstone, red Orpemēt, yellow Ocker, Antimonie, & Marchasita Leaden, who so listeth, let him reade in Lullus, in hys booke of Quintessence: the spiryte of Quintessence, or Uitrioll is commended of certayne Men agaynst the falling Sycknesse, and Apoplexia, or the benumming of the Senses. The spiryte of Golde, agaynst ye dyseases of the Lyuer, the spiryt of Birral, agaynst the stone of ye Raynes, and Bladder.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you Aqua vitae, after mayster Raimundus Lullus: whych was a man most excellent in Waters?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        HEe in hys dayes, dyd make the Water of Lyfe,Raymonde Lullius, florished, anno. 1322. he was a Spaniard. called Aqua vitae of incomperable goodnesse. Mary he vsed to still hys Waters, both symple and compounded: many tymes to make them more heauenly or pure. But to the matter, of making this Aqua vitae.
                     
                     Take an herbe called wylde Mirte, lyke Butchers Brome, Asparagus, called Sperage, Rapes, Persily, the Sea thystle called Eryngium,
                        His water for the stone. Mayden hayre, Grumill called Grana Solis. Cichory, Endiue, and wylde Carrets, Fenill rootes. ana. of lyke quantity, cut or brayed grosly, and styll them with your wyne, vppon a softe Fyre. Thys Water wyll breake the stone, and make mutch Uryne.
                     Here followeth an other. Take Nutmegges, the roote called Doronike, which the Apothicaries haue, Setwall, Galangall, Mastike, long Peper,Another precious water. the barke of Pomecitron, or Mellon, Sage, Bazell, Margerum, Dill, Spicknard. wood of Aloes, Cubebe, Cardamon called graynes of Paradise, Lauender, Peniroyall, Mintes, sweete Calamus, Germander, Enulacampana, Rosemary, Stichados, Squinance of eche lyke quantity, Saffron. ʒ.i. & the bone of a Hartes heart grated, cut, and stamped: but beate your spyces grosly in a Morter. Put in Ambergrice, Muske. ana. ʒ.ss. distill thys in a common simple Aqua vitae. made wyth strong ale, or Sackeleyes, and Anisseedes: not in a common Styll. but in a Serpentine: to tell the vertue of thys Water, agaynst cold, Wynde. Phlegme, Dropsy, and heauines of Mynde, comming of Melancholy. I cannot wel at thys present, the excellent vertues thereof, are sutch, and also the time were to long.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How make you a Water that wyll kill the Canker, and heale the place, whereas the sayd Canker hath beene?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     MAny good Men and Women wythin thys Realme, haue dyuers, and sundry Medicines for the Canker, and do help theyr Neyghboures that bee in Perill and Daunger, whych bee not onelye Poore, and Needy, hauinge no Money to spende in Chirurgi: But

some do dwell where no Chirurgians be neere at hand: in sutch cases, as I haue sayd, many good Gentlemen and Ladyes, haue done no small pleasure, to poore people: as that excellent Knyght, and worthy learned Man, Syr Thomas Eliot,
                        Syr Thomas Eliot. S
                              •
                           r Philip Parris. Sir Wylliam Gaiscoigne, whose workes be immortall. Syr Philip Parris of Cambridge Shyre, whose Cures deserue prayse. Syr VVilliam Gaiscoigne of Yorke shyre. that helped many soare Eyen: And the Lady Tailor of Huntingdon shyre, and the Lady Darrell of Kent, had many precious Medicines, to comforte the sight, and to heale woundes wythall, and were well seene in herbes.
                     The common wealth hath great want of theym, and of theyr Medicines: whych if they had come into my handes, they should not haue bin wrytten on the backside of my booke. Among al other there was a knight, a man of great worshyp, a Godly hurtlesse gentleman, whych is departed thys Lyfe:Syr Anthony Heueningham of Heningham in Suffolke his medicine agaynst the Canker. hys name is Syr Anthony Heueningham. Thys Gentleman learned a Water to kyll a Canker of hys owne Mother, whych he vsed all hys Lyfe, to the greate helpe of many Men, Women, and Chyldren: hee had also a Salue, for sundry greene Woundes. But bycause I haue not the coppy thereof, I wyl make report, but only of ye Water, whych I am assured he vsed, & it is not mutch vnlyke a water for the Canker, which Andreas Furnerius the Frenchman, dyd make of a great vertue, & thus it followeth.
                     Take doues foote, an herbe so named, Arkangell, Iuy wyth the Berries, young red Bryer toppes, and leaues, whyte Roses, theyr leaues, & Buds, red Sage, Selandyne, and Woodbynde, of eche lyke quantity, cut or chopped, and put into pure cleane whyte Wyne, and clarified Hony. Then breake into it Alum glasse, and put in a little of the pouder of Aloes Hepatica, & destill these together softly in a Limbecke of Glasse, or pure Tinne, i
                           •
                         not, then in a Limbecke, wherein Aqua vitae is made. Keepe this water close, it will not onely kyll the Canker, if it be dayly wasshed therewyth: but also two droppes dayly put into the Eye, wyll sharp the syght, and breake the pearle and spottes, specially if it be dropped in, wyth a little Fenell water, and close the Eye after.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes
                     MAny Men, Women, and Chyldren, now a dayes, bee greeuously vexed wyth a shamefull disease, called the Frenche Pockes, paynes in theyr Ioynts, no rest, palenesse of couller, falling of hayre, baldnesse of Heade and Bearde, lamenesse of Limmes, Skabs, filthe. &c. in sutch cases what is to bee done, I pray you tell me, gentle Health, for this Sycknesse waxeth common, but yet it woulde fayne bee called, but onely a Feuer.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        A treatise of the Pockes.
                        MAny Men haue written mutch of thys Pockes, after sundry sortes, and dyuers wayes, & haue killed not a fewe with long Diets, but I wyll speake yt, whych I do know, haue prooued and seene, to haue helped very many. Yet would I not, that any should fyshe for thys dysease, or to be bolde when he is bitten, to thynke hereby to be helped: but rather eschue the cause of thys infirmity, and filthy, rotten, burning of Harlots. &c. As to fly from ye Pestylence,

or from a wylde fyre, for what is more to be abhorred, than a p
                           •
                        cky, fylthy, stynkinge Carcasse? But if through blynde Ignoraunce,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         sodayne chaunce &c. any haue gotten it: then do thus to be deliuered from it.
                     Fyrst, yee shall prouyde that the sicke body,Three nota
                              •
                           ble thi
                              •
                           nges to be osberued in this 
                              〈◊〉
                            drynk, and the Diet in the tyme of sickenesse. haue a close chamber out of all grosse ayre, and cleane warme garments, both for the body, and Legs, and at rysing, and going to Bed, a fyre of Charcoales, for wood is not holsome for smoaking, also they must not be troubled with any thing to bring them out of patience, for that corrupteth the bloud, whych must be newe altered: also the sicke body must eate but little meate, and that kynde of meate as shall hereafter be prescribed, and at sutch time as shalbe appoynted, and let the sicke body vse playing of some Instrumentes, or here some playing, or tell merry tales, and haue no company of Women, for that is a most daungerous poyson for the health of any person in that case.
                     Secondly, yee must prepare two Brasse Pottes, or els Iron, one being iiij. Gallons, the other .vj. Gallons, one for strong drynk, the other for smal drink, also yee must haue close couers to them of brasse or Iron, yee must also prepare good earthen vessels with close couers to keepe your drink in of both sortes by them selues. Also yee must haue a strayner of a Searce clothe, to strayne your drynk after it is decocte:Although the pockes bee most vncleane yet to heale the same, requireth clenlinesse asmutch as medicine. Instrumentes to take out dead fleshe, and to search a soare, and a spring to clense any soare being deepe with the same drynk. Also yee must haue a woodden vessell to bathe the sicke body in, at sutch tymes as hereafter shalbe appoyncted. Also yee must prepare cleane clothes, to dry the sick body after a sweate, being warmed well fyrst: other Instrumentes yee shall neede none, but only your wood raped small, or turned, & the Barke of the wood pounded in a Morter, and the drugges also small, and your Water whych yee shall decoct, the same must bee of a Cundite, or running Brooke, very cleane wythout any kinde of filthe. Chalke water is good.
                     Thyrdly, for your strong drynk,Howe to proue good Guaicum. yee must take your Pot of .iiij. Gallons and set him one a soft fyre of coales, with .iiij. Gallons of the fayre running Water, then put into the same one pounde and a halfe of your wood small Raped, or Turned at the Turners, but when you do buy your wood, see it be not olde, and lacke moisture, the tryall is best, take a little coale burning and lay it on the Blocke, before it be raped, and if it be good it wil boyle vp on euery syde of the coale, lyke Myrre, then put thereto. ℥.j. or a little more of the barke of the same wood, made in small pouder, then take a quarter of a pounde of Cummen seedes put whole into the same, & one halfe quarter of an ounce of Radix, and Rubarb, and then stop your Pot fast, and lay Paste about the Couer, and so fast, that no ayre come out,Soft fire maketh sweete Malte, and ye like doth make good Guaicū drynke. then seeth it on a soft fyre, but euer keepe it boyling, & let it boyle at the least .viij. houres, then set it by, and vnstop it not vntill it bee colde, then take your Searce, and strayne it into a fayre Earthen Pot, and couer it cloase: the sicke body must drynk of this but one draught leuke warme in the morning, and one other at nyght.
                     Fourthly, you must take your Pot of .vj. Gallons,Fourth rule. and put in it .vj. Gallons of running water, and one pounde of the wood raped, and a quarter of Cummen seedes, and decockte it in all kinde of thing, euen as the other▪
                        
being close stopped, and when it is cold strayne it into an earthen vessell, or Uessels: and that must the partye drynke at meale, & at all other tymes when he list to drinke, and spare not but draw it by.
                     
                        Fifth rule.Fiftly, the sicke body must be kept very warme, and not ryse out of Bed before .viii. of the Clocke, and then eate a dosen or twenty Raisons of the Sunne,Note also, that F
                              •
                           lcrum is good to clense the Guaicum water wyth and no bread, and about a leauen of the clocke, let the sicke Body eate a little meate as may suffice nature, and what meate, it shalbee hereafter shewed, then let the sicke body walke some whyles in hys Chamber, or reade some Booke, or play on Instruments to keepe him from sleeping, then at .vi. of the clocke, a dosen of Raisons of the Sunne, and nothing els but his draught of stronge drinke warmed at vi. a clocke in the Mornyng, and at euenyng at eight.
                     
                        Sixt ruleSixtly, geue to the Pacient to eate these meates folowing, Chicken Partrige▪ Fesante, Henne, Capon, Rabette, Coni
                           •
                        , Ueale, Mutton, and none other, nor any Salt, nor leauened bread, nor Rie bread, and very seldome tosted, but boyled in water, and no broth, nor porrage, nor any kind of sauc
                           •
                        -if the sicke body haue roste, let it be but euery third meale, and no kynde of Fish, Milke, or fruictes, Raysons excepted.
                     Seuenthly, once in .iii daies, for the first .ix. daies in the morning let the sick body drink a good draught of ye strong drynke somthing warme,Seuenth rule and then lay very many clothes on him tyl he sweat, for ye space of two howers, then ease some of the clothes, and haue warmed linnen clothes, and rubbe all the body dry or he rise if he haue any sores that bee deepe, washe the sore with the stronge drynke, and with a syring, and dippe a little cloath in the stronge drynke, and lay it to the sore, whether it be sores or knobbes.
                     Eightly after .ix. or .x dayes be past, once in three dayes let the sicke bodye bee bathed on this sort.Eight rule Set fayre running water on the fyre, and put therto a great deale of ground Iuie leaues, and red Sage and Fenell also, and by a good fyre when the sicke body is going to Bed, put the Water and herbes into a vessell of wood, and let the sicke Body stand vpryght in it, by the fyre, and take vp the herbes and rubbe the body of the sicke Pacient downewards, and then dry him with warme cloathes, vse this .iii. weekes, and by the grace of God the sicke body shalbe made whole, what soeuer hee be, then if the party be very weake after .ix. or .x. of the first daies, let him eate euery day at .iiii. of the clocke at after noone, a new layd Egge poched in fayre water, and as mutch new bread as will suffice nature, and a lytle cleane wine: reade further in the place of Guaicum for the Pox, wheras is shewed greater secretes. And for this diat few men are to be compared in worthines and knowledge to Thomas Glandfield a cunning Chirurgian of London.Thomas Glanfield.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     Now I pray you maister Health make a brief rehersal of the Compoundes, and shortly of their names, & to what sicknes they be aplied vnto.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     THat I shall gladly, and first I wil begyn as foloweth: wherefore they do serue, praying thee to be contented to read them, & marke thē diligently: and also of the cōmon seedes, cold & hoat, of ointments, &c
                     
                        
                        
                           The Table of Compoundes.
                           
                              AVrea Alexandrina.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Syrupus de Bizantijs.
                           Trochisci diarhodon.
                           
                              Pilles of Agarike. &c.
                           
                        
                        
                           ¶ Agaynst Tercian Agues.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Oxysaccharum simplex.
                           Syrupus de acetosa simplex.
                           
                              Syrupe of tarte Pomgranets
                           
                           Syrupus de Bizantijs.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste Quarten Agues.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diasent.
                           Mythridatum Andromachi.
                           Oxysaccharum.
                           Vnguentum aregon.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst hoat burning Agues.
                           
                              Syrupe of Violets
                           
                           Diaprunum not laxatiue.
                           
                           Decoctio communis.
                           Electuarium catholicum.
                           Mel Violatum.
                           Oxysaccharum.
                           Syrupus de limonibus.
                           Trochisci de camphora.
                           Vnguentum populeon.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst agues cumming of dyuers humours.
                           Diaphaenicon.
                           Pilulae Agregatiuae.
                           
                              Pilles of Rubarbe.
                           
                           Trochisci diarhodonis.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst long agues of cold.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Diacorallium magistrale.
                           
                              Pilles of Reubarbe.
                           
                           Syrupus de eupatorio.
                           Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
                           Trochisci de absynthio.
                        
                        
                           The four great hoat seedes.
                           Anisseede.
                           Fenell seede.
                           Cummen seede, and Ca. rowayes.
                        
                        
                           The four hoat, and lesser seedes.
                           
                              Ameum, Amomum, Smalage, Yellow Carrets.
                        
                        
                           The four great cold seedes.
                           Gourdes, Cucumers,
                           Melons, Citrons.
                        
                        
                           The four cold and lesser seedes.
                           Endiue, Chycory, Lettice,
                           Purseline,
                        
                        
                           The four hoat Oyntments.
                           Vnguentum Martiaton, Altheae, Aragon, & Agrippae.
                           Vnguentum Altheae.
                        
                        
                           The four cold Oyntments.
                           Vnguentum album,
                           Populeum, Resumptinum,
                           Citrinum.
                        
                        
                           The fiue common opening rootes.
                           Smalage. Fenell. Perseily.
                           Sperage. Butchers Broume.
                           Kneholme.
                        
                        
                           The fiue waters whych doe comfort the heart.
                           Endiue, Succory, Scabiouse,
                           Langdebeefe, Baulme.
                        
                        
                           The .viij. solutiue hearbes.
                           Mallowes, Mercurie, Parietarie, Vyolets, Colewortes, Holioke, Acanthus, Beetes.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Lienteria.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Theriaca G
                                 •
                              leni.
                           Trochisci diacorallion.
                           Trochisci diambre.
                           Trochisci de terra sigillata.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst biting of venimous Beastes.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Oleum de Scorpionibus.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst euill liking of the body.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Diatragacantha frigida.
                           Diacameron,
                           Diasatyrion.
                           Syrupus de eupatorio.
                           Oleum Sesaminum.
                           Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
                        
                        
                           To aswage payne in any out warde part of the body comming of ache.
                           
                              Emplastrum oxycroceum.
                           
                           Oyle of Dill.
                           Oyle of Iuniper. &c.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst inward diseases.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexandrina,
                           Mythridatum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst burning, and scalding.
                           
                              Electuarium palmae.
                           
                           Oyle of Myrtes.
                           
                              Vnguentum rosatum
                           
                           Oyle of Egges.
                           Oyle of water Lillies.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst brooses.
                           Electuarium palmae.
                           Vnguentum aureum.
                           Vnguentum potabile.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst payne in the spitting.
                           Emplastrum ceroneum.
                           Lohoch de Pino.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst belchyng of rawe humours.
                           Diagalanga.
                           Diatrion Pipereon.
                           Diatragacantha calida.
                           Lohoch sanum.
                           Oximel scilliticum.
                           
                              Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynste payne in the Backe.
                           Pilulae foetidae maiores.
                           Oleum de Cheirs.
                           Oleum Scorpionis.
                           Diacassia.
                        
                        
                           To draw forth broken bones.
                           Emplastrum oxicroceum.
                           Emplastrū cōtra rupturas &
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge the Bladder of Grauell.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Benedicta. lax.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Oximel diureticum.
                        
                        
                           To aswage payne in the Bladder.
                           Emplastrum de granis lauri▪
                           
                           Mythridatum Galeni.
                           Electuarium Dulcis.
                           
                              Syrupe of Iuiubes.
                           
                           Trochisci de Alchachengi.
                           
                              Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                           
                           
                              Oleum Cheiri.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                           
                           Ageynst exalceratiōs in the Bladder.
                           Oximel scilliticum.
                           Trochisci de Alchachengi.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Cho
                                 •••
                              ke.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexand
                                 •
                              ina.
                           Dt
                                 •
                              ph
                                 •••
                              icon.
                           T
                                 ••••
                              isci de Rosis.
                           
                              Oyle of Camomill. &c.
                           
                        
                        
                           Medicines 
                                 •
                              o bee vsed after long and 
                                 •
                              oat agues.
                           D
                                 ••
                              rl
                                 •
                              odon abbatis.
                           Rosata nouella.
                        
                        
                           Agay
                                 •
                              st the colde, and shaking in Agues.
                           
                              M
                                    •
                                 lridatum Galeni.
                           
                           Syrupe of sticados.
                           
                              T
                                    ••
                                 chi
                                    •
                                 ci de eupatorio.
                           
                           Oyle of Dill.
                           Oyle of Sothernwood.
                        
                        
                           To caus
                                 •
                               an appetite.
                           A
                                 •
                              tidotum Asincritum.
                           Ar
                                 •
                              ma
                                 ••
                              cum R
                                 •
                              satum.
                           Mina 
                                 •••
                              plex
                           
                              Conserue of Quinces.
                           
                           S
                                 •
                              rupus de ab
                                 ••
                              nihio.
                           Electuar
                                 •
                              um consortatinum.
                        
                        
                           To comfort a colde Brayne.
                           Electuarium de gem
                                 ••
                              s.
                           A
                                 ••
                              m
                                 •
                              ticum 
                                 •
                              os
                                 •
                              tum
                           
                              Conserue of Gladian.
                           
                           Ther
                                 ••
                              ca G
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              nt.
                           
                              Oyle of M
                                    •
                                 ces.
                           
                        
                        
                           To co
                                 •
                              fort a moyst Brayne
                           
                              Conserue of Rosemary.
                           
                           Diambre.
                           Diaprassion.
                           Diatragacantha calida.
                           Electuarium ind
                                 •
                              matoris.
                           Pitulae alephanginae
                        
                        
                           To a
                                 •
                              wag
                                 •
                               payne of the Breaste.
                           Decoctio pectoralis.
                           Lohoch de Squilla.
                           Oleum de che
                                 •
                              rs.
                           Vnguentum marciaton.
                           Sy
                                 •
                              upus de Hyssopo. &c.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst streightnesse of the Breast.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                           
                              Conserue of Maydenhayre.
                           
                           Diatragacantha calida.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Vnguentum Martiaton.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst diseases of the Breast.
                           
                              Diacameron.
                           
                           
                              Dia
                                    •
                                 ragacantha fr
                                    •
                                 gida
                           
                           Syrupe of Horehounde.
                           Syrupe of Maydenhayre.
                           Galens cerote 
                                 ••
                              r ye stomack.
                        
                        
                           To cause boldnesse.
                           Triphera magna.
                           Electuarium de gemmie.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste g
                                 ••
                              wing in the B
                                 •
                              lly.
                           Antidotum Asincri
                                 •
                              um.
                           Mithridutum.
                        
                        
                           To keepe the body stronge.
                           Pilula luc
                                 ••
                               maiores.
                           Ro
                                 •
                              ata nouella.
                           Syrupus ex 
                                 •
                              nfusione rosarum.
                           Theriac
                                 •
                               Galeni.
                           Diasatyr
                                 •
                              on.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst spitting of bloude.
                           Mithridatum Galeni.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Electua
                                 •
                              ium Ind
                                 •
                              um Maius.
                           Emplast
                                 ••
                              m de granis Lauri.
                           P
                                 •
                              lulae qureae.
                           Pilulae Foetida maiores.
                           Pilulae sine quibus esse nolo.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst olde Coughes of 
                                 ••
                              mou
                                 •
                              es.
                           
                              Mythridatum.
                           
                           Pilles of Agarike.
                           
                              Pilulae Bechitae.
                           
                           
                              Loho h de Pino.
                           
                           
                              Lohoch sant
                                    •
                                 m.
                           
                           Syrupe of Horehounde.
                           Syrupe of Mirtes.
                           Syrupe of Lysope.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Cough.
                           Iu
                                 •
                              ep of Violets.
                           Syrupe of Licuerice.
                           Syrupe of Violets.
                           Syrupe of Poppy comp.
                           Syrupe of Iu
                                 •
                              ubes.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste the Cough of the L
                                 •
                              n
                                 •
                              es.
                           Antidotum Asin
                                 •
                              ri
                                 •
                              um.
                           Diatragacantha frigida.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Agaynst Coughes, which come of superfluous humours in ye stomack.
                           Aurea Alexandrina,
                           Diamargaritum c
                                 ••
                              idum.
                           Diacam
                                 •
                              ron.
                           Diacalamintha.
                           Dia
                                 ••
                              eos.
                           Diapap
                                 •
                              uer.
                           Decoc
                                 ••
                              o pectoralis.
                           Lohoch 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                           Lohoch de pulmone Vulpis.
                           
                              Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Crampe.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Theriaca Galen
                                 •
                              .
                           
                              Syrupe o
                                    •
                                  Sticados.
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  of Flowerdeluce.
                           
                           Vnguetum 
                                 〈…〉
                              .
                           Vnguentum Aregon,
                        
                        
                           Agaynst 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                           Mithridatum Andromach
                                 •
                              .
                           Theriaca Galen
                                 •
                              .
                           Vnguentum Aregon.
                           Vnguentum M
                                 •••
                              tat
                                 •
                              m.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                           Aster.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Diamargaritum calid
                                 •
                              m.
                           Diacameron.
                           Dia
                                 ••
                              odon 
                                 •
                              bbatis.
                           Diatragacan
                                 •
                              ha fr
                                 •
                              gid
                                 •
                              .
                           Mithridatum.
                           Tria
                                 •
                              andali.
                           Lohoch de pulmone Vulpis.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Ca
                                 •
                              k
                                 ••
                              , 
                                 •
                              ady part of the 
                                 ••
                              dy.
                           Corfectio hamech.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst all Aches, and dyseases of colde.
                           Oyle of Bay.
                           Oyle of Spike.
                           Oyle of Coste.
                           Oyle of Cam
                                 •
                              mill.
                           Oyle of Flo
                                 •
                              erdeli
                                 ••
                              .
                           Oyle of Roses
                           Oyle of M
                                 •
                              s
                                 •
                              icke.
                           Oyle of Lillies.
                           
                              Vnguentum Martiat
                                    •
                                 m mag
                                    •
                                 num.
                           
                           
                              Vnguentum Aregon.
                           
                           
                              Vnguent
                                    •
                                 m de Ali
                                    •
                                 ee.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst 
                                 〈…〉
                               
                              
                                 •
                              ut the Fu
                                 •
                              dement, or 
                                 ••
                              her places.
                           Oyle of Myr
                                 •
                              es.
                           
                              
                              Pomatum.
                           
                        
                        
                           To deliuer Women of dead children.
                           Theriaca Galeni, &c.
                        
                        
                           To cause good cooller
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Electuarium de gemmis.
                           Oleum de Costo.
                           Trochis
                                 •
                              i Diarhodon.
                           Hiera picra Galeni.
                        
                        
                           To purge Choler.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aromaticum rosatum.
                           Conditum Cotoneorum.
                           Confectio Hamech.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           
                              Conserue of Langdebeefe.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Borage.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Maydenhayre.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Succory.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Sorell.
                           
                           Oxysaccharum simplex.
                           Electuarium de rosis.
                           Electuarium de psillio.
                           Pilulae sine qui
                                 •
                              us esse nolo.
                           Pilulae de octo rebus.
                        
                        
                           For colde Complexions.
                           Diatragacantha frigida.
                           
                              Syrupe of Endiue.
                           
                           Trochisci de Rabarbaro.
                           Syrupus de acetositate citri.
                           Syrupus de succo acetosae.
                           Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
                           Syrupus acetosus comp.
                        
                        
                           To make good digestion.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aromaticum rosatum.
                           Conditum cotoneorum.
                           Diacuminum,
                           Diamber.
                           Diacalamintha.
                           Diatrion pipereon.
                           Miua simplex.
                           Pilulae ante cibum,
                           
                              Oyle of Mintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Dropsie.
                           Diacameron.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Emplastrum ceroneum.
                           Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
                           Pilulae de Euphorbio.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Trochisci de Eupatorio.
                           Trochisci de Rhabarbaro.
                           Syrupus de eupatorio.
                           Vnguentum Agrippae.
                        
                        
                           To cleare the eye sight.
                           Diaprassium.
                           Pilulae Cochiae rasis.
                           Collirium album rasis.
                           Hiera picra Galeni.
                           Pilulae sine quibus.
                           Pilulae aureae.
                           Pilulae de octo generibus mirobalanorum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst payne in the eyes.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Mithridatum androm.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst all maner of exulceracions.
                           
                              Oyle of Violets.
                           
                           Emplastrum de Cerusa.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Trocisci de alchachengi.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst deafnes and paines of the Eares.
                           Mithridatum andromachi.
                           
                              Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                           
                           Pilulae sine quibus esse nolo.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the fauling euill.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                           
                              Syrupe of Sticados.
                           
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Vnguentum Martiatum.
                        
                        
                           To purge phlegme.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diacartami.
                           Confectio Hamech
                           Diatrion piperion.
                           
                              Conserue of Rosemary.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Gladian.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Enulacampana
                           
                           Mel Rosatum.
                           Pilulae alephanginae.
                           Pilulae faetidae maiores
                           
                              Pilles of Euphorbe.
                           
                           Pilulae de Sarcocolla.
                        
                        
                           To purge salt phlegme.
                           Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
                        
                        
                           To make a beutifull, and a fayre face.
                           Oleum de tartare.
                           Pomatum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst fluxes of the body.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diascoridion.
                           Mithridatum andromachi.
                           Mycleta.
                           Miua simplex.
                           
                              Oyle of Roses.
                           
                           Syrupus de rosis siccis.
                           Syrupus de agresta.
                           Syrupus de Acetositate.
                           
                              Syrupe of Mintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the fluxe of meate vndigested.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Micleta.
                           
                              Oyle of Mirtes.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           
                           Trochisci Diacorallion.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the bloudy flixe.
                           Diacodium Mesua.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Mycleta.
                           Trochisci diacorallion.
                        
                        
                           To prouoke ye mēstruall termes.
                           Pilulae de Bdellio.
                           Trochisci de terra Sigillata.
                        
                        
                           To stop the fluxe of a strong purgacion.
                           Electuarium confortatinū sto.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst palenesse of the Face.
                           Hiera picra Galeni.
                        
                        
                           To cause newe fleshe.
                           Vnguentum Apostolicum.
                        
                        
                           To consume dead fleshe.
                           Vnguentum Apostolicum.
                           Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst olde fistulayes.
                           Vnguentum Apostolicum.
                           Vnguentum Aegyptiam.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Goute of heate.
                           Electuarium de rosis.
                           
                              Pilulae Arthritica.
                           
                              Oyle of wormwood.
                           
                           Oleum Lumbricorum.
                           Oleum Cherinum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Gout of cold.
                           Benedicta laxatiua.
                           Electuarium indi Maioris.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Pilulae Fetidae maiores.
                           
                              O
                                    •
                                 le of Baye.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Spike.
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Flowerdelice.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Mas
                                    •
                                 ike.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Euphorbe.
                           
                           Vnguentum Martiaton.
                           Vnguentum Aregon.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste the Goute in the feete onely.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Benedicta laxat.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Pilulae de quinque generibus myr oba.
                           Pilulae Faetidae maiores.
                           Oleum Vulpinum.
                           Vnguentum martiaton.
                        
                        
                           Against gaulinges.
                           Emplastrum de Cerusa.
                           
                              O
                                    •
                                 le of Martes.
                           
                        
                        
                           For Cliste
                                 •
                              s.
                           Diacasia fis
                                 •
                              ula pro Clist.
                           Hi
                                 •
                              ra picra Galen
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           To comfort the harte.
                           Diaecorallium magistrate.
                           Electuar
                                 •
                              um de gemmis.
                           Syrupus de acetosa.
                           Theriaca Galen
                                 •
                              ,
                           Trochisci de Gallia moschata.
                           Aromaticum rosa
                                 •
                              um.
                           Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                        
                        
                           Conserue of Roses
                           Diambre.
                           Diamargaritum calidum.
                           Diarbodon a
                                 •
                               bati
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        
                           To ingender beete in the inwarde partes.
                           Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                           Diacuminum.
                           Dia
                                 •
                              bre.
                           Emplastrum stomachicum.
                           
                              Oile of Rue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst 
                                 •
                              remblinge of the harte.
                           
                              Confectio de musco dulcis.
                           
                           
                              Electuarium de gemmis
                           
                           Conserue of Borage.
                           Conserue of langdebiefe.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst beat of the hart
                           Iulep of Roses.
                           Iulep of Violets.
                           Syrupe of Violets.
                           Syrupe comp. of Endiue.
                           
                              Syrupus de infusione rosarum viridium.
                           
                           
                              Sp
                                    •
                                 upus de succo acetosae.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst horsenes.
                           Decoct
                                 •
                              o pectoralis,
                           Lohoc sanum.
                           Oleum sesaminum.
                           
                              Syrupe of Iuiubes.
                           
                           Theriacum Galen
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        
                           Against the Hickop.
                           
                              Antidotum Asincritum
                           
                           Syrupe of Mir
                                 •
                              he.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst falling of the Hayre.
                           Oile of Baye
                           Oile of C
                                 •
                              ste.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst ache in the hip.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Pilulae fet
                                 •
                              doe maiores.
                           Pilulae d
                                 •
                               
                              
                                 •
                              uinque generibus miroballa.
                           
                              Oile of Bayes.
                           
                           Oleum vulpinum.
                           V
                                 •
                              guentum mar
                                 •
                              iaton.
                           V
                                 •
                              guentum ar
                                 •
                              g
                                 •
                              num.
                        
                        
                           Against al manner of hardnesse
                           Mithridatum
                           
                              Oile of sweete Almondes.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Baye.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Mintes.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Holioke,
                           
                           Oleum Sesaminum.
                           
                              Oile of Flowerdelice.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Mashke.
                           
                           Emplastrum diachilon album.
                           Emplastrum diachilon m
                                 •
                              gnū
                           
                           Emplastrum de mucilaginibus
                           Emplastrum de meli
                                 •
                              o
                                 •
                              o
                           Emplastrum de oxycroceum.
                           Vnguentum apostolicum.
                           Vnguentum Marciaton.
                        
                        
                           To purge the head.
                           Pilulae aureae.
                           Pilulae Cochiae.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst old headache.
                           Antidotum asincritum.
                           Pilulae Cachiae Raesis.
                           Pilulae agregatiue.
                        
                        
                           Against headache of heate.
                           
                              Electuarium de Rosis.
                           
                           Oile of Roses
                           Oile of water Lillies.
                           Oile of Poppie.
                           
                              Vnguentum rosatum.
                           
                        
                        
                           Against hedache of cold
                           Mithridatum.
                           Aurea alexandrina.
                           
                              Oile of Dill.
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Spike.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Flowerdelice▪
                              
                           
                           Oleum de euphorbio.
                           Vnguentum Martiato
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Against the Hemeroydes.
                           Mycleta.
                           Pilulae de Bdellio.
                        
                        
                           To kepe ye head frō horenes.
                           Oile of Coste.
                        
                        
                           Against vermin and scurfe in the head
                           Oile of Baye.
                           Oile of Lillies.
                        
                        
                           Against the yellow iaundice
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diarhodon abbatis.
                           Electuarium de r
                                 •
                              bis.
                           Syrupus de Bizantinus.
                           Theriaca galeni.
                           Trochisci de Camphora.
                           Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
                           Trochisci de eupatorio
                           Triasandali.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Ilic
                                 •
                               passio.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Theriaca galeni.
                           Mithridatum Andromachi.
                           Hiera picra.
                           Pilulae sine quibu
                                 •
                              .
                           Vnguentum martiaton.
                        
                        
                           Against inflamacions.
                           Antidotum As
                                 •
                              ncritum.
                           Cerotum stomachicum
                        
                        
                           Against hoat impost
                                 ••
                              es either in the stomack or liuer
                           Carotum pro stomacho.
                        
                        
                        
                           Against inwa
                                 •
                              d impostumes.
                           Trochisci de rouburbar
                                 •
                              .
                           Trochisci de eupa
                                 •
                              orio.
                           Oleum violarum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst hoat impostumes in the throate.
                           Diamoron 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                        
                        
                           To ripe impostumes.
                           Emplastrum diachilon magnū
                           
                           Emplastrum diachilon album.
                           
                              Oile of Flowerdelice.
                           
                           
                              Oile of Mastike.
                           
                        
                        
                           Against incensibility
                           Mithridatum
                           Theriaca galeni. &c.
                        
                        
                           Against inflamacions of Choller.
                           Conserue of Violets.
                           
                              Vnguentum rosatum.
                           
                        
                        
                           Against pain of the liuer,
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Pilulae aggregatiuae.
                           Pilulae de euphorbio.
                           Trochisci de rubarbaro.
                           
                              Sirupe of Setrac
                           
                        
                        
                           Against beate of the Liuer.
                           
                              Iulep of Roses.
                           
                           
                              Iulep of violets.
                           
                           Electuarium catholicum.
                           Mel violacum
                           
                              Sirupe of Violets.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe comp. of Endiue.
                           
                           Triasandali.
                           Trochisci de spodio.
                           Vnguentum rosatum
                        
                        
                           Agaynst coldnes of the liuer
                           Theriaca galeni.
                           Diagalanga.
                           Diarhodon abbatis,
                           Trochisci de gallia moschata.
                           Trochisci de absinthio
                           Trochisci de eupatorio.
                           Emplastrum stomachicum.
                           
                              Oile of Euphorbio.
                           
                           Syrupus de eupatorio.
                           Syrupus de absinthio.
                        
                        
                           Against hardnes of the liuer.
                           Emplastrum diachilon album.
                           Pilulae de euphorbio.
                        
                        
                           To make a man laxatiue.
                           Antidotum Asincritum▪
                           
                           Hierapicr
                                 •
                               galeni.
                           
                              Conserue of violet
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Diacassia fistula pro enematibus
                        
                        
                           Against daunger of lyfe
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diacameron.
                        
                        
                           Againste heate of the Lunges.
                           Diatragantha frigida.
                           Diarodon abbatis
                           Triasandali.
                           
                              Syrupe of Violets.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Endiue.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of comp. Endiue.
                           
                           Syrupus de infusione rosarum. viridium.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst coldnes of the Lunges.
                           Confectio dulcis de Musco.
                           
                              Conserue of Maidenhaire.
                           
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Tr
                                 •
                              chisci de absinthio,
                        
                        
                           Against dryues of the Lunges
                           Oile of sweete Almondes.
                           Syrupe of Liquorice.
                        
                        
                           Against the Leprie,
                           Confectio hamach.
                           Theriaca galeni.
                           Trochisci Theriaci
                           Pilulae faetidae maiores.
                        
                        
                           Against the Mesels
                           Theriaca galeni
                        
                        
                           Against madnes.
                           Aurea Alexandrina
                           Diasene.
                        
                        
                           Against the mother.
                           Antidotum Asincritum
                        
                        
                           To asswage payne of the Matrice.
                           Emplastrum de granis lauri.
                           
                              Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                           
                           Trifera.
                        
                        
                           Against cold diseases
                           Antidotum Asincritum
                           Diambre
                           Electuarium de gemmis
                           
                              Oile of Lillies▪
                              
                           
                           Emplastrum pro matrice.
                           Emplastrum Ceroneum
                           
                              Oile of Flowerdelice.
                           
                           
                              Oile of wormewood.
                           
                        
                        
                           To cause mirth.
                           Diambre.
                           Diamargar
                                 •
                              tum calidum
                           Diacameron▪
                           
                           Diasene
                           Electuarium de gemmis.
                           
                              Conserue of Borage
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of L
                                    •
                                 ngdebief.
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge melancholy.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Alipta muschata▪
                           
                           Confectio dulcis de musco.
                           Diasene.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Syrupus de epithi
                                 •
                              o.
                           
                              Conserue of Roses.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Maidenhaire.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Succorie
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Langdebeef.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Rosemarie.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Borage,
                           
                           Pilule sine quibus.
                           Pilulae de lapide Lazuli,
                           Pilulae aggregatiu
                                 •
                              .
                           Pilulae lucis maioris.
                           Trochisci de absinthio.
                           Trochisci de eupatorio.
                        
                        
                           Against all diseases aboute the Midryffe.
                           Mithridatum
                           Theriaca galeni.
                           Pilulae Cochiae Rasis.
                           
                              Oile of Spike
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Euphorbe
                           
                        
                        
                           Against soarnes in ye mouth
                           Diamorou potio
                           Mithridatum Cleo.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst b
                                 •
                              eeding at the nose.
                           Trochisci de terrae sigillata.
                           Trochisci de Carabae.
                        
                        
                           Against stench at the nose
                           Oile of Flowerdelice.
                        
                        
                           Against writhing of the neck on the one syde.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                           
                              Syrupe of Sticados
                           
                        
                        
                           Against obstructions.
                           Oile of bitter almondes
                           Oile of Coste
                           Oile of Dill,
                           Oile of Camomill,
                           Oyle of Flowerdelice.
                           Oile of wormewood.
                           
                              
                              Oleum de Chieri.
                           
                           
                              Syrupus de radicionibus.
                           
                           Syrupe of Bizantes.
                           Syrupe comp. of Endiue.
                           Syrupe of Maidenhayre.
                           Syrupe of Ceterac.
                           
                              Trochisci de Rabarbaro.
                           
                           
                              Trochisci de Eupatorio.
                           
                           
                              Trochisci de absynthio.
                           
                        
                        
                           To cause good Odour and sauour.
                           Electuarium de gemmis.
                           
                              Oyle of Coste.
                           
                        
                        
                           To comfort the principall partes.
                           
                              Aromaticum rosatum.
                           
                           
                              Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                           
                           
                              Electuarium confortans Stomachum.
                           
                           
                              Diamber.
                           
                           
                              Diamargaritum calidum.
                           
                           
                              Miua simplex.
                           
                           Syrupe comp. of Fumiterre.
                           Syrupe of Buglosse.
                           
                              Electuarium indium maiu
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Conserue of Roses.
                           Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           Oyle of Coste.
                           Oyle of Mastike.
                           Oyle of Quinces.
                        
                        
                           Against the drinesse of the principall partes.
                           Oyle of sweete Almondes
                        
                        
                           To mollifie the pryncipall partes.
                           Conserue of Roses.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Paulsie.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Pilulae de Euphorbio.
                           
                              Syrupe of Sticados.
                           
                           Vnguentum Martiaton.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Plurisie.
                           
                              Diatragacantha frigida.
                           
                           Syrupe of Violets.
                           Iulep of Violets.
                           Lohoc of Squilla.
                           Conserue of Maydenhayre.
                           Oyle of Violets.
                           Syrupe of Liquerice.
                           Syrupe of Hysope.
                           Syrupe of Endiue.
                           Syrupe of Iuiubes.
                           
                              Vnguentum de Althea.
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge the wynde pipe of grosse humours.
                           Diaprassium.
                           Theri
                                 •
                              ca Galeni.
                           Lohoch de Squilla.
                           Lohoch sanum.
                           
                              Syrupe of Liquerice.
                           
                           Syrupus de acetosus comp.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste the Pestilence or Poyson.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Puluis contra pestem.
                           Syrupus de acetositate citri.
                           Syrupus ex acetosa.
                           Syrupus ex infusione.
                           Rosarum viridium.
                           
                              Oyle of Scorpions.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Pimples, or Wheales.
                           Oyle of Myrtes.
                        
                        
                           Parfumes.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst reumes.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Mithridatu
                                 •
                              .
                           Diaprassion.
                           
                              Syrupe of Sticados.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe simp. of Popy.
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Rue.
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge the Raynes of grauell.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Benedicta laxa.
                           Oximel diureticum.
                           Syrupus acetosus comp.
                           
                              Syrupe of Maydenhayre.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Cettrac.
                           
                        
                        
                           Against payne in the Raynes
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Diacameron.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Electuarium indi maioris.
                           Oleum de euphorbio.
                           Oleum de cheiri.
                           Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Ringwormes.
                           Confectio hamech.
                           Oleum de Tartaro.
                        
                        
                           To comfort the stomacke.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Diacorallium magistrale.
                           Diamargaritum calidum.
                           Diaprasium.
                           Diagalanga.
                           Aromaticum Rosatum.
                           Aromaticum garyophillatum.
                           Trochisci de gallia muschata.
                           Trochisci de Alchachengi.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Miua simplex.
                           Electuarium confortatiuum stomachium.
                           Electuarium de gemmis.
                           Electuarium Indi Maioris.
                           Emplastrum stomachicum.
                           
                              Syrupe of Mirtes.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of sticados.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Wormewood.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Langdebeefe.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Quinces.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of dry Roses.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Langdebeefe.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Enulacampana.
                           
                           Conditum Cotoncorum.
                           
                              Oyle of Coste.
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge ye stomack of grosse humours
                           Hiera picra Galeni.
                           Pilulae Faetidae maiores.
                           Pilulae lucis maiores.
                           Pilulae de Sarcocolla.
                           Pilulae stomachiae.
                           Pilulae agarico.
                           Oximel simplex.
                           Oximel scilliticum.
                           Emplastrum ceroneum.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           
                              Syrupe of Hysope.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Maydenhayre.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Horehounde.
                           
                           Syrupus acetosus compo.
                           Syrupus de limonibus.
                        
                        
                           Against heate & burning of the stomacke.
                           Trochisci de Spodio.
                           Trochisci de camphora.
                           Diarhodon abbatis.
                           Triasandali.
                           Syrupus de succo acctosae.
                           
                              Iulep of Roses.
                           
                           Vnguentum rosatum.
                        
                        
                        
                           Agaynst coldnesse of the stomacke.
                           Syrupe of Mintes.
                           Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           Oyle of Wormewood.
                           
                              Vnguentum de Altheae.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst hardnesse of the stomacke.
                           Pilulae de Euphorbio.
                           Emplastrum Diachilon album
                        
                        
                           Agaynst payne of the stomacke.
                           Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
                           Emplastrum ceroneum.
                           Pilulae Faetidae maiores.
                           Pilulae Agregatiuae.
                           Trisera.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Dyseases of the Spl
                                 •
                              ne.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Electuarium catholicum.
                           Pilulae de quinque generibus myroba.
                           
                              Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           
                           Syrupus de acetosa simplex.
                           Oleum de euphorbio.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst hardnes of ye splene
                           Trochisci de absynthio.
                           Trochisci de eupatorio.
                           Emplastrum meliloti.
                           Emplastrum diachilon album.
                           Emplastrum ceroneum.
                           Vnguentum marciaton.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Sighing.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Diamargar
                                 •
                              tum Calidum.
                        
                        
                           To cause the spittie to auoyde.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           
                              Syrupe of Pyne aples.
                           
                           Lohoch de Squilla.
                        
                        
                           To restore the Speache.
                           Diaireos.
                        
                        
                           To breake the stone.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Oleum de Scorpione.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Strangution.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst sounding▪ and faynting of the heart.
                           Diamargaritum calidum.
                           Diasene cum Manna.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           
                              Syrupe of Langdebeefe.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Borage.
                           
                        
                        
                           To prouoke sweate.
                           Oyle of Dill, and other hoat Oyles.
                        
                        
                           To prohibite ouermutch sweating.
                           
                              Rosata nouella.
                           
                           Oyle of Quinces.
                           Oyle of Mirtes.
                        
                        
                           To cause a man to sleepe.
                           
                              Diapapauer.
                           
                           Syrupe of Popie.
                           Oyle of flowers of Popie.
                           Oyle of Dill.
                           Oyle of Nenuphar.
                        
                        
                           For Ch
                                 •
                              ldren, which cannot keepe, or doe speake in theyr sleepe
                           Trifera.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst Strangurion.
                           Diamoron potio. &c.
                           Venice Terebi
                                 •
                              tine.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the Scabbes.
                           Confectio Hamech.
                           
                              Oyle of Baye.
                           
                           Vnguētum pro pueris scabiosis.
                           Vnguentum contra sca
                                 •
                              i
                                 ••
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           To purge the instrumentes of the Senses·
                           Pilula Alephaginae.
                           Pilulae Agregatiuae,
                           Pilulae lucis maiores.
                           Therica Galeni.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the squinancy.
                           Mithridatum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynste the stifnesse of the inward Members.
                           
                              Mithridatum Andromachi.
                           
                           Conserue of Rosemary.
                        
                        
                           To mollify and ripe al swellinges
                           Diachilon paru
                                 •
                              m.
                           Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
                           Emplastrum Diachilon album
                           
                              Oyle of Flowerdelice.
                           
                           Vnguentum Apostolicum.
                           Vnguentum Agrippae.
                        
                        
                           To increase seede.
                           Oyle of sweete Almondes
                           
                              Oleum Sesaminum.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynste the sleepe or forgetfull diseases.
                           Oleum de euphorbio.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst deepe diseases in the Synewes.
                           Syrupe of Sticados.
                           Oyle of Quinces.
                           Oyle of Mastike.
                           
                              Vnguentum agrippae.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst cold diseases of the Synewes.
                           Oyle of Euphorbe.
                           
                              Oleum Lumbricorum.
                           
                           
                              Oleum de cheru.
                           
                           Pilles of Euphorbe.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst shootinge of humours.
                           Emplastrum palmeum.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst great, and colde soares.
                           Tela Gualterij.
                           Emplastrum de cerusa.
                           Emplastrum de minio.
                           Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                        
                        
                           To dry vp soares & By
                                 •
                              es.
                           Emplastrū Desiccatiuū rubeū.
                           Vnguentum Apostolorum. &c.
                        
                        
                           To quench the thyrst.
                           Trochisci de camphora.
                           Trochisci de Spodio.
                           Rosata nouella.
                           Syrupus de infusione rosarum viridium.
                           
                              Syrupe of Quinces.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of white Popie.
                           
                           Syrupus de acetositate citri.
                           Mel violatum.
                           
                              Iulep of Roses.
                           
                           
                              Conserue of Violets.
                           
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the fallinge sicknesse.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexandrina,
                           Confectio de moscho.
                           Electuarium de rosis.
                           Electuarium de psilio.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst the tooth ache
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Mithridatum.
                           Diaprassium.
                           
                              Pilulae de Hiera simplici.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst roughnesse of the Tongue.
                           
                              Diatragacantha frigida
                           
                           
                              Diamoron potio.
                           
                           Syrupe of Violets.
                           Iulep of Violets.
                           
                              Oleum sesaminum.
                           
                           Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                           Oyle of Violets.
                        
                        
                           Agaynst shortnesse of wynde.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Mythridatum.
                           Confectio dulcis de moscho.
                           Alipta muschata.
                           Diaireos.
                           Diacameron.
                           
                              Syrupe of Calamintes.
                           
                           Theriaca Galeni.
                           
                              Pilles of Agarike.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Horehounde.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Hysope.
                           
                           Syrupus de pino.
                           Lohoch de Squilla.
                           Lohoch de papauere. &c.
                        
                        
                           To breake wynde.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                           Pilulae aureae.
                           Diagalanga.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Electuarium indum maius.
                           Syrupus de eupatorio
                           
                              Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                           
                        
                        
                           To stop vomiting.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                           Miua simplex.
                           Rosata nouella.
                           
                              Syrupe of Mintes.
                           
                           
                              Syrupe of Quinces.
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Mintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           To cure the disposicion to vomiting, which is whā a man would vomit and cannot.
                           Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                           Miua simplex.
                           Rosata nouella.
                           
                              Syrupe of Mintes.
                           
                        
                        
                           To prouoke vr
                                 •
                              ne.
                           Antidotum Asincritum.
                           Aurea Alexandrina.
                           Diacurcuma.
                           Diacassia cum Manna.
                           Diasatyrion.
                           Oximel diureticum.
                           Vnguentum agrippae.
                        
                        
                           To prouoke Venus.
                           
                           Diasatyrion. &c.
                        
                        
                           To heate woundes.
                           Balsamum artificiale.
                           Emplastrum palmeum.
                           Vnguentum Apostolorum.
                        
                        
                           To scoure and clense woundes.
                           Tela Gualterij.
                           Vnguentū Apostolicō Auicen
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Vnguentum Basilicum.
                           Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                        
                        
                           Aagaynst Wormes in the Belly.
                           Puluis contra Lumbricos.
                           
                              Syrupe of Limons.
                           
                           
                              Oyle of Wormewood.
                           
                           Hiera picra Galeni.
                           Mithridatum. &c.
                           Vnguentum contra Lūbricos.
                        
                     
                     And thus I haue ended the notes of the Cō
                           poundes, with Cō
                        mon seedes. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What bee the names of the Compoundes, and in what leaues may I fynde them, I pray you tell mee?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     Fyrst I will begin at the letter A. &c.

                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          A.
                                          ALypta Moscata.
                                          Fol. 1
                                          Asincritum, a goodly Antidotarie, of singuler vertue.
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Aromaticum Rosatum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Aurea Alexandrina.
                                          2
                                          Aromaticum gariophillatum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Acatia.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Aurilj.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Aqua odorifera.
                                          3
                                          Apophlegmatismi, to drawe fleame from the head.
                                          
                                          40
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          B.
                                          BEnedicta laxati.
                                          Fol. 3
                                          Balsamum artificial.
                                          Ibidem
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          C.
                                          COnfectio dulcis.
                                          
                                             Fol. Ibidem
                                          
                                          Confectio Hamech.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Cerotum stomachale.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Confection for the Eyes.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Buglosse.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Rosemary.
                                          4
                                          Conserue of Borage, & Buglosse.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Roses.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Uiolets.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Maydenhayre.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Gladen.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Enulacampana.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Succory.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Conserue of Sorrell.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Conserue of Diagalanga.
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Collyria, & sief.
                                          38
                                          
                                             Cerot, how to make it.
                                          37
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          D.
                                          DIaciminum nicolai.
                                          Fol. 4.
                                          Diambra mesuae.
                                          5
                                          Diamargariton Calidum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diamargariton frigidum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diathamaron, of D
                                                   •
                                                tes.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Diarhodon Abbatis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacalamintha.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diatrion pipereon.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diaireos Salomonis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diatragagantha Frigida.
                                          6
                                          Diacameron.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacodium.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diaprassium.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diapapauer.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacurcuma.
                                          7
                                          Diasatyrion.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diaprunum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diaphaenicon.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacarthamum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacorallium magistrale.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Diacassia fistula.
                                          8
                                          Diasene.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Decoctio communis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Dropax.
                                          37
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          E.
                                          ELectuarium Catholicum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Electuarium Rosatum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Electuarium de Psillio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Electuarium indi maioris.
                                          9
                                          Electuarium stomachi.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Electuarium de gemmis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum Diachilon album.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum diachilon magnum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum de mucilaginibus.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum pro stomacho.
                                          10
                                          Emplastrum de granis lauri.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum meliloti.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum Caroneum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum oxicroceum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum de Ianua.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum contra rupturas.
                                          11
                                          Emplastrum de gratia dej.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum pro dolore matricis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum diuinum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum de minio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum de Cerusa.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum Palmeum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Emplastrum triapharmacum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Epithema.
                                          34
                                          Emplastrum desiccatiuum rubrum.
                                          Ibidē
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          F.
                                          FRontall for the head.
                                          Fol. 35
                                          Fomentum.
                                          37
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          G.
                                          GLis
                                                •
                                             ers.
                                          Fol. 38
                                          Gargarisme.
                                          35
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          H.
                                          Hiera picra Galenj.
                                          
                                             Fol. 12
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          I,
                                          IUlep of Uiolets.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Iulep of Roses.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Insessus, vsed for a stone.
                                          37
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          L.
                                          LOch de Pino.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Loch de Squilla.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Loch sanum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Loch de Caulibus.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Loch de pulmone vulpis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Liniment.
                                          35
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          M.
                                          MIthridatum manardj.
                                          Fol. 15
                                          Mithridatum, very noble against poyson.
                                          
                                          39
                                          Myeleta.
                                          13
                                          Miua simplex aromatica.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Mel Rosarum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Mel Violarum.
                                          14
                                          Mel Anthosatum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Manus Christi.
                                          Ibidem
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          N.
                                          
                                             Nasalia for the Nose.
                                          Fol. 35
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          O.
                                          OXimel simplex.
                                          
                                             Fol. Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oximel diureticum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oximel Squilliticum.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oxisaccharum simplex.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oxisaccharum compositum.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oyle of sweete Almondes.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of bitter Almondes.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Bay.
                                          15
                                          Oyle of Sesaminum.
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Spike.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Coste.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Rue.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Dill.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Camomill.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Myrtes.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Flowerdelice.
                                          16
                                          Oyle of Roses.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Uyolets.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Quinces.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oyle of Masticke.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             
                                             Oleum Gastorej.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oleum de Euphorbio.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oleum vulpinum.
                                          
                                             17
                                          
                                          Oleum de Tartaro.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oleum Scorpionum.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oyle of garden Lillies.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oleum de papauere.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oleum nimpheatum album.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oleum Menthae.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Oyle of Wormewood.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Oleum bumbricorum.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Oleum Violaceum albū, or Harts ease.
                                          18
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          P.
                                          POmander.
                                          
                                             Fol. Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Pou
                                                   •
                                                er of Uiolets.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Puluis contra pestem.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Puluis de bolo armenio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Puluis contra Lumbricos.
                                          19
                                          Puluis Bezoardicus.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Penidies.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pignolatum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae fine quibus esse nolo.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae Aureae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae Cochiae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae de octo rebus.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae de Mirobalans.
                                          20
                                          Pilulae Elephanginae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae Aggregatiue.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Pil
                                                   •
                                                es of Rubarbe.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Pilulae de sarcocolla.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae faetidae maiores.
                                          Ibidē
                                          
                                          Pilulae de Euphorbio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae lucis maiores.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae lucis minoris.
                                          2
                                                •
                                             
                                          
                                          Pilulae de lapide Lazul
                                                •
                                             .
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae de Bdellio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae de Hermodactylis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae Arthriticae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae stomachiae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae ante cibum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilles of Agarike, or Agarici.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Pilles of Fumiterre.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Pilulae Communès.
                                          22
                                          Pilulae de Assaieret.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae Bichicae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae imperiales.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pilulae de Hiera picra.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Pomatum.
                                          33
                                          Pessis.
                                          36
                                          Pockes, how to heale thē, with .viij. things considered.
                                          
                                             Fol. 42. and .43
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          R.
                                          Rosata nouella.
                                          
                                             Fol. 23
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          S.
                                          
                                             SYrupus de Acet
                                                   •
                                                sitate citri.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupus de Acetosa. Simpl.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Syrupus de Agresta. labru
                                                   •
                                                ea
                                                   •
                                                , or vnripe Grapes·
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Calamints or of Calamente
                                             ▪
                                          
                                          ib.
                                          Syrupe de Menta.
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupus de Absinthio.
                                          34
                                          Syrupe of Fumitery.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupus de Fumoterrae simplex.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Liquerice.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Hysope.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupus de Marrubio.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupus de Epithymo.
                                          25
                                          Syrupus de Eupatorio.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Sticados.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Syrupus de Violis, or Uiolets.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Syrup. de Papauers simp. or Poppy▪
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidē
                                             
                                          
                                          Syrupus de Papauere compositus.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Myrtes comp.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Myrtes simp.
                                          26
                                          Syrupe of Acetosus simplex,
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupus Acetosus compositus.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Syrup. de succo Endiuiae, or Endiue sim.
                                          
                                          
                                             ib▪
                                             
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Endiue compositus
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Suckery, or Cich
                                                •
                                             ri
                                                •
                                             .
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Quinces.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Nenuphar, or water Lillies.
                                          I
                                                •
                                             .
                                          Syrupe of Barberies.
                                          27
                                          Syrupe of tarte Pomegra
                                                •
                                             ets.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupus de Bizantijs.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             Sirupus de infusione Rosarum viridium, or greede Roses.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Syrupus de Rosis siccis, or dryed Roses.
                                          i
                                                •
                                             .
                                          Syrupus de succo Rosarum.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupus de Iuiubis.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Maidenhayre comp.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Maydenhayre simp.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of the same.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of Mugworte.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupus de Limonibus.
                                          28
                                          Syrupus de Cetrach.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Syrupe of Buglosse.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Syrupe of the same.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Sapo Moschato.
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          Suger Roset.
                                          34
                                          Sacculum, or scutum.
                                          36
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          T.
                                          THeriaca Galenj.
                                          Fol. 2
                                                •
                                             
                                          
                                          Trifera sarasenica.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci Diarhodon abbatis.
                                          29
                                          Trochisci de Violis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisc de Squilla.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Theriaci.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Trochisci diacorallion▪
                                          
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Camphora.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Alchachengj.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Myrrha.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Moscho.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Spodio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Absinthio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Eupatorio.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de terra sigillata.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Trochisci de Ambra.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Tela Galterij.
                                          Ibidem
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          V
                                          VNguentum Apostolicum.
                                          31
                                          Vnguentum Rorarum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum basilicum maius.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Aureum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum basilicum minus.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum populeon.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum martiaton.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Aregon.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Dialthea.
                                          32
                                          Vnguentum Agrippae.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Diapompholigos.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum de Enulacampana.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum contra scabiem.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum pro pueris scabiosis.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum desiccatiuum Rubrum.
                                          33
                                          Vnguentum contra lumbricos.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Resumptiuum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Album.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Matritum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Citrinum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Neapolitanum.
                                          Ibidem
                                          
                                             Another Vnguentum. &c.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Vnguentum Galeni.
                                          34
                                          Vnguentum pro Combustione ignis, to heale white fyre.
                                          
                                          
                                             Ibidem
                                          
                                          
                                             U
                                                   •
                                                pours, and Parfumes.
                                          
                                          39
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          VV
                                          WAter for soare Eyen.
                                          Fol. 37
                                          Water for the Webbe.
                                          38
                                          Water of Furnerius for Cankers.
                                          Ibidē
                                          
                                          Water most sweete.
                                          Ibidē
                                          
                                          Water to make sleepe.
                                          40
                                          Water for the Palsie.
                                          Ibidē
                                          
                                          Waters composed.
                                          41
                                          Water of Quintessence.
                                          Ibidem
                                          Water of lyfe, called Aqua vitae.
                                          
                                          42
                                          Water to kill the Canker, by sir Anthony Heuenigham Knight.
                                          Ibidem
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     And thus ende the names of Compoundes.
                     
                        The ende of the Booke of Compoundes, and here after followeth the Booke of the vse of certayne Compoundes.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        NOw you haue endded your Table, wyth ye names of compoūdes There are certayne wordes, very hard for mee to vnderstande, as when you doe name Apophlegmatismus, Dropax, Liniment. &c. I knowe not what they doe meane, by theyr proper names: I pray you tell mee the significations.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        WHen you come to Apophlegmatismus, it is a singuler good medicine to purge phlegme by vomite, or els to drawe from ye heade, 
                           •
                        uill & grosse humours, & is vsed sometime, as I haue rehersed in the proper place of Apophlegmatismus, before spoken.
                     And by mixture vnderstande, what sundry Confections, and Electuaries, be mingled together, to be taken in the morning, or els three houres before repaste of meate and drynke, to purge choller. &c.
                     
                        Confectura, is a medicine mingled of Simples, or some meate dygested: as cibus confectus, meate digested. There are sundry confections, as Confectio Hamech. &c.
                     
                     
                        Electu
                              •
                           rium is commonly knowen, made moyste wyth Hony, Suger, & pouders for to clense humours, being taken in the morninge, in Bolo, that is in the same masse, rolled wyth Suger, or els in Potione, or drunk with waters, according to the complexion: as to the chollerick least, and most to the Melancholy person▪ by the r
                           •
                        ason of hys earthly nature. And of Electuries be dyuers, and of sundry inuentions, as Rasis made one for an Heathen king, whose name was Almansor. To thys king he wryteth mutch, concerning bodyly health, and to put away pensiuenes, heauines, and Melancholy, he made Elestuarium Laetificans Rasis.
                     
                     
                        Electuarium de succo Rosarum of Roses, Electuarium frigidum Cophonis of one called Cophe. Reade of this man, and many mo, in the worke of Mesue.
                     
                     
                        Electuarium gemmarum of precious stones. &c. with many mo worthy Electuaries, profitable for mankinde: some warming, and some cooling. &c.
                     
                        Tragea, are sundry pleasaunt pouders, mingled together, whych are cast vpon delicate mea
                           •
                        es, or put in Wyne agaynst colde in the Stomacke, or Collicke, holesome for the Melancholy, or Phlegmaticke body, whych is colde or wyndy.
                     Conserue is knowen, as of Prunes, Barberies. &c. and will conserue and keepe the strayned fruictes, wherein spices wyth Suger, and sometyme sweete waters are sodden together, to make it bothe to last in it selfe, and pleasure mutch the receiuer, whych shall eate thereof, Morning, and Euening. Also young fruictes, as Nuttes, Peares. &c. and flowers may bee conserued, preserued, and condited in Syrupes. Keeping theyr forme, and goodnes, wyth mutch vertue.
                     
                        Trifera sa
                              •
                           acenica agaynst frensy, Melancholy, and coldnes. &c. was inuē
                        ted of the Saracens, to be drunk in wyne.
                     
                        Esdra was made by Esdras ye holy man, when the people of Israel were in captiuity, in great mysery and affliction of mynde: thys was the bodyly remedy for all the paynes of the head, comming of colde.
                     
                        Aurea Alexandria was made in Alexandria, & vsed for the singuler vertue

agaynst cold reumes, and to comfort the brayne: lyke as gold excelleth al other mettals in riches, so doth this al other in vertue.
                     
                        Lohoch is a pleasaunt thyng, as Lohoch Sanum, Lohoch de Pino. &c. This Lohoch is to licke or melt vnder the tounge, agaynst paynes in the throate, and Lunges, and is good to helpe the cough.
                     Syrupe of Liquorice, Horehound. &c. are made Symple or compound, to be taken a morninges and eueninges, some be hoat and some be cold.
                     
                        Rob is a certayne thinge made harde, and put into medecines: there is Dia rob, very wholesome for the liuer, and put into medecines for the mouth as in gargarisme.
                     
                        Decoction is a drynke most wholesome to clense the bodye, or to restrayne, or elles maye bee put in Clisters eyther to purge or stoppe accordinge to▪ the nature of the sicknesse. When ye wil purge, take opening seedes, leaues Barkes, rootes, &c. with Sugar, & seeth them, then strain them through a cleane wollen cloth, adde to Suger: & let the pacient drink a morninges, two or three dayes. And when you stop decocte Planten, Shepherdes purse, gumme Arabike. &c. strayn it and drink it morning and euening. Note also that Syrupes and decoctions be best new, speciallye the decoction which wil not last long.
                     
                        Iulep is not sodden so thicke as a syrupe, but is cleare made with sondery good waters and cleane Sugar, and is wholsome for the Liuer, as of ye waters of Cicory, Endiue or Syrupes and waters togeather. Infus
                              •
                           on, is when the Apothecaryes do for twelue or xxiiii. howers, put purging medecines in Water, as Rhabarbe, Agarike, Succo rosa
                              •
                           um &c. and then strayne them forth to drinke and purge in the morning.
                     
                        Trochisces are many, as of Cappers, Wormwood, Rhabarbe &c. and are dry lyke small tablemen, vsed in medecines, beaten into pouder and maye bee long kept.
                     
                        Sufuf is a goodly Aromatike pouder, made of spyces as Galanga. &c.
                     
                     
                        Sief is made for sore eyen, whyte and hard in the forme of a little Sugar lofe, but scant an ynch long, which must be steped in Rose Water, and womens milke, to be applyed to the eyen, to helpe them.
                     
                        Collyrium is made of Sief, when it is soft, or dissolued for sore eyen.
                     Pilles are of sundry kindes and natures, of great strength & vertue, to expulse euil matter, and may be taken at euening morning, and Ante cibum: according to their natures as I haue written. But old Pilles are dangerous new, are good, how be it, perilous for very fat bodyes. Ther are also Pilles restrayning, or stopping, as for flixes.
                     
                        Suffimentum
                        ▪ is sondry pouders for women, cast vpō coles, whose smoke doth subtilly passe into the body, or matrix, and somtyme for men.
                     
                        Nasalia are wholsome thinges to be put into the nose, to comfort the brayn and stop the bleeding at the nose
                     
                        Frontasia are good to reconcile slepe, to be applyed to the forehed, ye length twelue inches.
                     
                        Masticatorium, to champe vppon, to drawe forth flegme from the heade

and to clense the teeth.
                     
                        Gargarismus, is to gargle in the mouth, not to swallow it downe, to clense the mouth, throate, and teeth, put in warme to.
                     
                        Glyster is ministred beneath, and are of sundry kindes: relaxyng, bindyng and restoryng, and must be ministred, neyther to colde, for Wynde, nor to hoate, for excoriation or skaldyng, But temperate to clense and worke hys proper effect. Clisters are good for the stone, and when one can take no Purgacion by the mouth, Clisters are most best.
                     
                        Athanasia is so named, because it is so excellent in goodnesse, agaynste the immoderate fluxe menstruall in women, it is called a medicine immortal: of whych I shall speake of more, in a perticuler Booke by it selfe God willyng.
                     
                        Epithema, is vsed inwardly for the Liuer, and also fine Wolle, or rawe silke quilted, and steeped in waters and pouders, accordyngly. Scarlet in Grain, is holsome for the same purpose.
                     
                        Liniment is made to anoynt, or make soft, hauyng no waxe therein.
                     
                        Pess
                              •
                           s is made to be applyed, into the secret place of a woman, to helpe the euilles of the Matrix.
                     
                        Sac
                              •
                           ulum is a bagge or quylte, wherein Spytes cordiall, wyth holsome herbes are put in, and made warme wyth wine, vineger, or sweete Water, and so applyed to the stomackes of sicke folkes.
                     
                        Cerot is made of Waxe, Spyte, and Oyle, spred vpon leather, and applyed to the breast. &c. as Cerotum Galenj pro stomacho.
                     
                     
                        Insessus is sweete herbes sodden in sweete Water and wine, in whych the pacient must sit at euen.
                     Suppositor, is to put vnder in at the Fundament, for to relaxe the Bellies of weake bodyes.
                     
                        Fomentum is to wash the sore bodie wyth herbes, whych must bee mutch sodden, and applyed to the sore place. &c.
                     
                        Dropax is good for skalde heads, to clense them: and for Women that would haue hyghe foreheads, agaynst Nature. For a Dropax wyll pull of the hayre.
                     
                        Emplastrum is commonly knowen, and is grossye made of herbes, Spices &c. and warme to be applyed to the sore, or payned place of the body.
                     
                        Frication, is rubbing or chafyng of the body, wyth warme Clothes in the mornyng.
                     
                        Dentifricium, is made of thynges to cleanse the Teeth, and make them whyte: as wyth dryed Mallow rootes &c.
                     Wyth many more prety and apte notes of Medicines, but these shall suffyce for mans health: whych the preparers of medycines, must wisely marke and obserue, wyth these xxi. notes folowyng.

                           
                           i.
                           Must fyrst serue God, forsee the end, be clenly, pity the poore.
                           ii·
                           Must not be suborned for money, to hurt mankynde.
                           iii·
                           His place of dwelling & shop to be clenly to please ye sences wtall
                           iiii
                           His gardē must be at hand, wt plenty of herbes, seedes & rootes
                           v
                           To sow, set, plant, gather, preserue and kepe them in due tyme.
                           vi.
                           To read Dioscorides, to know ye natures of plants & herbes. &c.
                           vii
                           To inuent medecines to chose by coloure▪ tast, odour, figure &c.
                           viii
                           To haue his morters, stilles, pottes, filters, glasses, boxes cleane and sweete, &c.
                           ix.
                           To haue Charcoles at hand, to make decoctions, syrupes. &c.
                           x.
                           To kepe his cleane wares closse, and cast away the baggage,
                           xi·
                           To haue two places in his shop, one most cleane for the Phisik and a baser place,
                                 Thapoticarye.
                               for Chirurgie stuffe.
                           xii
                           That he neither increase, nor diminish the Phisicions bill, and kepe it for his owne discharge.
                           xiii
                           That he neither buy nor sel rotten drugges,
                           xiiii
                           That he peruse often his wares, that they corrupt not.
                           xv
                           That he put not in quid pro quo, without aduysement,
                           xvi
                           That he may open wel a vein for to helpe the pl
                                 •
                              uresy.
                           xvii.
                           That he meddle only in his vocacion.
                           xviii.
                           That he delyte to reede Nicolaus Myrepsus, Valerius Cordus, Iohannes Placaton, the Lubik. &c.
                           
                           xix
                           That he do remēber his office. is only to be ye Phisiciās Co
                                 •
                              ke.
                           xx
                           That he vse true measure and waight.
                           xxi
                           To remember his end, and the iudgement of God: and thus I do comend him to god, i
                                 •
                               he be not couetous, or crafty sekīg his own lucre, before other mens health, succour & comfort.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     I Assure you if the Apothicary do godly obserue these playne rules, hee can not do amisse: but shal please almighty God, profit the common wealth in his calling. Finally quyet his conscience, & liue wel. I pray you shew vnto me a little of the wayghtes and measures, and so make an end of this part which is of medicines.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     IF I should speake much of waight and m
                           ••
                        sure, that I could not wel do, without I should alleage the learned man Georgius Agricola, de mensuris & ponderibus, who maketh the distinction of al the measures of this world, of euery age & people. Who I do wish that you do often times read & for this present tyme let this suffice for weight, as fol
                           •
                        oweth, for this little booke passed be fore.
                     The whighte of

                           A pounde.
                           li.
                           An vnce.
                           ℥
                           A dragme.
                           
                              ʒ.
                           A scruple.
                           ℈
                           A Grayne.
                           G
                        
The waight of

                           of ech part,
                           ana.
                           A quarter,
                           
                              
                                 q
                                 quarter
                              .
                           Halfe.
                           ss.
                           A handful.
                           M.
                        
                     
                     
                        Note also that the Apoticaryes, do deuyde a pound thus. li. ℥.xii.℥.i.ʒ.viii ʒ.℈.iii.℈.i. G. xx.
                     Further there is a measure called Pugillum, or a little handful, noted thus.Another note for wayghtes and measures. 
                        P
                     
                     And euer measure youre Herbes by the handeful. M. youre Flowers by the. P.
                     
                     Your rootes and seedes by waight. ℈.ʒ.℥. &c, But somtime the rootes are vsed in nomber, as in decoction. &c.
                     The liquorice and pouders, by wayght, as the seedes.
                     Fruites are vsed in nomber, as Apples, Prunes, Mirobalans &c. not by wayght, as. ʒ ℥. li. but i.ii.iii iiii.v. &c.
                     Also when you do come to decoction, or seething of your thinges: Consider that you fyrst haue pure clean vessels, as Iron or stone, auoid stinking brasse, as much as you may, and prepare whyte mettal to make in your decoctions, with very cleane water: then you must haue your rootes cleane scraped and sodden. Why the rootes fyrst? Mary because they be harder, then any other thing in see thinge or decoction▪
                        Why rootes are fyrste soddē in▪ decoctiō. & whiflowers are last put in decoction. therefore they had neede of much seething to make them tender, next after them put in your seedes. And last of al your Flowers or Sene leaues, for because they be tender, & wil quickly passe away by smoke vapour and ayre: let it seeth neither vpō a sharpe quicke fyer, nor vpon a slow, but vppon a meane, vnlesse it require much hast. But after the seething let it stand by, in some conuenient place: and then strayne the same Decoction, throughe a cleane whyte Wollen, or Skarlet in grain cloth, and so reserue it to vse of Medecine.
                     Suppositours must be made of Honye, sodden to a thicknes and tempered with a sticke,How to make Suppositers. and when it is almost sodden, then put your Salte, and Hiera picra Simplex when your Honye is almost thicke, or els the Hiera will lose his strength, then roule it with butter in the forme of a spindle, smaller at one end, then at the other in length, according to the body as a Finger, two fyngers in length.
                     Clisters you haue the making of them before, but because trouble and tyme hath preuented me,Clisters. I colde not doo
                           •
                         so mutch in Clisters. &c. as by Goddes grace. I doe intend hereafter. Therfore I commend thee to Nicholaus Myrepsus. V. Cordus. I. Placatom, and also to one of this tyme of little fame because he hath written but a little boke, but yet this woorke is excellente good for a Poticary, his name is Petrus Gorias Bitriscensis. Note also, that you must haue your Clister pipe, and bladders in store, to minister the Clisters, neither very hot nor cold, for feare of wynd, or scalding in the guttes. Also I haue sayd before, your Clisters must be fyrst of decoction with your rootes, then seedes, last Sene, then strayned, and so your Oyles and Hiera picra &c. with a little recoction, and so giuen a pint. &c. Euen so there bee Clisters restrayning and stopping &c.
                     Syrupes some bee Symple, that is made of one thing, puttyng ther vnto Sugar,Syrupes, simple & cōpoūde, or hony, and this Syrupe is made of the iuice of Herbes, or fruites as Borage &c. Either the iuice is stamped and strayned, & clarifyed

or els the herbe is sodden in water, vntill the water bee consumed to the thyrd part, then strayne it, and put the decoction agayne into the Kettell, or Pan, and recocte it agayne, putting in the Suger, compounded wyth sundry Syrupes, as Grossery, as Spyces, and Seedes, are decocted, and sodden together.
                     Iuleps must be sodden but lightly, made thin and cleare, and are made of Uyolets, Roses, or Syrupes, and Waters together.
                     Infusion must stand al the night together, as Agarike, Rubarbe, Sene &c. and stilled water, & in the morning strongly pressed forth into a cleane vessell, to the vse of potion, to purge.
                     A stone of Marble must be prepared, to cast Manus Christi, or Lozinges vpon: whych Lozinges must be made of Suger, put into the Pan wt Rose or sweete water, sodden to a thicknesse, and when it is so thick, that a drop thereof will be cleere, lyke Uenice Terebintyne, then put in your Cordiall pouders, or Dias, stirring it with a sticke, cast it abroade vpon your stone. Note also, that your stone be eyther anoynted, with Oyle of Almondes, or els sifted ouer wyth ye pouder of Cinamon, whereby you may take vp your Table, to make your Lozenges▪ The names and quantities of them, are before rehearsed in the Compoundes.
                     
                        Electuarium must bee sodden thicke, and kept cloase, as Electuarium de succo Rosarum. &c. and. ℥.j. of any Electuary, is sufficient to be taken at once in the morning, with distilled waters accordingly.
                     Pilles. ʒ.j. made in fiue, or seuen Pilles, is sufficient to purge the Body withall. Pouders, Syrupes, and Waters must be alwayes prepared for Pilles, and to make them newe, beaten in a cleane Morter together, and kept close.
                     For moyst, or liquid thynges shortly to besayd.
                     
                        Amphora is .xlviij. Sextarius, and thys Sextarius doth containe a Pinte and a halfe, whych is ounces .xxiiij. that is. l.ij. Romayne wayght.
                     
                        Vrna is halfe of Amphora, whych .xxiiij. Sextaries, here in Englande are two gallons, & a halfe. And thus I doe ende of these medicines aforesayd, and what faultes be escaped, amendes shall be made, God willing.

                           Haec sunt vsitata Medicamina quae in officinis Medicamentarijs vbi
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ferè prostant, reliqua ad praescriptum Medicorum parentur, quod non difficile est in communibus exercitato.
                           Valeto.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Gulielmus Bullenus.
                     
                        
                           Ianuarij, anno salutis. 1562.
                     
                  
                  Hereafter followeth the Booke of the vse of Sickmen, and holsome medicine.
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        The Booke of the vse of sicke men, and medicines.
                     
                  
                  
                     Surfeyte, age, and sickenes, are enemyes all to health,
                     Medicines to mende the body, excell all worldly wealth:
                     Pisicke shall florishe, and in daunger will giue cure,
                     Till death vnknit the liuely knot, no longer wee endure.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Booke of the vse of sicke men, and medicines.
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     ALthough medicines, 
                           •
                        s composicions, be well made in all poyncts, wanting no Simples, yea, and also the Simples are good and newe, and the Apothicary cunning: yet it oftentimes hapeneth that the same good medicines do hinder me more, than my painefull dolorous sicknesse: in whom is then the fault? I pray you.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        The fruicte of rashe ministracion of medicines.
                        IT should appeere, neyther in the medicine, nor in the Apothicary, but in the vndiscreete geeuer, or rashe Physicion, which men, be the death oftentimes of many, that put theyr trust in them, as euill Medicine is. I therefore shall shewe thee, what is to bee done, agaynst sutch euill accidentes, if they do chaunce, how to remoue them. And how thou shalt behaue thy selfe wysely, in receyuing pocions. &c. For in the tyme of sickenesse, sometyme wee loose, or make the belly laxatiue, when it is stopped, euen so we do restrayne, stop and bynde the belly, when it doth immoderately run wyth laxes. Sometyme we do mortify or kill euill humours, that rebell agaynst Nature. And also we restore to nature, when it is decayed thinges restoratiue,A good Kitchin, is a good Apothicaryes shop. as Cordials, Dias & Syrups according, wyth Kitchin physicke: whych Kitchin I assure thee, is a good Poticaries shop. When we make euacuation wyth laxatiues, then vse we Scammonie, Rubarbe, Cassiafistula. &c. But when we restrayne or bynde the body, we giue Acatia and Opium. In restoring, repayring, or bynding nature, then we minister 
                           •
                        n meates & drinkes, & other cōuenient medicines, Diarhodon, Triasandali, Diamargariton, &c. And there is an other kynde of cure, when the matter is not mature or rype, crude & couched fast, whych must bee displaced wyth decoctions, warme syrupes and medicines acordinge, whych I shall declare hereafter. But here I wyll speake some thyng of Medicines solutiue, or laxatyue: and then next of constric
                           •
                        iue, or bynding. Thyrdly, of the maner of restoring, helping, or mending. Fourthly to digest, chaunge & alter.Foure things considered attraction, dissoluing. &c. Now concerning the fyrst, whych is medicines solutiue: we vse them three maner of wayes. First by attraction or drawing. Secondly by dissolution or wasting. Thirdly, by expulsing and dryuing forth. Then wee do this diuers and sundry wayes, according to the diuersity of the place where the matter is contayned wythin the body. Then wee loose & relaxe, wyth Benedicta laxatiua, or Catharico imperiali, or sutch lyke electuaries. We make attraction wyth Aloes, and certayne of the Opiattes. &c. We do expel with Scylla, washed in the waters of Tamarindes, & sutch lyke: and as the matter is, so do we worke, and prepare pocions, according to the diuersity of the place, where the euill humour or matter lyeth hidden, which wee intende to dispacthe, by Gods grace, wythout whose furderaunce, nothing commeth to good lucke, and all our labour is in vayne, although wee watche, ryse, study, labour. &c. Therefore let the mynister of the medicine diligently foresee the verity of the matter, so that he may minister one or two pocions of medicines, according to the property and place. As for example, if ye matter be in the stomacke, lyuer, or places neere the same, one pocion shall suffice to euacuate and expulse the same: but if ye euill matter do lye in places

distant, and farre from the stomacke, as it hapneth to theym that haue the gou
                           •
                        e, whose griefe is in the Feete. Wee gieue more medicines,Property and place, must be obserued. to dissolue, remooue, and open the matter, which is so farre of the stomacke: then we giue the Iuyce of Polipodie, and Agarike, and the Pilles called de Serapino, or Pilles de Lapide Armenio, descriptionis Mesuae, and sutch lyke. Then secondly, we vse to giue medicines whych haue vertue, to alter, to drawe and attract the losed humours to the stomacke,The vertue of bitter medicines is great and so dissolue thē wyth Benedicta, Hieralogodion, and Hiera picra. &c. For bitter thyngs do penitrate & pearse sooner to the extreme partes, & do purge more, then do any other med
                           •
                        cines. Thyrdly, we geue an expulsiue, and expel the humours that be gathered & alredy drawen in the stomacke wyth, Psileum. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     But I pray you, how doe you vse these medicines?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     IN maner folowing. Medicines to expell, we giue one in ye morning, the second at Noone, the third at Night: the cause may so requyre,
                           Apocion mus
                                 •
                               bee gieuen at three sundrye tymes, to remoue and expulse matter from the stomacke.
                           A Caueat. to beware.
                         the one at euening, another at midnight, the thyrd in the morning. Take heede also, that the humours be not to mutch dissolued▪ in the seconde mynistration: but after the fyrst pocion, the Pacient may sleepe, bycause the pocion is more weaker, when it is once drunke, than when it is taken two tymes, for beeing drunke twice, then it is double in strength. Some men may not away wyth medicines: well, to sutch we gieue but only a digestiue, and an expulsiue. And to them that are not able to receyue two,Mēs natures must bee obserued, a little medicine will worke mutch of some men, and a stronge medicine, wil skan
                              •
                            worke, on some other man. wee giue theym but one, but that one in effect, must bee as good as the three: whych must dissolue, attract, and expell, whych way of purgacion is not hurtful. For Physitions seldome times do gyue two, or three pocions, but it is greater ouersight: for if one pocion will purge, how mutch more will two or three: for one strong pocion, h
                           •
                        th not that vertue, and efficacy that three mens pocions haue: although one stronge pocion, and vehemēt medicine, doe quickly purge the neather partes of the Stomacke, euen so it may be so quicke, that it will penetrate to the extreme partes, as ye head, hands, & feete.. Also the vertue of the medicine, if it be weake in operacion, it doth vanishe away, through the passage of the vnapt partes, whereby that it cannot reache to the extreme members. And also, when we do intend to purge the extreme partes, then we doe geue two preparatiues, to the intent that the thyrd, may haue the 
                           •
                        reer way, and more effectuall passage. If we must needes giue but one, then 
                           〈◊〉
                         it be done by little, & little, & oftentimes, so yt the matter may be purged, fayre, & softly, and not rashely, nor sodaynely, as it chaunceth in many places, where the Pacient doth receiue sutch medicines, yt he goeth fourty, or three score times to the stoole.
                           Requiem eternam, wyth a spade. Sutch medicines once doe cause the pacient, to haue sunge for them, Requiem eternam, dona eis domine, which is, O Lord, geue them euerlasting rest, for sure we be, through sutch medicines, in this Worlde, they shall neuer haue rest, nor health. For these swift, strong purgacions, doe weaken ye body, dry vp the bloud, consume nature bring conuulsion, or palsy, & finally retayne euill humours, and let the good humour out. Therefore▪ 
                        Hippocrates
                        
sayth, after sodayne euacuacion, or replecion, to hoat, or to cold, be deceiptfull, and vtterly aduersaries to Nature.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     
                        I Had thought to haue made no more to do, but when my belly had bin costiue, or boūd, to haue taken any thing that had bin laxatiue, but now I perceiue by so doing, I should haue done my selfe more hurt than good: For by sutch actions & doings, I am brought into this case,Like as heate consumeth, euē so do Phisicke money. but from henceforth, I will take better heede, & God aforne. For so help me God and holli
                           •
                        ame, gossope Health, I got sutch a sicknes in Flaunders, that by ye space of two yeares, consumed my money among the Phisicions, that in ye ende, they had all my riches & gayne, and I nothing but sicknes & payne: then like wyse men, they counsayled me, to go home into my natiue Countrey where, sayd they, the Ayre should be my chyefe Phisicion. Euen so I did, but my sicknes is so inueterate & olde, that ye Ayre was vnsufficient to be my help: yet the countrey is very pleasaunt, ye know it very well, it is Suffolk, whereas very fewe Phisicians do inhabite, of myne acquaintance, but only an old Emperike, called Ihon Preston, some take him to be a great clarke, but I thinck he is learned beyond the mark. For all men in that countrey, he is greatly sought vnto: for he playeth our Lady of Walsingham,Ihon Prestō, called Ihon of Ston
                              •
                           ham giuing as mutch health for a peny, as she did holynes: yet custome hath cōmenced him amongest the common people, to be theyr doctour. I was this mans pacient a great tyme, but yet I neuer heard him talke of Hippocrates, and Galen, he troubles not his house wyth any of theyr bookes. What shall I say, all the time that I was with him, he vsed to minister his purgacions by chaunce medley, to his pacients, happy man by his 
                           •
                        ole, some speede well, but I do remayne sicke still. And as I doe perceyue by these three rules, that the fault was in abusing, misusing, and not duely ministryng of hys medicines: how, and in what maner therefore should I receiue, or giue my frend medicine, without errour accordingly, I beseeche thee gentle Health tell mee.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        Whē purging medicines are to bee geeuen, firste minister hearbes and drinks to prouoke vryne.
                        WHen you will giue any purgation, or medicine, diet your pacient first, by ye space of a day or two, with meates or suppings, to prouoke vryne: as the 
                           •
                        roathes of fleshe & fishe, boyl
                           •
                        d On
                           •
                        ons with fat Porke. Also geue the pacient two or three tymes poached Egges, saused with a little Wyne & Pepper, or herbs mollifiing or softning the belly, as Arage, called Atriplex, Mallowes & Mercury. &c. For which cause sayth Hippocrates, when any may will purge the body, he must first prepare ye matter to be flowing, that when the purgacion doth come, it may easely passe, & cary away all the euill humour,Preparatiues must bee firste geuen. & then purgacion. without griefe or hurt. And this must be giuen to hard Complexions, which will not easely geue place to purgacion: for in case the medicine lo
                           •
                        e not, it wil imprison, shut vp, and close, both the humour & the purgacion, rather than purge accordingly. Upon which occasion, sayth Galen, these Methodians, while as they make light of medicines preparatiue,
                           Methodici, bee Physicions yt obserue certayne rules by art. they inclose the matter, and make no euacuation, therefore they cause not only the sicknes of the Lunges, but also of the Ioynts, as Hands and Feete.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Now sir, for that you are very sensible, & talke in good order, I pray you furthermore, if you be not weary of my poore company: shewe me how that I may best prepare medicine for my selfe and others accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Health,
                     
                        FOr asmutch as I doe lacke many of my Companions, which bee now a dayes,The causes of sicknesse. al on thy side, intised by idlenesse, surfet, & theyr companion gluttony, & now are they all with thee, I know them well by sight, but I keepe very little cōpany with them. For if I so did, I should loose my name, & be called no more Health, but myserable wretched Sicknes,

as Feuer▪ Dropsy, palsy, blynde, lame, frantike, consumed, rupture, gouty, pocky. &c. Yet would God, would God, if thou & they be not past cure: I wishe you all on my side agayne. For I cōfesse, many of you haue mutch wealth, but al you lacke Health. But to want both, if age approach, I promesse thee it is the first hell, the greatest extreeme misery, and most wretched enemy to mankinde, that can be inuented, how sayst thou, is it not so? Thou canst not denay it. Well, yet it is a manyfest signe of health to seeke it. Cōtinue therein, & thou shalt finde it: and for this thy honest demaunde, how medicines should be prepared You shall prepare them in thys maner, if you quicken your purgacion wyth Scamonie quicken it .x. or .xv. dayes,How to prepare medicine before it be geuen: so that the sayd Scamonie may be incorporated with the spices. But note that the Scamonie be well rubbed betweene the handes, or chafed in a morter, wyth oyle of Roses, or Uiolets, or syrupe of Roses, well wrought betwene the handes, puttinge there unto a little Masticke. For Masticke hath a property, that it will let, & not suffer Scamonie to cleaue to the foldes of the stomacke, which oftentymes causeth a bloudy flixe, & excoriation of the guts. But by this mixture, the malice of the medicine is excluded, and wil do no harme: but if any chaunce happen in any sutch case, it will be soone helped. But there bee many bloudy villaynes,
                           Scamonie is perilous, except it be wel prepared, and doth kil many one. whych wyll geue Medicines immediatly, after they haue put in Scamonie, before it bee well incorporated with spices. For the longer it is incorporated, so mutch it will purge the more effectually and gently. Nowe if you haue not thys medicines prepared, and of necessity it must be geuen, or ministered in sutch case: let the Scamonie be rubbed or chafed, as is aforesayd, with oyle & Syrupe of Roses, & a litle cleane Masticke, & thus being quickned, it may be giuen after .ij. or .iij. daies: you must also roast ye medicine, in this maner following. Take a gray Costarde, or a Quince, cut it a sunder ouerthwarte in the middes, pike out the Coare, then put in the pouder of Scamonie, then put it togeather agayne: when this is done, wrap it close in a weat linnen clothe, and couer it in the hoat Emers of smale coales and ashes. When it is well roasted, thē take it forth, and mingle it with a Medicine, and being thus prepared, it may be geuen after two dayes. But take heede still, that it be not finely poudered, for feare of cleauing to the Stomacke, through whych may come a bloudy flyxe, and excoriation of the guttes: but it must be beaten grosly, that it may tary the longer, or more tyme in ye stomacke. And why so? Mary, then it shall dissolue the lurking humours, whych be hidden priuely, in the extreeme partes, as head, hands, and gouty feete.Lurkinge humoures howe to finde theim and expulse them. But if you eyther will receyue, or geue a pocion, then temper it wyth Rubarbe, Mirobalans, or Agarike, and let it stande a day and a night, according as the medicine shall requyre, wherewyth the matter shalbe purged, at Morning, sometime at Euen, as I shall declare hereafter. If a man be stronge, lusty, and not weake, then he may take the substaunce in the pocion. If he be feeble, tender, or weake, then to strayne it, and drynke the lyquor onely: thus, or after thys maner, is to prepare medicines.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     How and in what maner, doe you geue solutiue medicines?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        SOlutiue medicines, be sometime giuen to the whole, and sometime to the sicke.Medicines so
                              •
                           iti
                              •
                           e. why they are giuē. To the sicke, to expulse syckenesse: to the whole to preserue them in health. Then when thou myndest to mynister to thy selfe, or to any other, fyrst consyder ye sycknes, and the matter whereof it groweth, and the place infected. When these thynges be well noted, then as the matter shall requyre, euen so minister accordingly, as is sayd before. But consyder thys, that the medicine must not be offered, vntyll sutch tyme, as the matter or humour be decocted, riped & made soft,The chiefe signe of digestion. whereupon sayth Hippocrates, we must purge digested matter, but not moue crude, rawe matter. &c. The digestion of matter is knowen, by thicknesse of Uryne, in case a thyn vryne passed before the sayd thycke Uryne by at
                           •
                        enuacion, but is a thicke Uryne, come before the thin, then it is a Feuer. Wherefore know fyrst the distinction of the matter in this behalfe. Now if it be vndigested, vse incisiues, and thyngs that prouoke vryne: then after you haue prouoked vryne wyth Herbes accordingly,It helpeth mutch to nature, to prouoke Uryne. then may you minister your medicine. But on the other side, when you will gyue a Medicyne la
                           •
                        atyne, to the whole body. First, consider what humour doth abound, and the same is that, which causeth the payne and sickenes in the body: & therefore purge this cause,That humor which doth abound, purge the same The cause of sickeneess. & then the effect shal cease, by Gods grace. Now furthermore, if there be two humours, equall abounding together, extreamely in superfluitie, then there must be more Simples, put vnto the composicion, accordyng to the quality or quantity of the humour, to purge the same. As when choler and bloud do abound, then purge with confectio Hamech. &c For if two humours be superfluous, and then if you giue to purge but one humour,
                           Hippocrates. Purge that which should be purged, or els meddle the body wyl be molested, sicke, and grieued: and for this cause Hippocrates sayth. Si qualia oportet purgari purgentur, confert & benè ferunt, si vero non: contrarium: whych is, if sutch thyngs be purged, whych ought to be purged, is good and auaylable and men bare it well, if not, then it is cleane contrary and euyll.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What signe or manifest token, is then to be giuen, whereby a man should perceiue the humours by, I pray you say on?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        PArtly they may be known by certayne thyngs, what humours to abounde,Howe to know what humour doth abound, by his proper token. or ought to be purged or clēsed, within ye bodies of Men. or Women. As example▪ if any man be leane, or wāt his flesh, yea, or whiteshe of complexiō or fleshy, & haue salt spittle in his mouth, wyth bitternes of taste, in sutch bodyes salt phlegme doth chiefly abound, and needeth purgation: but they whych feele ye moysture, or spettle sweete in theyr mouthes, & haue plenty of swelling vaynes appeere in theyr faces, and also haue noysomnes & abhorring in theyr stomacke,Of sweete flegme. wyth aptnesse to vomit, and vryne red, thyck, & oyley, thys is a manyfest sygne, of ye aboundance of sweete flegme. Furder, if any man do feele tartnes, or sowernes in hys mouth,Tart flegme. wyth quicke appetite, no thyrst or desyre to drink in this case, there tarte fleume greatly aboūdeth, & doth raygne, when all ye spettle seemeth like vineger. Sometime the mouth doth feele no taste, & is vnsauery, feeling nothing but like Wel water: neither hath apetite or drines, desyring

neyther meate nor drynke: this is an vnsauerie flegme, and needeth purgacion.Signes manifest declaryng what humours beare the greatest rule, in the bodies of Men and women without which it is not possible to purge, accordyng to art
                              •
                            but rather to kylle. Nature hath oftentymes rebellyng agaynst her bitternes in the mouth, but no saltnes, the vryne thyn, yellow or reddysh in colour: thys doth declare that red choller hath the victory. Great stronge bitter vomits, as bitter gaule in the mouth, without vomites, and vrine yellow or ruddish not very thin: these signes do declare, there doth raigne in the Body, euyll corrupted and infested coler. But if it, be of lesse thynnesse, rednes, and bytternes: then it is coler, vitelline or like yolkes of Egges. that doth abounde. Well, if the vryne be yellow and thyn, hauing small residence in the bottome, and great bytternes in the mouth, then Citrine colour, is a Lorde, and ruleth aboue nature, therefore this and the rest▪ ought to be purged with medicines, made accordyng to the art, to put these cruell enemyes away, whych els will put the whole body, with all the members,Signes to know when Melancholy doth approch▪ after whome commeth the quartaine. in perill of dissolucion and death Marke when slouthfulnes, dulnes, idlenes, wearines, and heauines be greater, than they be accustome
                           •
                         to be: the appetite increased, and thirst diminished, and all the members, as though they had ben weary, after some paynfull labour, when these signes do appeare, then Melancholy must needes be purged with speede. If the veines be full, most chyefely in the Face, also when as the pulses be very full, with plenty of sweete spettle in the mouth wyth swellyng, & the blushyng in the face, heauinesse, painfulnes, and wearines in the shoulders, as it hapneth after labour, or bearing some heauy burden, and the vrine thick and red, in these men Bloud doeth plentifully abound, which may be helped, by the opening of the veine Mediana or Cephalica, or applying of boxing glasses, with skarifying the place first if either purging do seeme to long, or els the opening of the veine, is not don accordingly. &c. Electuariū of Succorosarum. &c. be good to purge bloud.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     HOw then doe you purge phlegme, whych is one of the foure Humours. I pray you tell mee? For lacke of medicine, conuenient for the same: there bee many whych be dayly cast away, as it appeareth by the rules of Phisicke.
                  
                  
                     Health,
                     TO speake of phlegme simply, it must bee purged wyth these Medicines, as wyth Benedicta laxatiuae, Catarico imperiali: decoction of Polipodie, Agarike.Purgers of flegme. &c. But salt phlegme is purged with the holy bitter medicine, which the Greekes call Hiera picra simplex, Theodoricon, Anacarde, Hyperisticon. &c. Sweete phlegme must be purged wyth Hyeralogodion of Memphis: and the strongest Hiera picra, and sutch like things, for purging sweete phlegme, as appeereth in the compoundes of medicines.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How do you purge burnt red Choler, which is hoat and dry?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     TO purge sutch choler, is with Trifera Saracenica, Electuario frigido, Oxyphoenicum, wyth the decoction of Mirobalans, Cassiafistula,The Manna of Calabria is the best of the worlde, & falleth downe in the nighte, as dewe vpō flowers and leaues. Tamarindes, Uyolets, & Manna of Calabria. Choler infected, must be purged wt 
                        Anacardium, or Agni corais, which groweth vpō a tree in India, whych tree, geueth fyre of it self, & bryngeth forth fruit like vnto Lābes harts, but very small, hauing a bloudy iuice: of this Rasis maketh a good cōfection, for simple takē it is venemous. There is also an excellēt Antidotū, in the .217. Cap.
                        
of Nicolaus Mirepsus, in his booke of Antidotaries called Theodoreton, or Gods gyft, wherein Anacardus in brought is. &c. Whych medicine doth help the head,
                           Theodoraton a diuine gift. lunges, stomacke, liuer, spleene, goute▪ &c. And also purgeth Choller, so do with Hiera picra simplex, Rubarbe, Diaprunes. &c But when Melācholy, that colde, dry, wretched Saturnus humor creepeth in, with a leane, pale, or swartysh colour, whych raigneth vppon solitarye, carefull musyng Men: whych humour at length, breedeth and bryngeth forth a terryble Chylde, called the Feuer quarten,Melancholie the worst humor of nature he b
                              •
                           getteth a sonne called the Quarten. Compounded humour may not be purged with a simple medicine, for they are to weake. the same if he bee not corrected, and banished away, wyll be hys fathers death. When he appeareth, correct hym thus, as wyth the strongest Hieralogodion, wyth the decoction of Sene, Epithymum, Hamech. &c. But in case the humour be compounded, then you must also vse compounded medicine: or medicine simple, doth rather hurt, than help in sutth cases. And why so? Mary beyng symple, it purgeth but one humour, & suffereth ye other corrupted humours to remayne: & what is ye cause thynk you? Truly none other, but yt it is to weake, & lacketh strength and force, whych ye compounded medicines. As example. George Tomson of Kelshall in Suffolke, hath a Feuer tercian (well) your good wyll is to help hym,A
                              •
                            example betweene a simple & a cō
                           pound medycine. & you geue hym a symple medicine: but what doth your symple medicine profyte hym? Nothyng at all. For he whych hath a tercian, must be purged of choler, & in sutch a case, because phlegme is mixed wyth choler, your symple may rather put forth phlegme, whych is moyst, and not moue choler,The fyre wyl get the victorie, if the Water bee not equall, or haue the masterie. Good intentes and good actes, 
                              •
                           e two thynges. which is hoat and dry, yea, the very cause and worker of the rygour in this tercian, and so when nature hath moisture drawen away from her, whych should quenche the heate, then to conclude, choler shall be come the more hoatter, vehementer, and cruel to nature, through a simple medicine, foolyshly geuen of a good intent,
                     When bloud doth abound, or breaketh forth at the nose, cōmonly on the ryght nosthrell, or spetting of bloud. &c. then diminishe it, as I haue sayde by dyscreete openyng the veyne, wyth a fyne Lanset, and no flem wyth a bearde, lyke to a bloud Iron, that Smithes do let horse bloud wythal. For they wyll sometyme cut a veyne through both the sydes, & cause a crampe. &c.Ignoraunt Barbers, their fruictes. Also in diminishyng of bloud, let not the Chirurgian without counsaile, or vppon auncient experience, take or open the sayde veyne or veynes. As example, William Downaby of Iken hath a grieuous payne in hys head wyth ache, he can take no rest. &c. there is no remedy, but to let hym bloud: the common Barbar doth take hys Lanset, & openeth a veyne, as ye blynde man shooteth at a Crowe, he taketh the fyrst that commeth to hand, or appeereth greatest, perhaps a Synewe, whych may chaunce to let out ye spirites of lyfe, & kill hym: well, in case thys Barber, for the paynes of ye head, intend to open Basilica. whych is vena interna, or axillaris, growyng through the arme hoale, & bryngeth both from the heart and Liuer, whych are his rootes, and through ignoraunce, do open a great sinew hard by it, whych is lyke a veyne: in whych sinewe the spirites of lyfe doe swiftly run vp and downe, mixte wt the bloud of lyfe. What hath he done now? Mary slayne one. And what is theyr refuge in sutch a case? The sygne, say they, was in ye place, & he would be needes letten bloud. But in case if ye Barbers cunning

be better, and if he open Basilica wythout hurt, what doth this help ye head? Nothing, or els very little at all. But if you will help W. Downabies head, open Cephalica, called vena externa, with a long cut, to let out grosse bloude, & foule matter, and cut not deepe, for feare of apostumacion: this veyne I say helpeth his head, to purge fyrst with, ℈.j.ss. of ye pilles of Hiera simplex, a day before is better. Now if his paynes be in hys breast, or rightside, ye or pleurisy, then open the veyne called Mediana, the middle veyne, whose parents be Basilica, and Cephalica: this Mediana or Cardiaca must be opened somewhat ouerthwart, & so shall he bleede wel, to help the griefes aforesayd: but when the matrix, raynes, Bladder, or Yarde, be troubled with griefe, stopping,Obseruaciōs in bloude letting. or swelling, & mutch paynes, then in a vessel of warme Water, open vena talie the Ankle veine, called Saphena: for this old creeping vulcans, or lame sicknes, called Sciatica, with paynes in the Huccle bones, can neuer be better helped, than to purge with Hiera, to anoynt with Oyle of the same, as appeareth in the Compounds, & to open the foresayd Sciatica veine, which is one of the middle, & toward the outsyde of ye foote. And thus to open veynes in order, is the best way: and when time of bloud letting, is not conuenient, thē apply boxes with scarification, euen as the place, humour, & time doe requyre, and this shall suffice of purging humours, wyth bloud letting.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     
                        I Trust to obserue these your sayings very well, deere friends Health. But how should I know, when medicines haue taken theyr effect, and wrought accordingly, to thend
                           •
                         of theyr force, and vertue?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     THus you shall know, fyrst, there is no man, but doth take medicine,To knowe, when medicine haue wrought their effect. to put away some griefe: and when the griefe is past and the body quiet, and no payne in the stomack, then the medicine haue wrought his good effect. Then you may geue the broth of a Capon, Chicken, or Hen, sometyme Almond milke, or cleane stewed broth, drynke small Wine, of colour yellow and cleane, and vse moderacion in eatyng and drinking, vnlesse there folow an ephemerall Ague. Now the next day after purging, the pacient may go to the stophe, or bathe: so that he go thither, taking no cold, or do no labour, by the space of three daies, & then to vse moderate exercise, and to feede vpon meate, that will ingender good humours. And thus to conclude, the body, or any that are sicke before time, shall now be conuerted into a new nature, through the helpe of Nature, and medicine?
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What els I pray you, is to be obserued in medicine?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     THree thyngs are to bee noted, Tyme, Humour, and Region: where purgacion is to bee ministred. Fyrste, as touching Tyme,Tyme, humour, regio
                              •
                            are chiefly to be considered. there be two dyuersityes: The one is the tyme of the yeare, and the other is the tyme of the Day, and Night, in whych euery Humour hath hys being. For according to the variation, and alteracion of the time of ye yeare, the maner of the purgacion must be altered and chaunged. And Hippocrates
                        
sayth, we must purge the vpper partes of the body in Summer, & the neather or lower partes in Wynter. (for why?) The humours do folowe the property of time.Purge vpward in Sū
                           mer, & downward in Winter. In Sūmer purge wyth Uomits, in Winter by the stoole, & not without a good cōsideration of ye time, age, & kinde of disease, & habite of ye body. For they, which haue strayght throates, may not be purged wyth, or by Uomit, for feare the spirite & breath of lyfe be stopped and strangled, & so through choaking, ye body be killed. Agayne, purge not olde men, by the reason of the coldnes of their complexion. In Sūmer purge aboue, earely in the morning. In Winter purge beneath, late at night. In the Equinoctial time, prepare at euen, and the next morning after your preparatyue, purge by Electuarie. &c. In extreeme hoat Regions, no purgacions: in extreeme cold Regions, none also. Neyther in the dayes, whych be not temperate, as to hoat wyth the Sunne, or to colde wyth Frost. &c. nor in the Cauiculer dayes, except great neede requyre.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     How must the day, and the night be considered, in purgacions?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        WHereas the time of the day and nyght, be in length .xxiiij. houres, whych is called the artificiall day, & artificiall night, which .xxiiij. houres,The day naturall, and the day artfiiciall make but one naturall day, deuided into foure times sixe for the foure complexions. For euery Complexion hath hys gouernment, & dominion sixe houres. Fyrst the bloud beginneth at nyne at night, & continueth vntill three in the morning. And choler from three after midnighte, vntill nyne before noone. And so the other two humours: fyrst melancholy, & phlegme, haue eche of them syxe houres, wherein they doe raygne, & gouerne the body.The foure cō
                           plexions raigning euery one by houres Now if it be Sūmer, & then you bee mynded to purge choler by vomyt, then you must geue the sayd vomit, a little before ye houre of the day. So that when it hath remayned, and stayed it selfe a whyle in the stomacke, it may woorke in ye houres of choler, to purge the same. In ye lyke appoyncted houres, so purge melancholy downward, in his houre and make euacuation of it. If thou wilt purge phlegme, let the pacient rest a Gods name, by the space of three or foure houres in the night, & then wake, and take his pocion, or medicine, a little before Midnight, & not sleepe after it, vntil it be purged. Now if you will purge bloud, in the morning open a Ueyne,The aged, the very younge, weake folke, and women with childe, may not be let bloud. except very olde, or yongue, or people consumed, or women with childe, wyth sutch I dare not haue to doe. If you will purge humours, otherwayes than thus, that is obseruing the houres, yea, & the mansions, or course of the Moone: you shall greatly erre, & do more hurt than good.
                     Furdermore, consider the diuersity of humours, if bloude abounde, hee must be letten forth by ye veyne, Cephalica, or Mediana, &c. If Choler bee to mutch aboue nature,Matter in the veynes must be put forth by bloude letting & 
                              〈◊〉
                            the belly by Clister, & in the breast by vomite. then purge by vomite: but if choller bee mixed with bloud, then let bloud as I haue sayd, vnles the matter be contayned in the neather partes of the Belly, then purge by Clister or pocion. &c. If flegme or melancholy be beneath, purge downwardes vnles it be about ye mouth, or entrance of the stomacke, or ye vpper parts of ye body: marke & wisely cō
                        sider the tyme, in all these things, for that is the chiefest poynct of all. For euery thyng, sayd the wyseman, hath his proper time vnder heauen. &c.

And regions by which here in this place, the humours be considered: also the places of purging, the vpper part, the neather part, the nostrelles, roofe of the mouth, pores of sweatyng, and veines of bleedyng, &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What say you then of place, in whom the matter is contained?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THE place in deede, as I haue sayed,Place where medicine should be ministred conueniently ioined with tyme. must bee considered in whych a medicine shalbe giuen: whether it be hoat in Sommer, or to colde in Wynter. If the day be to hoate, you may cast Uinegar, Sallow braunches, Uiolets, Water Lillies: and bee in a low Uaulte, or from the Sunne, and temper the place, where you wyll purge. On the other part if the place be to colde, make a fy
                           •
                        r of Charcoales, or a stoue, which is a fyer secret felt, but not seene. Close Windowes from wynde, in a prety warme Chber, wyāth good whole hangyngs or seelyng. The pacyent to haue light warme clothes, and slyppers, cleane, & well lyned: sweete linnen▪ as sheetes, shurtes, and Kerchiffes, a close chaire, lyned softly wyth a backe, hauyng a cleane round bason, or vessell wythin the same, to receiue the stooles or purged matter. And then to haue soft Cotten or cloth, to make cleane natures priuy place, you know my meanyng. Forget no sweete perfumes by art, for nature wyll play the stinkyng Beast, I tell you truely. Also in thys place no noyse, nor vtter Monkish silence, but be myndfull of some honest mery matter, or pleasaunt tale, or thynges that wyll reioyce the spirites. &c.Colde doeth take, and is not taken. And this place must be thus vsed, in the tyme of purgacion: but styll I saye, beware that you take not cold, or rather colde take not you. For in sutch a case, i
                           •
                         he get the victory, then he wyll put you into a sheete, and send you to the God of Qui Lazarum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sickenes
                     
                        WEl good sir after Qui Lazarum: Credo videre bona domini,
                        The hope of ye life to come▪
                         
                        in terra viuentium: And that do I beleue, euen to see the goodnesse of the Lord God, in the land of the liuyng,In Adam we haue our fall. where I shal receyue all my body whole and sound, in as goodlye a forme, as my father Adam was in, before hys moste Lamentable fall: by whome I am thus punished,Acab wil kyll Na
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           h, for his vineyard. wyth Misery, care, heauinesse, Labour, ingratitude of mine owne flesh and friendes, syckenes, paines, sorenesse, & daily daunger, to haue my bloud spilt for mine owne goods, prison, affliction of minde,When one descendeth into himselfe, hee shall beholde fearful things and somtime the periured enemye doth preuaile, with fiery tongue of slaunder, with a thousand crosses, which make me to stoupe. And to despise the world, whych is trapped wt Snares before mine eyes in ech place, and then I crepe within my selfe, whereas I do see mine own breast and conscience, written the carefull words of Iob,Mans Lyfe is both shorte and miserable Chapiter .xiiii. Homo natus mulieris, paucorum dierum est, & repletur inquietudine. &c. Man sayth he that is borne of a woman, liueth but few dayes, and is ful of misery: few dayes, and yet spent in trouble, Truely there is none other purging place, or purgatory but thys:In this lyfe we haue our purgatorie, & that we feele and perceiue. whych Iob hath poincted here wyth his fynger. The very maner, condicion, place, and turment, whych is onely Misery, deuyded into two kyndes, the one is the grieuous affliction and Miserye, whych is seene wyth Mortall eyen, as I haue sayed before,

as penurie, Pryson, sickenesse. &c. The second misery is not seene, but felte, as the inward agonie,Two sundry kindes of miseries. affliction of the spyrites: no inward consolacion, continuall thought, sometyme wishyng that death myght conquere Life, broken heart, and vexed spirite, full of sundry inward aff
                           •
                        ctions, and alteracyons of mynde, small rest or quietnes, sorowfull for the death of kinred, or fryendes, being chaunged into bitter enemyes, whych is a great plague. Or goods lost, or actes done insolently in tymes past: and most fearefull of thyngs to come, as doyng hurte, or suffryng harme by enemyes, or turning wyth a sodaine fall, from the fortunate happy wheele, if it so chaunce, of ryches,Sorrowe for thinges past, and feare of thynges to come. health, worship, pleasure, the victory of the enemy, and pleasuryng the friend, and heartes rest. &c into the pyt and darke lake of aduersity: sodainely depriued of these vayne slippery thyngs, and eftsones lynked, fetred, and intangled, wythall sutch euils, as the heart, and spirites, doe vtterly deteste, feare, and abhorre to thynke vpon: besides the sleepyng passions of the night, wyth carefull troubles of the spyrites, and dreames moste dreadfull,Prosperitie is very slipperie. of straunge shapes, fearefull syghtes, and pitifull appearyng of the dead Parents, Friends, Brethren, and old acquaintance. And sometyme the armed Enemy, with frounyng face, gnashyng teeth, bloudy hands, do mercylesse approch to kyll me,Horrible dremes in the Nyght, the sleepyng naked man, embracing my delyght, eftsones the flatterer doth please the eare, and pleasaunt thyngs approch. And the flesh is soone moued, through wycked lust, and in the twinkelyng of the eye, from dreame to dreame, the spirites be so variable: that the Nyghte to the carefull Man, is the very Image of Hell, and specyally to them whych feare not God:Dreames to admonish men to feare God. thus he punysheth them, as Iob sayeth, in the Nyght, to reforme them. And by sutch affliction of the night, in the time of sleepe, which is brother to death. In whych tyme the almyghty doth schoole mankynde, rebuke hym, and suffer the wycked Enemy to scourge hym wyth straunge visions. &c. Mankynd may sone thereby, vndoubtedly behold and perceiue the soule,The soule neuer sleepeth. Men doe dreame, accordyng to theyr temperament or complexiō. whych is lyuely occupyed, when as the grosse sences of the body. be stopped, and in a manner dead: neyther seeyng, hearyng. &c. Now whether it be dreame, illusion, vision. &c. as some do say, or the effects, or works, of the fower complexions, as the cholerike man, to dreame of Fyre, fighting &c. The flegmatike, to dreame of water. &c. And so in the other two complexions, or as Artemidorus in hys booke of dreames sayeth, they do presage, diuine, or shew before, what thynges do follow, or come after, good or bad. All these thynges be greate miseryes, and grieuous afflictions of the soule, whych I most humble desyre God,Wicked spirites, do molest our spirites. to delyuer vs from: and comforte vs wyth his holy spirite, agaynst all sutch euyll spyrites, whych do molest and vexe our spirites: whych are a thousand tymes more grieuous inwardlye, than the outward miseries of the body: as pouerty, prysonment, & extreame age.The troubles of the minde bee greater than the crosses of ye body. &c. For looke how mutch the soule is purer than the body▪ euen so the ioyes, and cares of the same, be more plentifull. And this occasion hath moued me, beyng a sycke man, to wander from our former talke. And why? Onely because you spake of Qui Lazarum, whych I haue heard songe, in a lamentable tragedye perhaps: but my song shalbe, Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur: Blessed be the dead, whych dye in the Lord: and happy are they, whych liueth in hym also: whych is the chyefest signe of their election, and

endles estate, in that place, wheras no ende shalbe of perfyt felicitye, and lyfe for euer: wheras neither ennemy, sicknes, woundes, prison, or pouerty shal vexe the immortal bodyes, which now be subiect to al calamityes:Kinges and Queenes bee subiect to the miseryes of this worlde and haue no perfit felicity before their mortal ende and beginning of immortall lyfe. yea from the King and Queene▪ which of all be honoured, obeyed, or flattered vnto the poorest bondman, and his wyfe, with his wretched children, that be shamefully despysed, contemned and vtterly reiected. But although no manne shalbe perfectly happy before death, as the Philosopher sayth, yet the same death shal bee swallowed vppe in victorye, which victorye is Iesus Christ the Conquerour, beginning and ending of all thinges, to whom bee prayse for euer Amen.
                     Yet because I am a man of the creation of God, scourged with many in fyrmityes in this world: by and through the same God also, many goodlye medecines be prepared to helpe mee, to relieue and comfort me, vntil sutche tyme as it shal please God to call me to the end of my Pilgrimage. Therefore good mayster health, beare with me, although I haue spoken in my greuous passion, to ease my mynd: and nowe by your pacience, whereas you haue shewed me immediatly before,Of the tyme of medecine. in what place medecine should bee geuen: Now I pray you shew me what tyme medecine should be ministred?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        I Am sory for thy double aff
                           •
                        iction both bodye & mynde, thou hast told a lamentable tale: wel, I wil saye thus much to thee, many handes make light worke. Beare these grefes quietlye, thou hast manye to helpe thee in this worlde. For there is nothing vnder the sunne, but vanity and affliction of mynd. Euery liuing man hath trouble, thus must needes be wysely suffred, because it cannot be auoyded: and wyse men may not dispayre in aduersitye, for comforte will come I warrante thee, bee neither to effeminate or childish, when trouble assaulteth thee, for then thou arte cleane gone. But arme thy selfe wysely with magnanimity, forsee thende, hold vp thy heade, and synke not. Use this world lyke a S
                           •
                        age, play thy part ther on in thy vocation, for the time honestly, serue God reuerently despise not ciuil pollicy, Profit the common wealth, kepe good company, be not ingrateful to thy frend. Depart from thyne ennemy, and yet beware of thy frends, Speake gently, trust not them that commonlye vse swearynge, slaunder,Eccle. v. dronkennesse, and be full of ielousy. Liue of thyne owne, though it bee but poorely. Be not bond, if thou maist stand at libertye. Go not to lawe with Lawiers, for they wil hinder thee. And beware of a flatterer, he wil betray thee. Be not variable in religion, obseruing tyme, and the maners of men: But obaying God which doth not chaūge. Ther be thre sondry men,A three stringed whip. which haue done thee neuer good: The winker in his tale, the Laugher in his rage, and the Foxe coloured, whiche will not sticke for bloode sheading, false witnesse, or periury▪ yet pray for them, and let goe displeasure. Bee angrye and synne not. Let not the Sonne goe downe on thy wrath.

Trust not to the world, yet behold it, and thou shalt se maruaylous things wrought therin·Eccle. iiii. Thou shalt see much wrong done dayly vnder the Sonne and behold the teares of such as be oppressed, and there is no man to comfort them, or that wil deliuer or defend them from the vyolence of the oppressours, but onely God, therfore follow the counsaile of the wyse man, for there is nothing better sayth he, for a man, than to be ioyfull in his labour, for that is his porcion.Eccle. iii. And for as much as mankynd, hath laboure, trauel, heauines, sorrow, and disquietnes al his life, and yet shal leaue al his labors to others, which neuer saw them, is it not better then, for a man to eate & drink, and his soule to bee merye in his laboure, and this is the gifte of God sayth the wyse man.What thing is be
                              •
                           t for mankynd. And thus to conclude if thou be troubled in mind, pray onely to God, and aske counsayle of the wyse: if thou be sick, seeke the Phisicion. Honour him because of necessity, God hath created him. For of the highest commeth medecine. and he shal receiue gifts of the kinge. The wisedome of the Phisition, bringeth him to greate worship: in the syghte of the great men of this world he shalbe honourably taken. The Lorde hath created medecine of the earth,E
                              •
                           od. 15.1. Regua
                              •
                           . 4. and he that is wyse, will not abhorre it. Was not the bitter water wade sweete with a Tree, that men might learne to know the vertue therof? The Lord hath geuen men wisedome and vnderstanding, that they might bee honoured in his wonderous woorkes: with such doth he heale man, and taketh away the paynes, of such doe the Apothecaries make a confection, yet cannot a man performe al his workes. For of the lord commeth prosperous wealth ouer al the earthe. My son despyse not this in thy sicknes, but pray vnto the lord, and he shal make thee whole, Leaue of from syn,Eccle. 38. and order thyne handes aright. Clense thyne hart from al wickednes: this is the counsayle of Iesus the son of Syrach, in his holy boke.Good counsell in the tyme of trouble. Chap. xxxviii. And now shal I shew vnto thee, what tyme medecine shal be geuen. Then do thus. Somtyme medecine is geuen to sleapward, or before sleape: and somtyme before day, in the morning, to ye waking time. First in the tyme of waking. then geue Liquid, or moyste medecines, and also easy: and specially when we must purge light humours in the stomack, For as a moyst liquid medecine in Pocion is soone dissolued, euen so she wil spedely and quickly, do her duty, and work her feate effectually in her place whereas she hath power to conuert actiuely, and chaunge thinges into hir nature, Euen so nature hath power to chaunge meate and foode vnto hir owne proper vertue.Medecin doth chaunge and meate is chaū
                           ged. Therefore note this, that when suche medecines be ministred: if the Pacient should then sleape, at such tyme as the naturall heate beginneth to encrease, then the sayd sleape letteth the vertue & good operetion of the same medecine: resoluing the body into paynful sweat, and attractinge and drawinge humours out of order, makinge the Paciente sicker.
                     Item in as much as Liquide and lighte humours, bee soone dissolued, then it followeth, that the same humours doe eftsoones come to the place of expulsion, Therefore to conclude, if the said Pacient do sleape at that present,

it might then chaunce, that ye medecine would not conuert, or chaūge the humoure, or cast it▪ forth: but rather resolue humours, in the body, which would cause most paynful peril, and noysome sicknes and disease,Why purgations worke not naturally. whyle as the putrifyed matter remaineth stil in the body, not purged. But when as the pacient hath taken but a light supper, he may take pilles, so that the said pilles be new, and the pacient not very fat,One may sleape after pilles, but yet beware of olde dry pilles. for fatte men and women haue small guttes, and pilles may chaunce hurt them. And when we purge hard matter, or humours in the extreame partes of the body, wee minister pilles, But for as much as pilles be harde of resolucion within the body, one may sleape wel vppon them, before they be resolued. For sleape bryngeth inward warmnes: and warmnes▪ maketh resolution, and furdereth the workinge of Pilles, which must take their effect in the extreame partes, as head: handes, and the feete. And thus I say, pilles may be geuen without hurte, whē the pacient goeth to his natural rest and sleape. Prouyded, that in the morning, when they begin to worke,Pilles may be made of al kindes of medecines. then the sayd pacient must sleape no more at that tyme. And note that pilles may be confected, of al kyndes of medecines, and there be pilles geuen before meate, for them which haue euil digestion, called Pilule ante cibum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     SOmetyme it▪ commeth to passe, that in a manner vnaduisedlye, or sodaynlye, the Phisition doth geue a Purgation or Medecine, not considering the complexion of his pacient, therein doth he wel or no I praye you?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THE complexion would be knowen, but when there is no oportunity or leasure to know the complexion, whether it be hoat, cold, moyst, or dry. In this cause let vs vse a preuenting medecine, or an Antidotarie,
                        The obseruation of complexions. whereby wee maye both prepare ye way, and also know whether the matter be hard or softe, to be remoued with the same preuentyng medecine, eyther yea or no: also in this case, let somthinge be ministred before, which may gently resolue the humours, Benedicta laxatiua, stomachicum carthaticum, imperialae. Or els let vs geue to the pacient some gentle pilles, and decoction of Polipodie, Agarice, and Hermodactiles, tempered white wyne, putting thereunto purifyed and cleane hony, and then geue it to the Pacient when it hath stande▪ vntil it come to a residence dooe the same with Polipodye, Esula, sodden in wyne, puttynge in a lyttle Cinamome. For this doth resolue and vnbynde flegme, and Purgeth it well, or else gather solutyue and losynge Herbes: as Mercurye, Beates, Mallowes. &c. seeth them in fatte Porke, puttynge in a little Sene. And in case this lose the sayd Sicke Pacient, if he marke the quantitye of the Euacuacion, or thinges purged, so hee may be contented therewith.
                     
                        If he feele more griefe in the belly, or payne burninge, or noysomnesse: hee may then prepare a stronger, or one weaker, according to his humour, age or tyme of the yeare,To geue medecine in the fit of a Feuer, is perilous. or habite of the body. And in all medecines beware of this, that nothing be taken in the fitte, rigour, terrour, or howre, when the pacient shal be vexed, tossed, or tormented with quotidian, tertian, or quarteine. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        FUrthermore, it cometh to passe as is dayly seene, that there be many feeble stomackes and fearful eies,Weake stomacks cannot a
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           ay with st
                              •
                           ong medecines. that do not onlye abhorre to se medecines. Some for their blacknes to behold, as Cassiafistula, or bitternes in tast, as Hiera picra, or fulsom to smel, as strong pilles: yea, it no lesse greueth thē to behold or see the vessell, in which the pocion is kept in, than to drinke the same pocion, or bitter medecine, contayned within the same. Such bee the weake, feble, nyce, stomackes of many, God knoweth why, for nature hath made them no stronger. For the feble stomacke of a tender Gentlewoman may not bee compared in force, to the boisterous, rough greedy or strong stomack of the Carter. The sight or smel of vyle thinges, doth him as smal displeasure, as the sweete odours, and pleasaunt aspectes, doth hurt the delicious senses of the tenderlings, or carpet muses. I say the barberous vplandish Ienking with torne hose, and clouted bootes, foule shurt, and thredbare bonet, long lockes, and crumpled handes, and gryned, scuruy countenaunce, with gan
                        
                           •
                        lets made of Sorels hyde, armed with a peece of a Motley mantel, bodly charging a long whipstocke, with croppe and laniarde, agaynst Rudde or blynde Baiard: which traile and draw the laden Cart, & bend their backes with continual burdens,Cow, shepe, & plough▪ be our Nurces. rewarded with vnpleasant foode. This vnseemly grome or Carter, driuing his cart, I say, yet is he a child, and feeder of the common wealth, with Cow, sheepe, and plow, in the Clotty fyeld following the share and Culter, after the dreaming steps of the deepe treadinge Oxe: which treadeth on the foote of each pore man in the country. These sillions which vse no Speares▪ but Spades, and fyght their combats with flailes, in solitary Barnes, among the Sheaues, s
                           •
                        ayinge the Mise into the Chaffe,The life of the playne people in the country when Snow and Frost maketh Cowe and Calfe to tremble in couart, and Swyne to lurke in cotte, for feare of the Northren, sharpe cuttyng wynd. Long blacke nightes, and short cold rayning dayes, vncouered naked trees, shrouded with Snow, vnder whom lurke the hongry byrdes. At such tyme as the playne people do spend, consume, and bring to nothing their substaunce among their labouring hyndes, Sōmers fruits, not with out Winters trauell God wotte. If Saturne cast forthe then from his high cold Throne vpon them, hys malicious euill infortunate influence: when hee with Syeth in Hand, and gray Hoary Lockes, doth creepe into the sixt House of the Heauen,
                           Hali de iudicijs A
                                 •
                              rorum pars octaua. Cap. vij,
                         or fallyng angle. Frō whence he poureth forth, sayth Haly among mē gret infyrmities, melancholy, falling euill, madnes, leprosy, quartens, & also euery sycknes yt commeth of coldnes & drines. &c. And dryueth the playne people to theire wits ende, which lacke prouydence,

to forsee and prepare medecine, fitte for their defence, of whom God taketh the onely cure and charge, from an higher place,Psal. cxlvi
                              •
                           . than wheras old Saturnus doth dwel, vppon the symple sort of mortal men: he careth for the straū
                        ger, fatherles, and widow, and opneth his hand, & filleth euery liuing wight with plentiousnes:Psal. cxlv. and is neare vnto them that doth call vpon him faythfully, and there is none of his, that are fallen into any misery, but he seeth their fall, whether it be pouerty, prisonment, exile, care, agonye, affliction, or vexacion of mynd. &c. Then with mercy and pittye hee putteth forth the hand of his prouidence, and lifteth them vp, and helpeth them in the dayes of their carefulnesse, makyng them pleasaunt. Geuing them rest, and quiet sleapes, while as the vngodly, doth remoue their neighbours land marks,Iob. xxiiii. And rob them of their cattell, and by extorcion kepe them from their own, and oppresse the widowe and fatherlesse, makyng them goe naked, yet these people prosper for the tyme, although they murder the symple, But at length the shadow of death shal come vppon them: and they shal goe into horrible darknesse. And thus haue I read in a lamentable booke, of one, who had experience of miseryes infinite. Sicknesse, and sorowes: yea,The end of 
                              〈◊〉
                            wicked men. this Iob was onely sicknes, whose seruaunt I am: and what is the chiefe helpe, or to whom shal I the sicke, p
                           •
                        ore, feble man resort? Euen to him that my maister Iob went vnto Who was that, I pray you? Was it the Chirurgen, Apoticary, or Phisicion? &c. No, no: It was the Almighty God, without whom euery artificer, both in Philosophy and Phisike,God the 
                              〈◊〉
                            Phisicion. their workes take none effect nor any good successe, although they do excel in knowledge, learninge, iudgement, and practice. Therefore I do say, deare friend Health, with the Prophete Dauid, in his Hymne, or Songe: I do lifte vp myne eies vnto the mountaynes, from whence commeth helpe to me? My helpe commeth from ye lord god, which made heauen and earth: and here I do gather,Psalm. if I be sore or sick, weake, or wounded, troubled, or vexed, although I lift vp myne eyes vnto the mountaynes of this worlde, for the health of my body, as to ye best Chirurgians or Phisicions, which as I haue sayd, do excell in knowledge and practice. This is nothing if my helpe come not from heauen, from the fountayne of Phisicke: euen so, for the health and regiment of the soule, when it is sicke. The mountaynes of Sainctes, Angels, and men, can not preuayle, except the very saluation, attonement, health, praise, and quietnes, proceade onely from God, which is verye Salus, that is, health, or Sospes, the health giuer: & vpon him I do onely depend, which dwelleth in Heauen.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        IF he be on your side, who can be against you? Nothinge in Heauen, Earth, or Hell, is able to molest you: if you be vnder the shade of his Winges,Roma. viij. you are safe from all Stormes. I dooe commende youre Godlye zeale, and faythfull affection to Almightye Godwarde: al be it, you seeme vnto me, to wander in this your communication, from the path or line which was layed out straight, betweene you and me,God doth worke by miracle, and meanes. which was the regiment and health only of the body. And you do declare of the miserye of the common people, and of the calamityes: and saye

when they fall sicke, they lacke prouidence and helpe among themselues. but onely God. Marye I saye also onelye God. But howe? That God doth alwayes sende health withoute meane? No: For almightye God doth worke by miracle, and by meane: by miracle as when he raysed the deade, Clensed the Lepre. &c. By meane, when with Claye he opened the Eyes of the Blynde: and with Spattle he caused the Deafe to heare, yea, and commaunded the Apostles to carye Oyle with theym, to heale the Sicke. Whye do you then talke thus, leauyng out this woorde meane? Which is lyke vnto an hande, which worketh for euery thinge, both with out, and within the Bodye. By which meane, the holy Spirit of God is perceyued, as example. The Apostle .i. Corin. xii. Chapiter. The gyft of the spirite is geuen to euery Man, to edify withall. To one is geuen throughe the Spirite the vtteraunce of Wysedome. To an other the vtteraunce of knowledge, by the same spirite. To an other is geuen Fayth, by the same spirite. To an other the giftes of healynge, by the same Spirite. &c. Loe here you see healing is the gift of Gods spirit,The holy Ghost. which is God the holy Ghost And although the gyft of healynge, was plentifullye shewed and powred in, and vppon the holy Apostles, which wrought both with miracles and meanes: Yet it cannot be denayed, but dyuers which had no fayth heauenly, or the gyft of Fayth, yet they had the gyft of healyng. For they be seuerall gyftes of God.
                     
                        Infidelles haue singular giftes of God.
                        Hippocrates▪ Galen. Auicen. &c. had not the gyft of Faith, and were Infidels, beleeued not in God, nor in his sonne Chryste: yet God bestowed vpon thē excellent knowledge of Natural thinges, as appeareth by theire learned Bookes, which be Candels to geue light to Phisitions, to the worlds end, for the incomparable learning and cunning which is written in theym. Thus God hath made the very Infidels, meanes to helpe the Christians, which you may not denay. Neither thinke the playne people to be so ignoraunte, but when they be sicke, they can send to the Phisition, or Chirurgē for helpe: as wel as they wil send to the Mill, to haue theire Corne ground, Or to the Shoemaker for Shoes, to defend theym from goinge barefoote. What would you haue the Carters (as you terme them) so miserable, or wt out wit, or worse then the Dogge: which can licke his wounde, and chose his vomittyng grasse? That should appeare by the fruites of poore men, I meane their children. I pray you, be not mitours set vppon the headdes of Plowmennes sonnes? and do not the children oftentymes, of obscure, skant yomen, and very abiectes, possesse both rych houses and lands, where somtyme their parents would gladly haue serued in the Kitchen? &c. What is ye cause? It should appeare vertue auaunceth, and learning helpeth Exclame not neither bewayle these pore ones estates:Pore men be exalted through vertue. for they can see daye at a little hole, and liue as merye, the olde prouerbe sayth, as whyte B
                           •
                        e in Hyue. I pray you pitty them with measure, vnlesse your large lamentacion should geue occasion, to nourishe Idlenes, nor that men yet shoulde disdayne the poore But who so stoppeth his eare at the cry of the pore: shal cry himselfe and not be heard of God.Math. xxv. Nor also that pore people, should disdayne, murmure,Psal. cxlvii. or speeke euil agaynst thexaltation, or aduauncement of them

whom God hath plucked out of the dust, to be his ministers in the rule of this world. And as for thoppressours, be pacient: for the same god that geueth them preparatiues with warninges, as the plague: wil also geue them a purgation, and expulse them from hym, except they do repent. For gather they neuer so much, beware the third heire of an extorcioner, and oftentymes he doth not enioy his goods himselfe. For Salomon sayth: Haer
                              •
                           ditas ad quam festinatur in principio, in nouissimo benedictione carebit:Prouer. xx. The heritage yt commeth to hastely at the fyrst, shal not be blessed at the ende. And in an other place, sayth he, who so hordeth vp riches,Sodaine gotten substaunce remaineth not longe. with the disceiptfulnesse of his tongue: he is vayne, and a Foole, and lyke vnto them that seke theire owne death, this is their end. Therfore, my brother disquiet not thy mynd, content thee in thine estate: kepe thyne owne goods, spend them to Gods glory, desyre none other mannes.L
                              ••
                            no man be angry with an othe
                              •
                            mans folly. And when thou dost see the wicked in great prosperity, disdayne them not: neyther fret thy selfe, thou hast nothing to do with them, but to make accomptes for thyne own selfe: and be not forgetful of the Prophetes wordes when he sayd: Noli emulare in malignantibus. &c. that is: Fret not thy selfe, because of the vngodly, neyther be thou enuious agaynst the euil doers, for they shal be cut downe lyke grasse▪ and be withered euen as the greene herbe. Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and bee doyng good, that thou mayst dwel in the Land, and verily thou shalt bee fed. Delight thou in god, and he shal 
                           ••
                        ue thee thy hartes desyre.He which loueth God, shal haue hartes rest. Commit thy way vnto the Lord, and put thy trust in him and he shal bring it to passe. &c If thou art troubled in thy mynd resort vnto his holy word: and ministers for the soule. And whereas thou art sicke,
                           Ecclesiast.
                         and sore in body dispyce not his ordinary means, but honoure ye Phisition, because of infyrmity: the almighty hath created him for yt purpose, yt through the vertue of Phisicke, thy name may be chaunged from Sicknesse into Health. I therfore wil now cease, & giue place vnto the Diuines, and Morall men, which with tounge and pen can geue good counsayle, and heauenlye Cordialles for the sicke, sore, afflicted spirite.
                     And now to the fyrst part of your question conserninge Phisicke, which is the race wherein we begunne to runne. Let vs nowe come agayne into that playne path, hold on stil, & then we shal the sooner come to our waies end. And then syt vs down, and rest vs quiet
                           •
                        y a Gods name: for rest is an Image of Heauen, after laboure. Your question was thus of them whiche do abhorre the syght, or smelling of medicin, being ready to vomit also, to behold the vesselles, wherein medecine was giuen: to that question you answeared your selfe. The cause was, the stomacke doth abhorre those thinges that offend the sences, as in seing, smelling. &c. (But in dede our sence of smellyng is worse then any other liuing beastes, as Aristotle sayth in his booke of sences: Odoratum peiorem habemus quam alia animalia. Furder sayth he,
                           Aristo. in libro de Sens.
                         man only doth smel and take delight in the odours of flowers or sweet thinges: Euen so doth his nature abhorre stinking thinges But speciallye they which bee cleane of Nature, or by accidentes. And this is knowen by natural Philosophy, and Phisicke: and wheras the Philosopher doth leaue there the Phisition doth begin. Although there be many secrete hidden desyres

within nature, knowen onely to the same, and hydden from ye Phisition:Nature hath manye hidden desyres, vnknowen to the Phisitions. As example, some women beyng wt child, desyre Tarre, yea, I haue seene them eate Sope, and hurt them not, with other vyle thinges, that I wil not name. Without nature had led them, death would f
                           •
                        llow: yet Phisicke compteth them deadly. These bee the secrete hidden thinges with in nature.) But now to the question.
                     When nature is so weake and feeble, that it doth lose and abhorre, to see or smell medecine: the best remedy is thus, that you geue laxatiue Claret, made after this maner.
                     
                        Medecines for feble stomacks to purge gētlyR. Cleane Claret, or white li, x. of Polipodie, Hony, ana. li. ii. Agarik ℥.ii Cinamon, Cloues, Spicknard, Ginger, Galingall, ana. ℥.i of Peper ℥.iii. First make it thus: temper the clarifyed Hony with wyne and draw it through a Colander, and stampe the Polipodie, and strongly strayne it, and seeth it to the third part, and beat your spice into pouder, and put them into abagge made of a peece of a serce or bulter then put your tempered wine, Hony, and iuice of Polipodie, togeather, put in your bagge with spice, and seeth all in a closse vessel wel Tinned, and strayne your bagge oftentymes. And then receiue this drinke, and geue a draught to your weake, feble, stomacke, according to your strength. And for Hony you may put in cleane Sugar, and to your spices, you may put to Sene. ℥.iii. And when you drinke of this, you must drinke cleane cold water, or runninge water after it. Nowe syr if you wil restrayne, or stop the body, when it is to much laxatiue: or draweth nature to vehemently. Then giue hoate water to drinke, and this is both pleasaunt, and profitable to nature, although to many it seme vnpleasaunt. Thē take spices in pouders, according to the property of the humour, or complex
                        
                           •
                        on, which ought to bee purged, puttyng the water and the sayde spices wt a little Sugar, into a closse vessel of glasse and seeth it in a vessel of water. Prouided, that the sayd vessel of Glasse be wrapped in Haye, or els stande in a playne stillitory, making a good fyre vnder the same, and then you maye take it forth, after it be well and closse sodden, and strayned. And eyther receiue it your selfe, or els geue it to others. But if it bee bitter, put in more sugar into the same, to please youre stomacke. The more spice you do take▪ the more vertue it hath for the melancholy, or flegmatike.
                     Item you maye dooe thus, take a meane quantitye of Elleborus albus, chopped small with a cuttinge knife, seeth it with Barley, with cleane Water, into a thicknesse. Then feede an Hen eyght dayes, with the same Corne, and Elleborus, and at eyghte Dayes ende, kyll the same Henne, and seethe it, and put in no Salte but Croomes of Bread and Sugar, and drynke thys broth. Put in Manna if you will, and eate the flesh of the same Henne, and it will purge the same, without anye molestation or hinderaunce to Nature, I assure you, and that I haue prooued. Euen so haue a greate nomber proued,
                           Elleborus albus, the poysō therof. 
                        Ell borus albus, to theire greate hurt, and perill of death by vomittinnge, yea, almost expyring among the Dogge Leches, and murderers. But beware of them, and then thou shalt be called Health, and no more sicknesse, by Gods grace.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes.
                     IS there no consideration to be had, in the ages of Men, or Women? may the medecine giuer, geue hand ouer heade, to the tender Childe, middle age, and old men, all a lyke without hurt to theym: I woulde fayn know, what to do in this case. For in the countrey, the medecine that is giuen to a woman, of .xxiii yere olde: is also giuen to a man of xlvi. yere olde.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        YEs surely, diuersity of age must be considered, in the ministracion of medecines laxatiue. For purging or relaxing medecines be geuen to sondry sortes of ages: as to boies,Men, women & childrē must take medicines according to their strength and age, springaldes, Lusty yong men, and to the aged. Euen so to Womenkynde in their degree of ages, euerye one of these hath his or their proper purgation. As Manna of Calabria to yong thinges, and the same to olde folkes: or els some gentle solutiue medecine, and to women with childe, no laxatiue medecine, vntil the v. moneth be past: and then put gentle ones, as Cassia, Manna, or the syrupe of Roses solutyue, Euen so she may haue some Sene of Alexandria, their leaues sodden closse in broth of a Chicken, or Mutton within a couered, earthen or Tinned potte. Also suppositours may be gyuen to these foresayd folkes, that be excepted in purgacions. And furthermore, with discrecion, the aged may receiue a gentle Glister: because the sayde aged be grieued with corruption of the raynes, bladder, and guttes. For if children bee purged much, because the humour is light: they shall be in daunger of their liues. And liuing, the sayd purgations wil make wretched. alter the complexion, and expulse the natural moysture, whereupon they should encrease and grow. As we see yong children hauing laxes, be wretched, leaue, swelled bellyes, crampe, and conuultion. &c. The aged also in such, shal lose moisture of blood, and fall into melancholy, drynes, feblenes, lacke of sleape, & consumption, through resoluyng of a strong laxinge medecine. But yet to them which be not in extreames, eyther of age or sicknes: ther be many gentle resolutions, or clensynges of humours, and may be geuen without daū
                        ger. As Reubarbe infused in Cichory water, or the water of milke, and Mirobalans. But by the way of Parenthesis, let euery minister of medecine feare to geue any thing that doth, or wil dry the body, or bodyes to much, of yonge or old men: yea, or in the middle age, specially of cholerick men. As example, I did know one, beyng then a yong practicioner, seuen yeres past who did minister a Purgation wherein was Scammonye, vnto a righte worshipful, and a famous Knight,Beware of drying medecines in Sommer for cholericke persons. called syr Robert Wingfeeld of Lethingham, which 
                           •
                        ft soones gaue him twenty stooles. The cause was as I suppose now, this Scammony was not prepared accordingly: and also the pacient Cholericke, and then partly weake of nature, before the receite of the sayde naughty purgation. Therfore looke diligently to al that I haue sayde before: marke the tyme of the yeare, the age, quality, and complexion of the pacient. The Region or dwelling place, the goodnes, quantity, and mixture

of your medecine. &c. and then you shal do no harme, nor play the ignorant murderer.
                     Now agayne to our matter, neither purge yong children nor old men in the heate of Sommer,A cauiat for Sommer. and if you wil needes do so, then you shal bee commenced Doctor of Phisicke, wearing William Sommers hud for your labour, which wil bring you to no small estimation. So trimly to sette the cart before the horse, and to play blynde Bayard yourselfe: therfore be warned, or you be reproued, or ashamed. For in the heat of Sommer, resolutiō of humours, is quickly made with purgation after which, ensueth euacuacion to much aboundantly, to the vtter hurt of nature. Yong▪ lus
                           •
                        y, or sickly persons, may be purged at any tyme: so the sayd purging doe agre to the time, and the complexions And they may take more of the purgations, than the children or old people may, because of their strength. But yet the springe tyme is best, and ye Dogges dayes worst to purgacion: but sicknes cōmeth at al tymes, and must at al tymes be diligently watched for, as a Thiefe that wil steale away the most precious thing called lyfe, which is oure best iewel through the venim of death. But yet death finisheth and maketh an end of euery matter, and of euery personne good and badde. Before whose battle be fought we liue but vncertaynly: although we flatter our owne selues. For happines is not common to euery liuing creature: but lyfe and death be common to euery liuing thing. As Aristotle sayth in the boke of life and death Vita & mors sunt communia omnibus animalibus, And life is but dwellyng of the soule and body togeather for a tyme. And in the meane season, clouted and patched vp, with meate, drinke, cloth, sleepe. And when life is in peril, then helpe Phisicke, Phisicke, I pray you helpe: we be afrayd to die godly because we haue liued wickedlye. I praye god this Caroll bee not to common, yea, or rather, there bee manye dooe so liue, that they feare no punishmente or Hel, after this life, doo they neuer so wickedlye. Excluding God cleane out of their hartes, or rather God refusynge theym for their wickednes, There is a Psalme wherein Dauid lamenteth, the wretched estate of fooles, saying Dixit insipiens in corde suo, non est Deus. The folish man hath sayd in hart, there is no God, Would God that there wer few of them. Oh Sicknes, Sicknes, although thou sekest Health, and parhappes mayst obtayne it: yet thou shalt once chaunge this lyfe, and see an other World, and also God, for no man can see him perfectly before death, nor be saued, which in this lyfe, beleeueth not in hym.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        YOur conclusion, although it did not belonge to your Exordium, is yet very Godly: I pray God graunt vs to be his, and to forsake sin Wherby we shal so quiet our consciences, that when our arriual shalbe into the next land: we feare not our Passage, or iourney from hence thither, for awaye we muste. But in the meane tyme the Image of deathe is to all Fleshe so fearefull, that Menne woulde be gladde to 
                           〈◊〉
                         helpe and comforte Life, both manne and beaste, do vndoubtedly

feare death, nature hath taught one beast to be in dreade of an other, the shepe to be afrayed of the Wolfe: the Dere of the Dog?Nature hath prepared that one creature dreadeth and feareth an other. the smal byrdes of ye Hauke. And if they escape woundes curable, ther be medecines, yea nature hath taught dyuers beastes, and fowles to helpe themselues, muche more man should do the same. We therfore thanke God for his grace, that he hath geuen vs reason: which other liuing beastes haue not, whiche do excel vs almost in all other thinges, ioyned to their natures. As the Unicorne to haue an horne, to withstand poyson. The Lyon voyd of dreade. The horse strong and swift. The shepe whose cast coate, makeh vs aparel. The birds to flye, wheras no man can clime the way. The fysh to swim, where as no man dare folow them▪ &c. But only reason I say▪ What maketh vs els superiours to beasts? Nothing Wel take that away, and then we be the most vilest, and the worst: & can least helpe our selues, of any other liuing things vppon the Earth: as appeareth by the folish, or madde people, or els young babes. They be in shape and licknes, as we be. And why are they so miserable? Because reason is not there, which should gouerne them, and this is a lamentable case, deare Health, to see so goodlye Images, lackynge theire principal beauty and gouernment called reasō. Like shippes without their helmes, subiect to euery hurt and storme: except the prouidence of almighty God, their only defence watched thē. Els should they perish sodaynly, in the mouing of an hand, as God doth know: And because God hath geuen reason, by which artes are perceiued, and good things, from the bad, ye sicke from the whole, and foolishnes from wysedome. Els, how shouldest thou haue shewed me reasonably, the natures of medecines, complexions, age, tyme, place, quality, and quantity, &c. And therfore to the matter, in my last question I demaunded of the age of men and women, to whom medecine shoulde bee ministred, I haue in that case receiued myne answeare, for which I geue you harty thankes, for your curtesye, and great gentlenes: specially for your reuerent and godly zeale, wherein you do neither smell of the Papistes, which are the mother of al disobedience to Princes, and the springe of errours: nor of them, which be of no religion. But some do say, it is better to bee of one euil religion then of none at all. Now syr I pray you, after our diuersity of ages, what do you say to the varietye of complexion, in geuing purging medecine?
                  
                  
                     Health
                     
                        ALL is in vayne, deare frend, if we do forget the temperament, or complexions of men, or womē. You therfore do very wel in calling them to remembraunce: for one complexion, can not bare so much as an other in purging. No more then a little weake boye, or younge Ladde can beare as heauy a burden, as a great lubber which is sturdy and stronge to labour. Wee therfore giue more a purging medecine, to the flegmatike body than to the cholericke, and yet more to the melancholy, then to the flegmatike. Why so? Because melancholy is an harder humour, then the flegme is:

and humidity, or moisture, more aboundeth in the flegme, then in the melancholy,Purge flegme mo
                              •
                           e than chol
                              •
                           r▪ and melancholy more thē 
                           
                              •••
                           gme. As example. Therfore when you wil geue Scammonye, to anye cholerick person, geue him a peny weight, to the flegmatike, twoo P
                           •
                        nye weight: but to the melancholy, geue three peny weight, For a cholerik mā must haue but little geuen him. The cause is, the sayd choller is hoate and dry: and if he should take as much Scammony, as the melancholy, it wold inflame him, and rather consume the pure naturall humiditye, then purge the noysome fylthy humour, which is the cause of the sicknesse. For the slender man,Choleris sone
                              •
                           drye▪ ther
                              •
                           ore purge but litle 
                              〈◊〉
                            the fleshy body hath much moysture, the
                              •
                           fore purge more. Of the quantity o
                              •
                            matter to be purged. may byde worst a quick purgation: as on the other part, the more fleshy, I meane flesh, and not grosse fatnes, the more he may abyde a good strong euacuacion, or stronge medecine, by the reason they haue the more moysture and humidity than the sayd cholericke haue.
                     Furthermore, as concerning matter to be purged, somtyme it is muche and at other tymes, it is scarce, or of little quantity. Therfore the medecine. must be geuen accordingly somtyme much, and somtyme little, smal matter is dispatched with small medecine, Except it bee wrapped, compacted, and thrust togeather: and then a preparatiue must be geuen, and after purged. But wheras much matter is, ther it doth require a greter medecine, notwt
                        standing,Much humoure must be purged by little and little, & not at once. it ought not to be euacuated al at once, but by litle and little, & by tymes if so be it be in the extreame partes of the Body, as the head, hands and feete, be the extreame partes.
                     And in this case. we haue ye noble famous prince of phisicions, for a witnes how this matter should be handled, in the best maner saying: Nam secundum multum est repente euacuare, siue replere, fallax est, & omni
                              •
                           o inimicum naturae. That is to say, to make a large or a quicke euacuation. or purging: Replexion, or fylling, is a disceitful thyng and an vtter ennemy to nature. Therefore beware of extremity in all thinges, and vse the meane and best way, a gods name, what els haue you to say?
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     I Haue almost forgotten, how to receiue Moiste, or hard Medecines: it would pl
                           •
                        ase me very muche, and not displease you a littl
                           •
                         y
                           •
                        t agayne to put mee in remembraunce. For Sicknes God knoweth, is forgetfull Ferendum est imbecilitas hominis. The weakenes or feblenes of man is to be born withall. Good syr should they be geuen hot, or cold What say you to the matter?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TO the healthful, liquide or moist medecines, be giuen cold: & to the sicke persons,Cold medecines to the whole, but warme to the weake must be geuen. they should bee geuen warme, because the vertue of the medecine shal in them lose, deuyde and expulse matter, whan the sayde medecine standeth in the stomacke or guttes: whiche in the whole bodies, the pocion or medecin wil take his effect in good part, & this must be done at Mornynge. The harde medecine, as I haue sayd at Euening moist, as pilles: l
                           •
                        zi
                           •
                        gs after midnight. Pouders at none in broth, clari
                           •
                        ied posse
                           •
                         ale at eueninge. And why be pilles giuē at Night? Because a mā may Sleape well after theym. What doth Sleape then preuayle? Because sleape maketh the Bodye warme within, and Pilles be verye harde: and therfore they must bee resolued with warmnesse. To what maner of menne.

To them, whych haue the riche mens sicknes. What is that? Forsothe the goute, whych many gentlemen be tormented wythall: as example. Syr Rychard Fulmerston knyght, Barthram Anderson Esquyre. &c.The Goute loue
                              •
                           h riche men, but is afrayd of poore 
                              〈◊〉
                           . For the Goute is sore afrayde to dwell among poore men: for they keepe hym so hardly, and punysh him wyth colde, and labour. &c. But the bitterest pilles of all in ward medicines, do fardest pearce to the hands and feete, to purge and heale them. And in the feete the Goute is placed: therefore pilles bee good for the Feete. Who can denay it, whych I haue spoken?
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     AFter purgations, oftentimes it happeneth, that the Pacient falleth into a Feuer, called Ephemera febris, or a light Ague: whych may doe more hurt to nature, if it bee not helped quickly. What is the cause I pray you tell mee?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        TRuly, there do oftentymes chaunce, sutch euill accidents after purgations, through sundry causes.Of ouermuch purging the body, the reamedy to helpe the same. As sometime by to mutch euacuacion, clensing, or purging. Whereupon the Spirites cause vnnaturall heate, and thereof insueth an vnnatural flaming or heate called an Ephemeral, and lykewyse it chaunceth by ouermutch eatinge or drinking, as of Wyne. &c. and also by colde or by attraction of ouer many humoures to the stomacke, or the lacke of the quantity of medicine, whych hath no vertue or strength to be purged, but remaineth stil in the stomack, and thereby doth continue putrifed, hurting the body & making a feuer: if thys do chaunce, then put the Pacient into a Bath, if hee bee able. And let there be made a good fyre, or hoat house, for thys Pacient, and anoynt him before & behinde wyth Vnguentum dialthea, or els wyth Vnguentum Martiaton and bryng him close wyth clothes, from the balne or Bathe to hys Bed, & keepe hym from sleape eyght houres: and so shall he be dispatched cleane, and made whole, being purged agayne▪ to clense the inward partes, as the stomack. &c. But if ye Pacient bee to weake to come to the Bathe: refresh him in his Bed, wyth holsome suppings. Keepe hym warme, in a sweete chamber, and then geue hym an easy laxatiue, of drawen Cassiafistula. ℥.j. wyth water of Borage. ℥.iij. or els wyth sweete Calabria Manna. ℥.ss. And often it chaunceth, that Men are dry after purging, then geue them small Ale clene brued, or P
                           •
                        isane, or els cleane colde water, Gumme Arabicke, & Dragantum bee sodden. And to gargarisme these thynges in his mouth and Throate: and to put Prune stones in colde water, and chafe theym wyth the Tongue vp and downe in hys Mouth, and so renue theym still. And keepe the mouth, Teeth, and tongue cleane wyth washing, clensing,To coole the mouth. & scraping: and this shall comfort the sicke Man. Whych els shalbe corrupted, defiled, and so anoyed, that it shalbe as paynfull to himselfe, as hugely, and noysome to the beholders of the sayd sycke Man or Pacient.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     WEll, then I doe perceyue, that thys shoulde suffice to helpe theym, whych be not well purged before: and also to coole theym, in theyr greate thyrst and drynesse.
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        NO not so: it is not sufficient to quenche. For, fyrst you must vnderstand, the occasion of thys thyrst: fyrst that it cūmeth of hoat choller not purged, of whych I speake not. But when the body is well purged of dry, yea, or of moyst humours, then lackinge moystnes, it must needes followe, drinesse wyll eftsoones ensue. Then we giue water, where in the foure cold seedes, gum Arabike, gum Dragagantum, and crūmes of breade haue bin sodden: drawen through a strayner, thys is giuen bloud warme. Now syr, there is a drynesse, as I haue sayde, which when it cōmeth, declareth the body is well purged, as some men suppose. But therein I take, that they do mistake the wordes of Hippocrates: Quicunque in pharmacijs purgantur,
                        
                           Hippocrates.
                         
                        non fitiunt: non quiescūt, donec sitiunt: non enim semper bonam purgationem significat: that is: Who so euer be purged, & thyrst not, the paciēt taketh no rest, vntil they do thyrst: this doth not alway signify, the purging to be good. Take this for an exāple. One called Beumayne▪ hath a pletorike body that is a body ful, or replenished with grosse humors, aboundauntly compact together thys grosse body must be purged: wel, he taketh a purgacion by Electuarie,
                        Example. it worketh vpon Beuman. Now if he feele hymself very dry, wt a great thyrst, desiring to drynk after fyue, sixe, or seuen stooles: what is thys, a sygne good, or bad? No it is an euill signe, and is proued thus: cholerike or dry humours be attract, and drawen vp into ye stomacke, and therefore they are not expulsed. Whereof there ryseth a hoat and a dry flegme, smoake, or vapour, into the throate, and spyritual partes: causing the thyrst a foresayd.How to know whether Choller be purged, or no. What reamedy for thys grosse body, then I pray you? None other, but wyth speede to giue him an other laxatiue medicide, to purge the sayd choller, and dry matter, & then the thyrst wil soone, or quickly cease. And so in the end, he shalbe better purged of ye grosnes of humours, perhaps than clensed frō ye corruption of euil condicions. For a bodily medicine cā smally preuayl, or take any effect, in ye Regiment of the Mynde or Soule. Also, if sutch a grosse body as I haue named, whych is called Pletorike, do waxe dry or thrifty, after .xij.xvj. yea or .xx. stooles: thē is not haot Choller alone in the stomacke, but in all the members of the body. Purge him still wyth gentle Electuaries, by little and little, vntill hee feele moysture in hys Throate, and that mutch. And to conclude, whosoeuer being grosse, and very drye, before hys Purgation, is sycke of the Feuer quotidian, or tercian: the same must be purged, in the same maner, as I haue sayd before·What harme Wyne doth in a feuer, or after purging. But the leane cholerike man, is soone purged, & when he is dry: let hym take his reamedy, as is a foresayd, a Gods name. It happeneth also oftentimes, that the pacient cannot away wyth colde Water: yea and vnknowen to the Phisicion, the sayd Pacient drynketh Wyne, to hys great daunger, hurte, and perill: for thereof followeth hoat inflamacion, and torment wyth paynes in the belly. If thys doe happen, then with speede prouoke Uomit, wyth drynking warme water, and Sallet oyle, thrusting a Fether into the Throate, or a Fynger as farre as it may go, & so Uomit. Thys helpeth, but doe it speedely, my good friende, for sundry causes, to auoyde sutch daunger, as els would followe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes
                     ONe question I wyll aske you, bycause, cause mooueth me so to doe. I haue taken oftentymes Purgacions, and as the Physicion hath sayd, they were excellent good, well compounded, newe, the quantity, place, and tyme conuenient, to receyue them. But to conclude, they would not woorke accordingly. What is to be sayd therein, I pray you tell mee?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        DOth cause, cause you to mooue thys question to me?Certayn causes which le
                              •
                            medicine to woorke. I wyll shew you three sundry causes, whych let the medicine to make euacuation, or woorkyng. The fyrst cause may be, by the reason the purgation is to weakely made: els the dosse or quantity is to little, whych remayneth to the hurt of the body vnpurged. The second cause may be, that the body is to mutch colde, and subiect to melancholy, as me thyncke youres is. The thyrde cause is, the resol
                           •
                        cion or wasting of humours, doth extinguishe or quenche the vertue of ye laxatiue medicine:Example o
                              •
                            Waxe & Fyr
                              •
                           
                         as it happeneth sometyme in the Phlegmatike bodyes In whom, when soeuer the phleume beginneth to dissolue, eftsoones and by and by it quencheth, euen as Waxe wyll sometyme quenche a burninge Charcoale, when it is melted vpon it. And bycause grosse humours are resolued, and cannot be expulsed: then there followeth an importable dolour,Signes of death through purging the body. and a myghty torment about the stomacke, and intrailes. And in ye ende, sutch soluciō, or none other, but a manyfest signe, or peril of death to folow.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     MAry, thys is a poynct next the worst, & an extreme case: it is hygh tyme for a man to be wyse, and to looke diligently to hys Pacient, now, or els neuer. God help, what reamedy?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THE best reamedy is thys, when sutch perill approacheth, wyth the strength of Mens handes,When the Pacient is in perill ye reamedy to help him. take vp the Pacient warmely wyth clothes folded about him, not hard, boysterous, or cōberous about ye sayd pacient. But diligēt, quicke, easy, & trim: and bryng him into a hoat Stophe, or Bathe. Or hauing none sutch, thē prepare a very good fyre, as they terme it, made of Charcoale, if you may: and then anoynt hys backe bone, wyth the Oyles of Camomill. Capers, and Roses. And then anoynte the Belly, breast, and Sydes wyth ye same: then put a warme Tyle stone, in a double linnen clothe, and apply it very warme to the Belly. Wherefore is thys done? To the ende that the naturall heate may be made strong: and also that thereby, the medicine may be excited, stirred, or moued to expulse,A Clister t
                              •
                            molify the bely in the tim
                              •
                            of daunger. and do his feate. Now if thys mooue him not to go to the stoole, then giue him a moli
                           •
                        ying Clister, made with Mallowes, Mercury, Polipodie, Agarike, brayed & sodden in water strayned, and mingle ye decoction wyth oyle of Olyue. & put in a litle Hiera picra simplex thereunto. But if Euphorbium be in medicines, as in a Clister, it wil excoriate the skin of the Guttes, & cause

a bloudy fluxe to runne forth: it is also helped this way, as to drynke Oyle, and warme water, or els the far broth of Porke a Ladlefull, wherein .xii. of Alzarabaca leaues, the iuice of them be strayned▪ and drynke this, it wyll prouoke vomites,A good note to be obserued when nature is weake. rather to helpe, than hynder the body. If the pacient feele no dolour aboundantly in the Guttes, then purge not mutch, vnlesse mutch purgyng, wherein Scamonie is, do cleaue to the stomacke. But if sutch thynges chaunce, giue the Pacyent to drynke, water of Mirrhe. It is often times seene,In Ellebor
                              •
                           s you shall know how to correct the same, folio. 19. Simplici. He meaneth Elleborus albus.
                         that when medicine beginneth to worke within the body, in the way of purging: then Nature is so weake, that it cannot take his effect, as it should doe accordingly: and by the meanes thereof the sayd medicine remayneth, chokyng the stomacke, and neyther commeth vpward, neyther downeward. What is then the best remedy to be vsed: None other,
                           ʒ.ss. but to follow Hippocrates, whych sayth: Elleborus mouit corpus▪ &c. Elleborus moueth the body. Therefore: let the body 
                           •
                        e moued therewyth, in drinke halfe a dragme, whych is corrected in a Raddish roote: and so vomite wyll follow, but walke still in the close house, and take no winde. And so ye Medicine shalbe dispersed, and vanysh through vomites and sweate, in vehement mouyng of the body. Now if he can not walke, let hym syt, but sleepe not: and then after three howers, gyue hym Oxicatarticum imperiale, saccarum violaceum. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     
                        Extreames be perilous thinges.LIke as some men, in them medicine wyll skant worke: in other Men, medicine doth so mutch worke, that it wyll not cease, vntyll it haue (almost, yea, or altogether) slayne the body: what helpe for them then?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THere be two wayes, Death, or Lyfe. If the body bee deade,Death is the ende of Life. there is no remedy▪ no medicine, no counsayle, nor comfort, to call it agayne. But pacience, and farewel, wel, we shall all folow in the end of our lyues, when wee haue run our race. Therefore, bury hym that is deade, let hym rest in peace, and cease from sorrow. But vnto the liuyng that is in hope of cure,The causes why medicine worke immoderately. if hys medicine be to violēt, cruell, and daungerous, causing flixes: consyder the fault is in the Phisicion, which hath gyuen to sharpe a purgacion, or in the vnwyse Pacient, whych wyll not keepe the house wyth a cloase stoole, but sytteth in the Winde abroade in the Ayre, Yarde, or Garden. &c. Or else in the vndiscretion of the Apothicarye puttyng in to mutch Scamony, or thys may be the cause: the aptnes of humours prepared to expulsion, as it chaunceth often to Chyldren that haue repletion wyth hoate humours. And after purgacion, excoriation or scaldyng of the Guttes doeth follow, whych is no small daunger to nature. Therefore to withstand thys, we stop the flixe with Planten Water, or water wherein Planten, Bursa pastoris, and Comphorie are sodden, with Bolearmony, Gum Arabick, & tower plumbes &c· or we minister Almond milke with Rice, &c. or Clisters stopping, as appeareth in the

compounded Medicines, here before: also comfort the pacyent with Diacodion, syrupe of Myrttels, or of Quinces with warme anoynting the pacients belly and his backe agaynst the warme fier,A plaster for the flixe. wyth cleane clarifyed Hony. Now you shall perceyue a bloudy flixe by the payne in the belly, and powring forth bloud, and scrapyng lyke Leather. Well do as I haue sayed before, and apply a plaster of Barly bread crommed into stronge Uineger, and apply it to the Belly:Tenasmus what it is, and how to h
                              •
                           lpe it. and gyue hym to drynke the foresayed Sirupes or Planten Water, wherein the flowers of Pomgranets or Mulberies haue ben sodden in. &c. And giue him Diacodion, euery night to bedward, and in the nyght also. Mary there is a perillous gryefe in the Belly called Tenasmus, hauyng a wyll or desyre to go to the stoole, and yet cannot voyde or purge any thynge at all: this commeth of the acuitie or sharpnes of the medicine or els of the ouersyght of the Pacient: let the Pacient therefore, sit ouer Apozemate or Decoction of Pomegranet Flowers, barkes, or rindes of Pomegranets, Knotgrasse, Roses, Coriander, Peache leaues, Planten, Oke leaues, or the water wherein Mulberies haue bene sodden, Acatia, and Hipoquistis, and Quinces, beaten together and sodden, and the pacient to sit warme and close therein, and to drynke Diacodion, puttyng in a little pouder of Saffron, to comfort the heart.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        YOu say this is a good remedy for the flixe. It often tymes chaunceth, that a man after sutch torments in the belly can not be without mutch noysomnes in the stomacke: and when the stomacke is anoyed, how is it helped, or with what Medicine?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        LIke as ye earth is the mother and nourish of euery liuing thyng, and feedeth all creatures good and bad:The Earth is mother of euery liuing thing. so is ye stomacke the storehouse or Kitchen, whych doth nourish both the members and euery part of the Body, noble and vnnoble: as the heart whych is the king within the body, and to all the subiect members in order, the place from whence they all be fed is onely the stomacke, whych must be kept cleane, as a pure Uessell, and must not be offended, grieued or anoyed, but nourished, fortifyed and pleased: now if it haue lost appetite through lothsomnesse,How to quicken the stomacke. anoynt the same with oyle of Maces or of Wormewood, & apply Galen his proper Plaster to the stomack, and drink the tart sirupe of Pomgranets, or wyth sower Grapes with grosse Peper therin, and giue the pacient in hys sauce the iuice of Mints, and of Parsely, put in Ginger and Suger: whan hee hath eaten his meate, giue the said pacient sirupe of Roses & Diarodon, and this shal help his stomack wt moderate drinking. And keeping ye body from sweating heat▪ & quaking cold, vse temperāce only,Extreame heat and cold be euyll. for ye meane diet is best of al. And who so doth vse it, shal neuer fal into ye snares of surfits or sicknes.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THe chiefe thing that I had thought to haue demaunded, and the very marke, that I would haue thee to sh
                           •
                        te at, is to tell me some thinge of dieting my self with meate and drinke, in Health and Sickenes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Health,
                     
                        THere is to be considered, in eating, and drynking, the tyme of hunger,A consideracion in eating and drinkinge to bee had and of the variety of meates. and custome of the place of eating, and drynkinge, whether it be cold or hoat. Also the tyme of ye yeare, whether it be Winter, or Summer: also the age or complexion of ye eater, and whether he bee whole, or sicke: also the thynges whych be eaten, whether they be Fyshe, or Fleshe, Fruicts, or Herbes. Note also the Complexions, and temperamentes of the sayde meates, hoat, or colde, dry, or moyst, and most chiefly marke the quantity, & so forth. And lyke as Lampes doe consume the Oyle, whych is put vnto them, for the preseruation of the lyght, althought it cannot continue for euer: So is the naturall heate, which is wythin vs, preserued by humidity, and moystnes of bloud & phlegme, whose chiefe engender, be good meates and drynkes.A cause why the Soule departeth from the bod. As Auicen sayth, de ethica. When natural heate is quenched in the body, then of necessity, the soule must depart from the Body. For the workeman cannot woorke, when hys Instruments are gone: so the spyrites of lyfe can haue no exercise in the body, when there is no Naturall heate to worke vppon. Wythout meate sayth Galen, it is not possible for a man to lyue eyther whole, or sicke: and thus to conclude, no vitall thynge lyueth wythout refection, and sustenaunce. Whether it be animall, reasonable as man, or animall, as brute Beasts, without reason, as Tree, Gum, Mettall, Stone, Herb, or any vitall thing insensibly. All these thynges be nourished with the influence, or substaunce of the foure Elementes.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     Truely thou knowest well my Complexion, and disorder of my dyet, what reamedy for me, that haue lyued wythout order of Dyet?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        I Knowe it well, thou art phlegmatike: and therefore it is long,To eate bothe fish & flesh together hurteth the flegmaticke. or thy meate be digested. When thou dost eate fyshe & flesh together, it doth corrupt in thy stomacke, and styncke: euen so doth hard Cheese, & colde fruicts. And olde poudred meates, and rawe herbes, ingender euill humours: so that diuersity of quantity, & quantity of diuers meates, do bryng mutch payne to ye stomack, and engender many diseases, as thou mayst reade in the fyrst booke of Galen:
                        
                           Galen. Hippocrates.
                         
                        de Iuuamentis membrorum. cap. iiij. And the Prynce himselfe sayth, in. iij. pri. doc. ij. cap. vij. saying nothing is more hurtfull, than dyuers meates, to be ioyned together. For whyle as the last is receyued, the fyrst beginneth to disgest. And when the table is garnished wyth dyuers meates some roasted, some fryed, and baked, some warme, some colde, some Fyshe, some fleshe,To feede of dyuers sortes of me
                              •
                           es corrupteth the body. wyth sundry fruicts, and Sallets of dyuers hearbes, to please thyne Eye: Remember wyth thy selfe, that the sight of thē all, is better than the feeding of them all. Consider wyth thy selfe, thou art a Man and no beast, therefore be temperate in thy feeding, and remember the wyse woordes of Salomon:
                           Eccle. 37. be not greedy in euery eating, and be not hasty vpon all meates.

For excesse of meates, bryngeth Sicknes, and Glottony commeth at the last, in to an vnmeasurable heate. Through surfet hath many one perished,Good d
                              •
                           e
                              •
                            prolongeth Lyfe. but he that dyeteth hymselfe temperately, prolongeth hys lyfe. Therefore grosse Fyshe, Lambes fleshe, and the Inwardes of beastes, rawe herbes, Pygges braynes, and all slimy meates, be euill for thee: but late suppers be worst of all, specially if they bee long, for they cause paynfull Nights to follow. But Galen sayth in hys booke Di euchimia, the meates whych bee wythout all blame, be those whych be betweene subtile, and grosse. Good bread of cleane wheate, fleshe of Capons, or Hennes, Fesantes,What kyndes of meats doth cause good bloud. and Partriches, Pigeons, and Turtell Doues, Blacke byrdes, & small field byrdes, roasted Ueale, and Mutton: These doe engender good bloud, sayth Galen. Note also, that any other meate, that thou dost eate at supper, although it seeme repugnaunt to a phlegmaticke stomacke, if thou sleepe well after it, and feele no payne▪ thou mayst vse as a meate necessary. And when thou canst not sleepe well, if the defaulte came through meate:A good rule to be obserued marke that meate or drynke, although it seeme pleasaunt, refuse it as an Enemy. And where as thou hast vsed euill dyet, as accustome in abusing tyme, quantity, and quality: by little and little bryng thy selfe into good order, and to tyme, both for thy Breakfastes, Dynner, and Supper. Prouide alwayes, to eate good thyngs: but not many thyngs. For lyke as repletion, or aboundance of meate, is an enemy vnto the Body, and Soule, and bryngeth sudden death: euen so is emptinesse, a shortner of tyme, a weaker of the Brayne, a hinderer of Memory, an increaser of Wynde, Choler, and Melancholy. And oftentimes to many, bryngeth sodayne death also, except Nature haue some thynge to woorke vppon, as I dyd tell thee before-vse some light thynges at breakefast of perfet Digestion.What hurte cōmeth of an empty Stomacke when yee go to bed. Wythin foure houres after receyue thou thy dinner, obseruing the good order of Dyet, drynking Wyne, or Beere oftentymes, and little attonce, eschuinge great draughts of drynke, whych be vsed among beastes, and myngle thy meate wyth myrthe, whych is euer the best dishe at the Boarde, and be thankefull to God. And so leaue wyth an appetite, passing the tyme wysely beetweene dinner, and supper, wyth exercise, labour, study, or pastime,An order of dieting. vnto ye ende of .vj. houres, and then begin thy supper: prouided that if it be shorter than thy dinner, eating thy meate by little and little: for greedy eating is hurtfull to nature, as Galen sayth in his Dietary. Note also,
                           Galen. die.
                         that thou must eate more meate in Wynter, than in Summer, because thy natural heate is closed wythin thy body in Winter, but vniuersally spred in Sūmer. Also cholerike men may as lightly disgest Beefe, Baken, Uenison. &c.The Cholericke. Wyth asmutch speede, & little hurt, as the flegmatike man may eate, Rabet, Chicken, and Partrige. &c. But the Melancholy man,The Melancholye through the coldenesse of the Stomacke, hath not the strength in ye Stomacke, as he hath promptnesse in wyll: to eate things warme, and moyst, is good for him. The sanguine man, is not so swift in his digestion, as the hoat cholericke man is.The Sanguine. But notwithstanding, he hath good disgestion, through the humidity, and warmenesse of bloud, and coueteth to eate sweete thynges, which greatly

augment the bloud: Therefore sharpe Sauces, made wyth Uinegar, Onions, and Barberies. Purslen, Sorell, bee holesome: small Fishes that feede vpon ye stones, in fayre running waters, Cucumbers, & pure Frenche wyne, partly delayed wyth water, be good for ye Sanguine Men to keepe them from mutch encrease of fleshe.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THou hast shewed vnto me a discreate, and holsome Order of Dyet perticulerly to my selfe, and partly to other Complexions, but what rule or prety gouernment is there for sicke Folkes, that be sodenly vexed or other wayes?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        An order for ye dieting of sutch as bee sicke of sharpe Feuers.
                        THey that bee sodenly vexed wyth sharpe sicknesses, must haue thin Dyets, wyth water Gruell, thin Mutton, or Chickens, Potage wythout any fat or thicknesse, Uyolet leaues, Endyue leaues, and sutch like cooling herbes, and let theyr drynke be made of Ptisantes. Thus doe to them, that haue hoat sharpe sicknesses, occasioned of choler. And also colde syrupes of Endiue, Uyolets, Sugar, water and Uynegar, sodden together be very holsome. But if sicknesses be long of continuance, theyr diet must bee the thicker, and theyr meates made stronger,Short sicknesse, thinne broathe: long sicknes, thicke broathe. specially if theyr dyseases be cold, wyth the flesh of Cockes, Capons, temperate Wyne stewed Broathes, wyth wholsome hearbes, as Buglose, Borage, Bazill, Parsely, and Fenell rootes, with some Maces, Dates, Damaske prunes, Raysons of ye Sunne, and sutch lyke. Syrupes of Isope,Of Syrupes and drynkes. and Citrones: prouided, that they neyther take meate, nor medicine, immediatly before, or soone after theyr syts, posset Ale wyth clarified herbes accepted, whych they may take for theyr comfort, according to ye estate of theyr Disease. Sutch as bee sicke, must haue Meate contrary to theyr Complexion. For they that be colde, must haue hoat meate, and medicines. And they that be dry, must haue moyst thynges. But they that be hoat, must haue cold thynges▪ for th'ardent heate of the Fyre, is quenched wyth moystnes of the water, and so the quantity of one Element ouercommeth the quality of an other. And in deede, Physicke sayth, the bodies that be hoat, must be fed with things like themselues, as they that be hoat wyth hoat thyngs to preserue theyr heate, & sutch like. But when they doe exceede in heate, colde, moyst or dry: then let the qualities of moystnes, be tempred with drynes, and the coldnesse, with warmenesse. For lyke as man delighteth in things of lyke,As the cōplexion is, so man requireth hys foode, in the time of health things like to his nature but in sicknes the contrary. as the Cholerike man, in cholericke thinges: euen so doe Beastes, and Fruictes, as the Coloquintida, which is bitter, delighteth in bitter ground. Hoat spices delight to grow in hoat grounde, & euery fruict, and herbe, doth delight in the thing that is lyke it self: beware of distemperaunce, surfets, or repletion, reare suppers, and drunkennesse, make thy Belly no shambles, or Kitchen.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     But if a man feele great griefe after meates, or drinks, what way is there then, for to helpe hym?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        VSe walking vp and downe, and perhaps, that wyll Digest, as Auicen sayth: And Rasis sayth,
                           
                              Auicen the iii. doctrine, the vii. chapiter. Moderate walke after meate, profite lj.
                           
                              Galen in .vi. de accidenti & morbo. Capitu i. Auicen in .13. Theo. iii. trac. iii. Capit.
                           
                         to walke an hundred Paces after meate, is wholsome. For it comforteth digestion, prouoketh vryne, and gieueth one powre and strength of stomacke, to eate hys supper. But the coūsayle of Galen must here bee obserued, whych sayth: there is no meate, but it will corrupt, or styncke, if the body be cast into a sodayne heate, by strong trauell soone after meate, whych corrupcion of digestion, is the mother of all diseases, and the beginner of all infirmities, as Auicen reporteth. And if you see, thys will not helpe to digest youre ingorged full stomacke, then prouoke your selfe to sleepe, lying vpon youre Right syde, leaning towarde your Breast and Belly, laying your warme hand vpon your Breast, as Auerhois sayth: the powre of digestion is made strong, when a man sleapeth. For naturall heate, that is drawen inwardly with warmenesse, or heate, hath powre to digest: but if sleape ease you not, prouoke vomit, or fast it out: and this is the counsayle of many learned Men. For it is no maruell, although many meates corrupt one man,
                           Auicen in secundo doc. capitu. 6. whych be of sundry workings in the Stomacke, Lyuer, and Ueynes, for the qualities doe hinder Nature, asmutch as the superfluous quantityes. And take heede these signes, and euill Tokens, bee not found in you. The paynes of all your Members, with Idlenesse, and wearinesse to goe, or mooue your body: Sodayne great Blushinges, or rednesse in your Face, Ueynes swelled and puffed vp, red Uryne, and grosse Skin, extended or stretched out with fulnesse, lyke a blowen Bladder, and Pulses full, small desyre to meate, ill rest, and gryefe in sleepe, seeming in the sleepe to beare some intollerable burden, or dreaming to bee speachlesse:Daūgerous tokens. these be the euill and daungerous tokens of replecion. And of thys I gieue you warning, for it hath slayne as many by aboundance: as hunger hath killed through scarcity. Therefore forget not vomites, whereof I doe intende to speake shortly hereafter: how to vomit by medicine accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes
                     I Haue heard thee say, that holsome Ayre,Of ayre▪
                         is a great comforte to Mans Nature: but corrupt Ayre, doth mutch harme. I shal require you therefore, to tell mee of the good, and the bad Ayre, that I may learne to vse ye good, and refuse the bad.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        
                           GALEN in lib. de Sectis, sayth: A wyse Phisicion oughte to know the Natures of men, of waters, of ayre, of regions,Phisicions ought to haue a perfet knowledge of the nature of places, and ayre. & dwellings, generally. Particularly, to thy selfe beeing a naturall Englysheman, of byrth & education. Thys Lande is very temperate, howbeit, our dwellings in thys land be variable, as Fennes, Marryshes, Woodes, Heathes Ualleyes, Playnes, Rocky places, & neare the Sea syde. But ye sayde Galen,
                        Note which is the most holsome ayre, to dwell in. geeueth counsell in hys Regement of health, saying, a good ayre, whych is pure and holsome, is that, whych is not troubled in standing water Pooles.

Therefore Marrysh grounds, and places where Hemp, and Flaxe are rotten,What ayres corrupt the bloud. and dead Cartons be cast, or multitudes of people dwellyng together, or houses inuironed wyth standyng waters, where into Priuies or sinkes haue issues, or wallowyng of Swyne, or carrion vnburied, or foule houses, or sutch lyke places, be daungerous, and corrupt the bloud, whych is worse than corruptions of meate. For Hippocrates sayeth, that all places of concauities,Corrupt ayres brynge sondry diseases. as Sellers, Ualtes, hoales of Mineralles, where mettales bee dygged, or houses, or Walles ioyned together, whereas the Sunne wyth reflexion beateth in with sooden heate, whose absence bryngeth colde: These ayres are distempered: but pleasaunt cleare ayres, sweete Gardens, goodly hilles, in dayes temperate, when one may see far of: these be good. There be certaine starres called also infortunates in theyr exaltacion, whose influence bryngeth corruption to creatures, rot, and pestilence, to men & beastes, poysonyng waters, and killing of Fish, blastyng of Fruicte in Trees, and Corne in the Fieldes, infectyng men wyth diuers diseases, Feuers, Paulsies, Dropsies, Frensies, Fallyng syckenes, and Leprosies. Against the saide influences,Feruent prayer vnto God doth mitigate his wrath. all Chrystian men must pray to God to be theyr defence, for they be Gods Instruments, to punysh the Earth. Example, we haue of mortall Pestylence, horryble Feuers, and Sweatyng syckenes, and of late a generall Feuer, that thys Land is often plagued wythall. Then make a Fier in euery Chimnay wythin thy house, and burne sweete Perfumes, to purge this foule ayre.Sweete ayre to be made in the time of sickenes, with perfumes: What situacion is best for a house. And now in conclusion to answer thy question, for ye health of dwellyng, Auicen sayth, to dwell vpon Hylles is colde: and in Ualleys, comprysed wythin Hilles, is hoate. Upon a Hylles syde, against the North, is colde and dry. Toward the West, grosse, moyst: very subtyll towardes the Easte: and cleare and warme, towards the South. And Rasis sayeth: in hys fyrst booke Afforie. A man dwellyng neare the Sea side, or great Waters, can not lyue long, nor can not be wythout weakenesse of members or blyndnesse, but the best buildyng of an house is vpon a drye Ground, and a hyll towards the West syde,Pleasaūt people, their ayre. and south west doores, and Wyndowes open towards the East, & Northeast, hauyng neare vnto the sayd house, sweete Sprynges of running waters, commyng from stony or chalkye Ground, whych is both pleasaunt and profytable to the house. For Hyppocrates saith in his booke of ayre,Ayres are to be obserued▪ in sickenesses as in health. and Water, the second chapiter: Cities and Townes, placed toward the East, be more surer, than the Townes builded towards the North, for temperate ayre, or Wynde, and theyr sickenesses be lesse. And in the sayd booke Hippocrates greatly commēdeth pleasaūt Riuers, running towards the risyng of the Sunne: the dwellers in sutch places (sayth he) be fayre and well fauored, smothe skynned, cleare and sharpe voyces, and thys shall suffyce, what and where good and pleasaunt dwellyng is. Note also, that thou must obserue ayre, as thou doest meate: colde sickenesses, warme ayre: dry syckenesses, moyste ayre. And so in the contraryes to them that bee sycke, and they that be whole. ayre of lyke qualitye, is most holsome. They that haue longe syckenesses, chaunge of ayres is a great helpe, both in Feuers, Dropsies, Fallyng syckenes, and Reumes. Reade Hippocrates in hys booke of ayre.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sicknes.
                     I Haue foūd very mutch disquyetnes in my body, when my seruaunts and labouring Family haue felt ease, and yet we are pertakers of one ayre, and my toode is fyne, and theirs grosse.
                  
                  
                     Health
                     THe cause why thy laboryng Seruaunts, in the Fyeld at Plough, Pastures, or Wood, haue sutch good health, is exercise and laboure:Moderate exercise is a sufferaine thing. and disquietnes, commeth partely of idlenes, and lacke of trauel, whych moderately vsed, is a thyng most sufferain to nature. Reade of exercyse in the booke of houshold, wrytten by Xenophon: wherein he sheweth, ye Prynces would labour, plante. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     I pray thee tell me some thynge of exercyse?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THE well learned man Fulgentius sayth: that exercyse is a Fyle, and chafer of the heate naturall, whych chaseth away Sleepe,
                           Fulgen, in lib. 2. and consumeth superfluous humours, wastyng the Naturall vertues, redeming of time, enemy vnto Idlenes, due vnto yoūg Men, ioy vnto olde Men, and to saye the truth, hee whych doeth abstayne from Exercyse, shall lacke the ioyes of Health, and quietnesse, both of body and minde. And Galen sayeth, in his Regement of Health, if we wyll keepe perfect Health, we must begyn with labours, and moderate Trauell, and then to our meate and drynke, and so forth to oure sleepe: and this is the cause why Faukeners, Shouters, Hunters, Runners,What profit commeth by exercise. Tenisplayers, Plowmen, and Gardeners, and lyfters of wayghtes. &c. haue so good digestion and strength of Body. Who be stronger armed men thā Smythes? Why so? Because of the exercise of theyr armes: stronger bodied then Carpenters, whyth lyft great Blockes, and Masons, whych beare great stones, not onely in theyr youth, but sutch men wyll take maruelous trauayles in age, whych to idell people, seeme very paynfull, but vnto them selues that Trauell, no payne, but pleasure, because of custome. These people can digest grose meates, eating them with mutch pleasure,Use maketh labour ca
                              ••
                           
                           ▪
                         and sleeping soundly after them vpon hard Beddes: where as the idle Multitudes in Cities, and in Noble mens Houses, in great numbers for lacke of exercise, doe lothe Meates of lyght digestion, and dainty Dyshes: Mary in deede they may be very profytable to Phisicions. But if Trauell be one of the best preseruers of health,
                           Aph
                                 •
                              .
                         then is idlenesse the destroyer of Lyfe as Auerrhois sayeth: and Hippocrates sayeth, euery contrary is remoued, and helped by hys contrary, as Health helpeth Syckenes▪ 
                        
                           •
                        xercyse putteth away idlenes. &c, But euery lyght mouing, or sorte walkyng,Idlenes the mo
                              •
                           her of all mischiefe. may not bee called an exercise, as Galen sayeth: therefore Tennis, Daunsyng, Runnyng, Wrastlyng. Ridyng vpon greate Horses, were ordeyned aswell for the state of mens health, as for pleasure: whereas they are now conuerted in manye places, rather to the hurte of many, than the profite of fewe. Exercise doeth occupy euery parte of the Bodye, quycken the Spirites. purge the excreamentes both by the raynes, and Guttes, therefore it must bee vsed before

meate. For if stronge exercyse be vsed immedyately after meate, it conueieth corruption to eche part of the body,Exercise before m
                              •
                           ate▪
                         because that meate is not digested. But when thou seest thy water after meat, appeare somewhat citrine, or yellow:Li
                              •
                           le trauell for the sicke. then mayest thou begyn exercise, for digestion is then well: but sicke folkes, leane persones, younge Chyldren, Women wyth Chylde, may not mutch trauell. To conclude: the exercise of Dyce, Cardes, fighting, drinkyng,A signe of digestion. footebaule, and castyng of the stone, with lustes immoderately vsed, and sutch lyke, may be called exercyses of fooles, rather than of wysemen. I myght haue spoken mutch of exercyse of hand labour: and of the noble profession, or worthy estate of a true souldiour, but this shall suffice.
                  
                  
                     Sickenes.
                     THere are many idle people in Cities, and in noble houses, do thynke the chyefe felicity onely,The practise of idle people. to be from bed to belly, and then from belly or borde, to Bed agayn: none other liues they wyll vse, than Cards, Dice, or pratlyng title tatle excepted. Spendyng their tymes in sleepyng, eatyng, and laughing: and somewhat els to small effect. Now for asmutch as they neyther can, or wyll trauayle, what say you to the matter.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        Idlenes bringeth mischief to the body & soule, and pouertie. Gene. xix.
                        MAry this kind of life, would make of a noble, or worshipful persone, a deformed monstrous man: with a life short and painful: & eftsones chaunge a yoman into ye miserable estate of a begger. For Idlenes and plenty of victuals, are fyt for such citezens, as were in Sodoma & Gomorha whych peryshed in their lust, idlenesse and fatnesse. And although perhaps, there be a great Number, whyth say in theyr hearts,The Heathē are better thā many Christians. 
                        Non est deus: and looke for no lyfe to come. Yet because they haue the shapes of men, not forcyng for the immortality of the soule (for whych damnation is due) yet let them not appeare, worse than brute beastes,An example of brute beastes. in thys poyncte. Or the Heathen infydell, whych Heathen are both comely, cleane, worldly wyse, valyaunt, neate and fyne, and also haue goodly (although not godly prouidence to preserue bodily health. For it is reason, they should so doe, seeyng they are carelesse for the soule: but the idle Chrystian, careth lyttle for both, the belly excepted. Well fare the Heathen, in thys honest manly poinct to preserue nature.
                     The fat Oxe, or vgly brauned Bore, although they can not come oute frō theyr frankes or staules, lackyng Liberty: yet nature hath taught them, a trim wholsome exercyse, called fricacion, or rubbing of them selues: chafing forth by the poares euyll humours,Of frication the vertue thereof. wherin they do fynde pleasure & health. There is no kinde of beast, that myght bee longe wythout filthy itch, sores, or skabbes, wythout they vse fricacion, commyng. &c. Fricacion is one of the euacuacions, yea, or clensynges of Mankinde, as all learned affyrme: that Mankinde should ryse in the Morning, and haue hys Apparell warme, stretching forth his handes and legges, preparing the body to the stoole, and then begin wyth a fyne Combe to kembe the haire vp and downe: thē with a course warme cloth, to chafe or rubbe the head, Necke, Breast, arme hoales, belly, thyghes. &c. and this is good to open the poares. Further, if

any haue the Crampe, or is full of Melancholy, or heauinesse of Mynde, or els fallen into a sodayne cold, through watchyng in a cold house, or fyeld,When to vse rubbing or frication, and wherefore. or els haue a moyste reume. &c. What is better than frication, or chafing with warme clothes? This is ye very best way, but it must be done a mornings, before meates: but at nyght it is not good. For then it openeth the poares of the body, and is an enemy to sleepe, and quyet rest, and letteth sorth naturall vertue, whych should nourysh sleepe. Now, as concernyng the diuersity of frication, or rubbyng, note three thynges. The fyrst is,Three things to be obserued in Frication. hard fricacion doth open the poares, let forth smoke, and bynde the body. Soft frication doth mollify, and relaxe the body, as it is wrytten, Dura frixione ligatur, molli verò soluitur. But the third whych neyther is softe, nor hard, but meane doth neyther diminysh, nor increase, but indifferently warmeth. Neyther are the spirites or smoke of the naturall heate, thereby letten forth by the poares of the skyn: And all men that vse to be trymmed, washed,It is not good to be trimmed of ye Barber at night, but in the morning. or rubbed at ye Barbours at euenyng, do erre from the regiment of health, but in the morning it is very good and comfortable, and augmenteth naturall heate, & strēgth, expulsing sluggyshnes and sleepe. So that the body lifte some wayghtye thynge from the Ground or els draw a Bowe, accordyng to hys strength. Furthermore vnderstand, that all dry and whole bodies, may vse fricacion, with warme and moyst oyles: And all moyst and colde bodyes, to vse the contrary. There are also ioyned to fricacion, two other exercyses:Gestacion the profit thereof the one is called Gestacion, that is to be caryed of an other thyng, wythout any trauayle of the body it selfe, and as easy cockyng in a Cradell, to bee car
                           •
                        ed vp and downe in a chayre: eyther in fayre Weather, to be rowed vp & down in a tylted Boate or Barge, and this is very good for weake people, whych haue had longe agues. &c. The second part of thys exercyse, is Equitacion,Equitacion is very wholesome. whych may be moderately vsed of sycke men and Women, that be weake through Feuers, or Timpanye. And that must be vsed, vpon a soft easy going horse, in a playn pleasaunt fyelde, in the cleare ayre, vpon the faire daies. These exercyses do not onely reconcyle sleepe, but augment & make strong the naturall vertues. And thus I end of Fricacion, Equitacion, and Gestation: of this you may read lib. iiij. capi. vi. Aetius. Cornelius Celsus lib. iiij. capi. xix. who also writeth profitably, and plentifully of the same no lesse pleasaunte than good, to mans nature: sodaine exercise after meate, maketh the bloud foule, corrupteth digestion, letteth forth naturall heate,When to trauell, or play. maketh the stomack cold, bryngeth skabbes: as Hippocrates affyrmeth. Si impurgatus laboraucrit, vlcera erumpent, therefore in the morning, and two houres after meate, exercyse is best.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THis is well, I assure you. But yet I haue seene, stronge Uomittes haue chaunced to men, after their meates. Exercise or Fricacion. &c. what is the cause thereof?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        FIrst, weake stomackes in sicke people, or women wyth chylde,The cause of vomit, and when it helpeth, & when it hurteth. they wyll quickely vomite, as, we see by custome: also Repleciō through meates, or stronge drynkes, bryng Uomyttes. Notwithstandyng

vomyte is a goodly euacuacion, for those persones, whych be molested and grieued in their breasts or stomacks, or them, which be vexed wyth flegme, or choller,What persones may best vomite. wyth sutch lyke foule humours, whych grieue the stomack. And specyally to people, which haue short Neckes, great breastes, and wyde Mouthes: For all these may easely vomitte wythout hurt. Also they, which haue narrow breast, and longe small Neckes, may not well vomyt, without hurte, or peryll of deaffenesse, and stranglyng: howbeit Hippocrates, the Prynce of Phisicions sayth, who so hath a vomyt, wythout coaction or medicine,Who may worst vomite. it healeth theym, whych haue had a longe flixe or laxe. The same Hippocrates sayth, who so euer vomiteth blacke choller vpward, without a medicine giuen,Uomit helpeth the flixe. it is a token of death. Uomittes be also perillous to them that be in consumption, or weake of nature. The best tyme of vomits is in Sommer, as Hippocrates affirmeth .iiij. Aphoris. Aestate quidem superioris magis ventr. Hyeme autem inferioris medicamentis purgare conuenit. It is more conuenyent,When to vomite. for to purge the body downeward in Wynter, but vpwarde in Sommer: specially in Haruest tyme. Howbeit, Cornelius Celsus affirmeth, that no vomyt in Wynter, is better than Sommer: by the reason the stomacke is full of crude, rawe fleume. Galen de lib. primo ratio victus, counsayleth to vomyt two tymes in the Moneth saying it is good, that is to say, euery, .xv. dayes. But note thys, that you vomyt two dayes together, for that whych is left the fyrst day, shalbe clensed by vomyt the second, But in som
                           •
                         vomites,How to prouoke vomit, and how to stay it. veynes are broken through great straynyng of the body: and lyke as to procure a vomyt, we doe minister Oximell Squilliticum, warme Water and Hony, and sometyme Oyle, or the leaues of Azarabaccha. &c. Euen so we minister whan an euyll accydent commeth of ouermutch vomyt, to the sycke body Minte water with the pouder of Mumie, Sage, Mirobalans, Chepoli, the pouder of Mastike. And giue to drynke Diacodion, small Wyne with tosted bread: and thus I do end with vomittes, whych are good before meate, but better after the same two howers: as affirme dyuers men, of great experience.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     After strong vomits, there chaunceth often times the Hickop, or yexing, what helpe for that?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        THat is very perillous, I assure you: for after stronge purgacions or vomittes,An hickop after a vomit is perillous. sayth Hippocrates, if eyther conuulsion, or the Hickoppe, called yexing doe come, it is peryllous, and mutch to bee feared. Further sayeth he, in his Aphorism. Conuulsio a veratro lethalis est. A conuulsion, sayth hee, after one hath drunke Elleborus albus is deadly, by the reason that the strength of this Uenemous Herbe, doeth draw from the Sinewes moystnes,To helpe the Hickope. and contracteth them wyth a sodayne emptines, and drines that scant helpe may be had, but rather deadly Peryll foloweth, or euen as if they were aged, paste Nature, and ready prepared to the place of silence, or the Graue. Yet notwythstandyng do thus, and refuse not this meane, whych hath greate Uertue. ℞. Meale of Fenegreeke, of Fleaworte, of

cleane Barly, ana. ℥.iiij. and the Oyles of Uyolets, water Lillies, & red Roses, ana. ℥.j.ss. Hony. ℥.j. mingle all, and temper them in a morter:A goobly waye to helpe hickop, comming after vomit. then seeth Mallowes, and Uiolets together, ana. M.j. put them into a Morter▪ beate them well, and make two emplasters, applying vnder the breasts and arme hoales, meeting towardes the Raynes of the backe. And gieue the Pacient Goates milke or Womans mylke wyth Suger: and washe his heade wyth warme Wyne, wherein is sodden Roses, Uiolets, Mallowes, Barly, and fiue finger. And then warme anoynt the heade wyth ye Oyles of Roses, water Lillies, and Hens grease, and then make a Bathe for the Pacient to sit in, of Uyolets, Roses, Henbane, Mallowes, Poppy, Lettyce, and water Lillies: and thus I doe ende of the yexing,A meane is best. whych is an euill accident, following vomit of two extremes, that is of repletion & emptinesse: a meane is left therefore in euery thing. For extremes you see, are hurtfull, both in matters politike, and Phisicke. &c.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     There is an euacuation called Sternutacion, or neesing: what doth ye profit?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        
                           HIPPOCRATES, of neesing sayth thus, Sternutamentum fit ex capite, Cerebro califacto, aut humectata capitis parte inani: Aer enim intrò contentus extra erumpit, sonat autem quoniam per angustiam exit: Aphor. 52. That is, neesing that commeth from the head,Of neesinge, the profitte thereof. is made eyther of the Brayne, whych is hoat, or els the empty or voyde place of the head, being very moyst. For the ayre contayned therein, breaketh forth, through a small narrowe way: and so commeth the sounde or noyse forth. Thys is holsome, yt the strength of nature forceth forth winde, specially once or twyse in the morning, putting away belching: but more is not good, and who so cannot neese, it is a sygne of weakenesse, sicknes,Neesing doth helpe Women in their trauel coldnesse, and age. And to neese after meate, is not wholsome, but when a Woman laboureth wyth Chylde, or hath the Mother, then Neesing is holsome, and healthfull, and wyll soone helpe them: but sometime through strong neesing, bleeding doth quickly ensue, by the breaking of some Ueyn
                           •
                         Then apply the Nasalia, and frontarij, as I haue wrytten before, in the ende▪ of the Compoundes.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     Then what say you of bleeding, what profit or perill is in it?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        I Haue spoken thereof sufficiently before: thereefore, I say, remember, that to be letten bloude in the Spring tyme,When it is good to bleed
                              •
                           
                         is ye best season, as Galen affyrmeth, in libro de Flobothomia, and through ye same, these euilles are helped. Replecion, Pleurisy, hoat Tercians, Frenses, Pestilence, stoppinge of the termes &c. All the Orgaynes of the Senses are cleansed thereby. And finallye, the Body is of a weake body, made strong to thē,Who must no
                              •
                            bleede. whych are in lusty yeares. But prouide, that neyther people in consumpcion, old folkes, Women wyth chylde, or yongue children, be letten bloud.

And no man to be lettē bloud, after ye good bloud appeareth in bleedyng, for feare of Crampe, Palsey, or dropsy. Nor none to sleepe, after they are letten bloud 8. howers.Tucke and Rapier. Reade Galen vt supra, and Rasis lib. 4. ad Almanso. There is a new kynd of Instruments to let bloud withall, which brynge the bloud letter sometyme to the Gallowes, because hee stryketh to deepe. These Instruments are called, the ruffins Tucke, and longe foining Rapier: weapons more malicious, than manly.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     Wyll boxing doe any pleasure?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        Boxing is good for a Lubber.
                        YEa forsooth, very mutch: As example, if you haue any sausie low
                           •
                        , or loitryng lubber wythin your house, that is eyther to busy of hys hand, or tongue. and can do nothyng▪ but play one of the parts, of the .24. orders of knaues, There is no pretier medicine for this, nor soner prepared, than boxing is .iii. or .iiii. tymes well set on, a span longe on both the cheekes. And although perhaps, this will not alter his lubberly condiciōs, yet I assure you, it wyll for a tyme, chaunge hys knauysh complexion, and helpe hym of the greene syckenes: and euery man may practise this, as occasion shall serue hym in his family, to reforme them.
                     
                        Boxing doth draw forth euill humor. &c.But for the Boxing, whereof Galen speaketh, calling it Boxing, Cupping, wyth Cucurbitula. &c. Sayth he, Boxing doth helpe swellyng, and letteth forth wynde, stoppeth the termes immoderate, and the bloudy flixe, and helpeth appetite. And when a Woman doth swound, it is good to reuiue the spirites agayne. There are two kyndes of the ventosas, or Boxinges, the gentlest is wythout scarification:Boxyng doe stop the termes, when they do aboūd the other is to draw forth water, and asswage hard swellyng, and clenseth Melancholy, specially in weake Bodies. And it wyll remoue humours from place to place, as from the head to the Necke, from the Necke to the shoulders. &c. And what stoppeth the termes soner, as Hippocrates Apho, Si mulieri menstrua sistere volueris, Cucurbitulam quā maximam sub mammis defige. If thou wilt stop the termes of a Woman, then put a great ventose vnder, or vpon her breastes, for the vaine, whych is in the matrix, commeth from the breastes.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     Doth sweating profit any thinge at all, to mankinde?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        SWeating is no lesse pleasaunt to Nature, than profytable to a common Wealth:Of sweates profitable, and vnprofitable, to a common Wealth, and sometime sweating is vnprofitable. As example. If any artificer, or Husband man, haue any seruant that is so diligent, that he can sweat at his labor, and not at his meat, this is a good sweate: But if his man do eate vntyll he sweate, and labour without heate, thys fellow, if you giue hym not an expulsiue, out at your Haule doore,An expulsiue for an idle Loute. vndoubtedly hee wil els shortly vomitte you, into the backehouse Ditch, with a threde bare Cap. Therefore, take heede to sutch sweaters, and idle eaters, except you bee Abunde Diues, and yet let all men both poore and Riche:Gene. .iii. remember what Almighty GOD saied vnto Adam: Manducabis herbam agri, in sudore vultus tui vesceris pane, donec reuerteris in

humum. Thou shalt eate the Herbe of the field, in the sweate of thy face, thou shalt eate Bread, vntill thou be retourned backe agayne into the Earth or Groūd. And in an other place it is wrytten: they whych wil not labour shal not eate. And also there is a promise of God▪ by the mouth of the holy Prophet, which affirmeth saying: Nam labore manuum tuarum manducabis, beatus eris, & optime habebis: that is. For of thy labour of thy Handes, thou shalt eate, thou shalt be blessed, and haue the best thyngs: as prosperity, and the fruicts of the earth. &c. Lo, here you see, here is no hunger, beggyng, idlenes, loitring pickyng, slauery, disyng, whoryng, theeuyng, prysonyng for the same,A good reward, for a diligent labour, or Tiburnyng, appoynted not to labourers, but to loyterers. Here you haue the promyse of God for the same: that they whych wyll honestly laboure and sweate, shall be in good health to eate. As we daily see the honest labouring husband men, and theyr family do trauell, toyle, and sweat: they haue therefore Gods blessing, good health and long Life.The Carter doth daily help the Courtier. For if the husband man and Carter did not sweat ech other day, the Courtier and Citizen woulde crye well away. Now sir to Phisical sweate, whereof I will shortly conclude, which are two kindes: the first of them is naturall, as when men do voluntarily sweat, without force of medicine, as hoat drynke, or hoat House. or stoue: these wyll easely open the poares, and dissolue grosse humours,Of two kindes of sweates, naturall, and artificiall. clense the bloud, comfort the spirites, put away cold, consume crude humours, amend the sinewes, put away ache or numnes, Feuers, dropsie, and the Pestilence: Sweate helpeth all these. And if one be sicke in his sweat, he ought not to sleepe: and this is a token, that he shal do wel in sweatyng, if he sweat in all places, and by litle and litle feele the paynes aswage, then it is a signe that health wyl follow. But if he sweat, in one or two places onely, and finde more griefe, it is an euyll token,
                     The artificiall sweate, is made in stoues, bathes, or bladders,Poxe is clensed by sweat. wyth hoate water, hoat stones, put in clothes, and applyed to the body lying in Bed. Or els wyth moist bathes of herbes, or perfumes wyth Masticke, Stirar Oyle. &c. Which haue vertue to clense skabbes, itche▪ Pox. I say the Pore, as by experience we see, there is no better remedy than sweating, and the drynking of Gu
                           •
                        icum, vsyng it in due tyme and order. Prouided alwayes, to sweat at euenyng is better than in the morning: as Phisicke affyrmeth, and reason proueth. For when the Body hath nourishment wythin, the spyrites shall not be vtterly drawen forth to the extreame partes,Who ought to sweate, and who not. through the outward heate. Further, let leane dry folkes, or feeble persones, vse little to sweate: for it wyll hurt them mutch, but fat folkes may sweat well, it helpeth them mutch▪ howbeit, sweate is not good for the eyes, because it drieth to mutch: leane Bodyes therefore ought to be anoynted wyth Oyle, after they haue sweate, Sweate is euer good in sharpe agues,What sweate is good. in the dayes of the Crises, or Iudgement of sickenes, sayth Hippocrates in his Prognostico: but the contrary, Sudores optimi sunt, in omnibus acutis morbis, qui in diebus iudicatorijs. &c. Reade here after, in the signes of death, of sweatyng.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     What say you of abstinence, or fasting, is it very profitable for the body?
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        The great goodnesse of fasting, bothe for the soule & the body.
                        YEa truely, and also for the soule: as it is wrytten by the Prophete: In ieiunio humiliaui animam meam: In fasting, sayth he, haue I humbled and brought lowe my soule. Fastyng is a singuler Instrument to correct the flesh, and make it obedient, and seruaunt to the spirite, if it be ioyned wyth fayth otherwayes it is vayne, concerning perfect religion. But neuerthelesse, profitable in Phisicke, is abstinence for the body. For take this for example: If one haue taken a surfete, wyth repletion or fulnes, or els dronkennes, nothyng is better to bryng the body into good quyet order,The ritch vse gluttony, and poore penury. than abstinence, which wyll consume matter superfluous and hurtfull, But yet not of it selfe, but by a certaine way or meane: for it it is not quickly restored, whych with longe abstinence hath ben wasted. Fasting is not vtterly to refuse meate, but to eate that whych preserueth Lyfe onely: Oh that moderacion were vsed in a cō
                        mon wealth, then would not the ryche die in gluttony, and aboundaunce, nor the poore perysh for lacke of bread. Extreames are euyll to mutch fasting, or to mutch hunger. Galen affirmeth, that people which haue narrowe veines haue but litle bloud, and sutch may not suffre longe hunger, but shal fall into sickenes. But they which haue great veines, haue plenty of bloud, and may fast wythout hurt. So may all sutch, as haue mutch rawe crude matter,Cholericke people must not fast mutch whych is helped through fastyng. Abstinence is hurtfull to Chollerike, and Melancholike Persones, or them whych are sicke and weake, or to younge chyldren: so euery one must be considered in order accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        WHen I haue ben weary and sore vered both in minde, and body, no thyng hath don me so mutch pleasure. as sleepe hath don, and reste in the nyght tyme: what say you to sleepe?
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        SLeepe is brother vnto death, sauing the one doeth not awake again, and the other doth recouer the senses: and of necessity, all Creatures that wake, or watch, muste sleepe and rest. For the holy Prophet sayth, in the booke of Psalmes, or Hymnes to almighty God: Ego iacui & do
                              •
                           miui atque euigilaui,
                        The vertue or benefit of sleepe, or rest Psal. 3. 
                        quoniam dominus me suffulcit. I layed me downe (saith he) and slept, and also waked agayn: for the Lord dyd onely comfort me, Truely that God, that made vs also, made our actions and doyngs as labour, rest, eatyng, drinkyng, sleepyng, and wakyng, wythout whych we cannot liue. Aristotle sayth, all liuyng things haue sleepe, as swymming, flying, and goyng creatures. Further he sayeth. sleepe is lyke the fallyng euyll, by the reason all the senses are depryued: for sleepe is the ligament of the senses,No man or beast, can liue without rest. and wakyng doth vnbinde them, and sleepe is giuen to ech liuyng creature, for theyr health. And further, Aristotle sheweth the cause of sleepe, saying: Somnus causatur ex vapore cibi, qui vadit ad cerebrum.
                              Arist. de som.
                            &c. Sleepe is caused of the smoke or vapour of the meate, going into the braine: which commeth backe agayn cold, and maketh sleepe. Therfore Men after Meales, are soone gyuen to Sleepe, as wee doe see by experience:

and without sleepe, wyse men should be chaunged into idiote fooles. Note thys, that all sleepes do not make thyn, dissolue, or warme alwayes. but sutch sleepes onely as follow eyther labour, great exercyse, or honger. And further, when man is sleepyng, the naturall heate is drawen inward, whych when the sayd sleepe fyndeth no nouryshment or thyng to feede vppon: then lyke a Lyon, it doth forthwyth consume,How the stomack must be prepared toward sleepe. and wast the beste Humour, or one of the radicall vertues, and in conclusion, doth dry vp the bloud and make the body leane: therefore, let all leane folkes, or them whych haue ben aboundantly purged, or els letten bloud, beware of very mutch sleepe, sleepe after sweate, labour, as running, tenice, mutch daunsyng, whych doe open all the poares, and let forth all the euyll vapours, betwene the skyn and the flesh. Whych sleepe doth reuoke, retract, and draw backe agayne,When sleepe is perilous. through the inward heate, wastyng the same moisture, and if one haue flegmon in hys Guttes, that is to say, apostumacion of Choller and Bloud, nothyng is more perillous than sleepe. by the reason, that the burning and heat encreaseth, whych wyll augment the dolour: euen so in our Englyshe sweate, and the Pestilent sleepe, it is to bee forborne, and also before bloud lettyng, and after duryng twelue howers,Drunkards what they do. or els the poyson will approch to the heart Or when the fyt of an Ague doth begyn, or in drynking any Uenime. &c. For in sutch cases, it will make eyther rigour, or horrour, leauyng the outward parts cold, drawyng through vnnaturall heate, the venyme to the nutrimentall parts, or els to the parts vitall:The cause why a drunkard dyeth sodainely. and so this way sleepe is not good, but rather hurteth. Euen so it hurteth the drunkards, bench-whislers, that wyll quasse vntyll they are starke staryng mad, lyke March Hares, Flemmyng like Scinkars, braynelesse lyke infernall Furies, Drinkyng, braulyng, tossyng of the Pitchar, staryng, pissyng, and sauyng youre reuerence, beastly spuing vntyll midnight: these fellowes abuse the tyme of sleepe, and in sutch case if they should sleepe, perhaps apoplexia,Luke .xx.ii. and sodayne death would follow, as Hippocrates affyrmeth Aphoris. vij. Si ebrius quispiam repentè obmutuerit, conuulsus moritur, nisi febre corripiatur, aut vbi ad horam peruenerit quá crapulae soluuntur, vocem recuperet. That is (if a drunkard do sodainly lose hys speach, and become dumbe: he shall die of a conuulsion, excepte hee be taken of an Ague, or els receyue agayne his Speach, at the same hower, when the surfyte is dygested. He herein speaketh reasonable: for drunkennes flyeth into the brayn, and so distilleth into the sinewes, which bringeth conuulsion, and after conuulsion insueth Death, through the Crude, Colde moystnesse. Except the Heate of a Feuer doe concocte, and waste it. &c. Therefore, let Men take heede of drunkennes to bedward, for feare of sodayne Death: although the Flemysh Nacion, vse thys horrible custome, in theyr vnnaturall watchyng all the Nyght. But remember his woords, whych haue made vs all, and know what dyet is best for vs, euen Iesus Chryst hymselfe saying: Cauete autem vobis, nequando grauētur corda vestra, crapula, & ebriete. &c. And a wyse Man sayth: Omne nimium naturae inimicum, all Extreamyties are Ennemyes to Nature. So is to mutch Labour, meat, sleepe, Watch: or to lyttle is euyll also: a meane therefore is good, and the best of all. And a due time, place, maner, and order of sleepe.

The night is the best tyme: the day is euill, to sleepe in the Fyeld is perillous.Of good and bad sleepe. But vppon, or in the Bed, lying fyrst vppon the ryght side, vntill you make Water: then vpon the lefte syde is good. But to lye vpon the backe, with a gapyng mouth, is daungerous: and many thereby are found starke dead in their sleepe, through apoplexia, and obstruction of the sinewes, of the places vitall, animall, and nutrimentall. And all sutch as feele intolerable paynes in theyr breastes in the Nyght, whych growne, and can not draw theyr breath:Fooles be afrayd of the Mare in their sleepe. the very cause is, lying or sleeping on their backe, and not through the Mare, or nyght spirite, as they terme it, after the Iudgement of supersticious Hypocrites, Infidelles, with charmes coniuryngs, and relickes hangyng about the Necke, to fray the Mare, the foole I should say. Let sutch people, both keepe good diate, cleane lodging, lye in order, as I haue sayd, and specyally commend both their sleepyng and wakyng to Iesus Chryst, that they may lyue honestly, goe to bed merily, sleepe quietly, and ryse earely.How to auoi
                              •
                           e euyll dreames. To serue GOD deuoutly, and do theyr businesse in theyr vocation diligently: to helpe them selues and their neighbours charitably, and not to be carefull for any dreame in the Nyght. But wysely consyder this, if they doe dreame of Fyre, to take it for no euill presage of strife &c. But rather that fyre doth signify, that yellow hoate Choller doth abounde, and would be purged by good pociōs, Diasene, or the Sirupe of Rhabarbe. And to beware of a Tertian Ague. And when they dreame of Cloudes: darkenes,What dreames doe signify. or to lye in darke dungeons. &c. Remember it is Melancholy, that vexeth the body and spirites in the sleepe: and would bee purged wyth Hamech, Pilles de lapide Lazuli. &c. If dreames be of cold, Snow, Ise, water, then flegme would be diminyshed wyth pocions accordyng. and Pilles de Agarico. &c. Some in the Nyght seeme in theyr sleepes▪ as though a greate blocke were pressyng downe theyr Legges: this is the resolucion of the Sinewes, or the aboundaunce, whych would be letten forth, by the Medyan veine. And to vse bathyng to Bedward in warme water, wyth sweete herbes: and to dry theyr Legges,
                           Hippocrates vpon sleepes. and so go warme to bed is excellent. And thus I doe end of sleepyng and waking, of whych sayth Hippocrates Aphor. Vehemens vigilia, tum cibi tum potionis cruditatem efficit That is, vehemēt watchyng doth bring cruditie, and rawnes, both to meat and drynke in the stomacke:Mutch watch causeth raw humours in the stomacke. Moderate watch is good for studients to make them learned, for apprentices to giue them knowledge in their facultie, to the man of warre, or Watchman, to preuent the enemy; to the fat body, to diminish grosenes: But watching at Dice, Cardes. &c. Make many watch men in lanes ends, for their purses:To whome watche is good. such watches I say make many miserable wretches, whose rewards we see daily, to be daungerous and shamefull in the end.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        Thafflictions of the minde are hard to bee helped.
                        THere is one thyng, whych hath troubled me very long, it is a sickenes, that hitherunto I could finde no Phisicion so cunning, wise, or learned, that euer was able to helpe the same. Neither did I euer see, or tast of that medicine, that had vertue to relieue mee in that poinct. Furthermore, the chaunge of ayre, were it neuer so sweete or pleasaunt, with the sightes of faire fieldes, Gardeins, hilles, woodes, & valleis,

                        
                           •
                        ouered wyth all coloured kynds of sweete smellyng plantes, herbes, or flowers, could neuer helpe this syckenes.Pleasure is noisome to the disquiet heart. The daily beholdyng of Iewelles of stone, Golde, riche apparell, fayre buildyngs: yea, manly feates of Armes, wyth triumphaunt syghtes, dyd me neuer a pinsworth of pleasure. But when the tyme was past, my syckenes doubly assaulted me agayne.
                     The Sacred heauenly Musis or Heliconiades, the daughters of Iupiter, whom I haue knowen: those .ix. celestiall damosels, whych dyd wash them in the Well wyth syluer streames, where as the swift flying Horse called Pegasus pearced wyth hard houe, the frosen hard diamond flinte, as Poetes affyrme. These .ix. Ladyes called the Nimphes,
                        The ix. heauenly Ladies can smally cō
                           fort some careful heart whē it is in care. haue infinyte Uertues to please the eare wythall in Musicke, yet haue they not pleased me: as example. The fyrst called Calliope hath a voyce most heauenly in pleasure, to moue the affections wythall. The .ii. named Clio, a mat
                           •
                        on of grace to all damosels, for womanly behauior: yet with a glorious comely Gesture, mouyng her beholders, inwardly to sigh. or breake theyr sleepes in the night. Sutch grace she hath, to wound the heartes of lusty youth, and make the aged dispayre, whych are past hope▪ to renue theyr age agayne. The .iii. is the amorous Lady Erato, with her sweete songes of Louers delyght: whose tunes are of sutch heauenly vertue, equall to the Angels: whych haue sutch force, that they wyll banysh all Louers weepyng lookes, yea, care, and louynge spyght, and make eche amorous subiecte, or Prysoner, free to them selues,The Sacred gift, that the ix· heauenly Musis haue and can giue to others, to comfort them in trouble. wythout mistruste, casting frō them theyr colde Willow crownes of mournyng: and foorthwyth, this tune wyll cause them to renue them selues, in that victorious diadem of warme Laurell, agaynst all cold passions. And gieue them theyr delyghts, through this her sweete pitifull songe. The fowerth will cast a sweete water on the face of euery slothful Louer, and quickly wake them, out of theyr flatteryng or fearefull dreames, and shew them gladnesse, and all pleasaunt greene thynges, to forget their follie, or pleasaunt purgatorie, her name is Thalia. Then followeth dame Melpomine with her songes, separating of Mars from Venus. Prophesying of Warre, and fearefull Tragadies, she is the .v. The sixte named Terpsicore pacifying Warre, and noise of bloudy Trumpet, reconciling all agayne, with heauenly Harpe, and Musical Instruments of cordes by her: vnder the sweete arbour, sitteth her sister Euterpe, with instruments of Winde, agreeing wyth her sister in true Musicall concord or vnitie, she is the seuenth. The eyght is Polibymnia, with a memory passing all creatures, this Musis dryue Musicke into numbers, by whose knowledge, the velocitie or swyftnes of the soule is perceyued. The .ix. and last is Vrania, through who her sacred songe, moneth eche liuyng man to be heauenly mynded, religious, and to geue them selues to a blessed lyfe. Her songes be lamētable, pitifull, drawing the hearts from earthly vanities, desiryng a chaunge into a happier Land,The names of the nyne Muses, wych their gyftes aboue the bryght shyning starres. These Musis, I say, deare Health, haue helped mee before these dayes: but now can not at all forall their pleasaunt pipyng. For theyr delyghtes to me be rather lothsome, and vexe my Minde: sauing the last Muse, called Vrania, which moueth mee, for els none. For they are but playne vanity.
                  
                  
                     
                     Health.
                     
                        WHat sickenes is this, that neyther Phisicke, nor all these delights, can gyue cure vnto? it is a merueilous disease, bee lyke it shoulde appear, that it is no sycknes of the body, but rather the passions or perturbations of the mynde.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     
                        YOw haue spoken the truth, it is euen so: but I take it to bee no new sickenesse,All the workes vnder the Sunne, are nothyng but vanitie▪ and affliction to the minde. among foolysh Men· For the wysest man hymself, complayneth thereof, saying: Ecclesiastes cap. j. Prospexi enim omnia opera quae sunt Caelo, & ecce omnia sunt inanitas, & animi molestia. &c Truely I dyd behold all thynges, that are wrought vnder the Sunne: and behold they are all but vanitie, and vexation of the minde. &c. And so this affliction of the minde,The perturbation, or sodaine mocion of the minde, must be well obserued. is the greatest gryef, that I haue wt my perturbacions. But in a maner, I do not vnderstand eche of theyr causes, they are so variable, paynefull, and endlesse. For my delyght and pleasure is gone, and brought in bondage to them through longe trouble.
                  
                  
                     Health▪
                     
                     
                        THey are called perturbacions of the Mynde, after. M. Cicero: but Galen termeth them Pathemata vel affectus animi,
                        Of the sodain alteracion of the minde, frō ioy to care. that is the affections,, or sodayn mocions of the minde, chaunged or altered through some cause, from the ryght way of reason into some passion; and these mocions of the spirites, must be as wel consydered,Of feare what it is. and diligently obserued of the Phisicion, in the tyme of sicknes, as any other common knowen Syckenes.
                     For these perturbacions, or paynefull affections of the spirites, do chaunge the estate of the body, marueilously and sodaynly. As wee within fewe dayes past,Examples of sodain feare. haue seene a persone beautyfull, well fauoured, pleasaunt. &c. but now wee skant know hym: Iesus, say we, how this man is altered, and cleane chaunged, wythin these fyue dayes, as though it had neuer bene he? &c.Gods vengeaunce. Regum. i. This is our talke, of the sodaine alteracions of our aquaintances: wee therefore must resort vnto certaine reasons, in sutch cases. As example. Feare is after some euyll tidyngs, or doubte of mischiefe, as losse, prysonment, or that death wyll quickly insue. Then these thynges wyll follow: The spirites and bloud are all drawen inward, and then all the outwarde. members are pale and colde, wyth tremblyng and fayntnesse of speach. By the reason that all the vertues, both Anymall and Naturall, are made feeble, and sodaynely weake: through whych often tymes it haue bene seene, that sodayne feare, hath brought sodayne Death: as example: Ely the hygh Priest, ouer the People of GOD, in the Day of the great battayle, when the Philistines preuayled agaynst Israell: as he satte vpon a Stoole, lokyng towards the waye, hys hearte feared hym, for the arke of GOD: in the meane tyme, there ran a Man hastely vnto him, wyth a lamentable looke, in mournyng Clothes, declaryng vnto hym, fyrste how that Israell was fled and slayne. Secondly, that his two Sonnes, Ophni, and Phinehes were slayne. Thyrdly, that the vncircumcysed had taken the Arke of GOD: at whych tidinges, sutch sodayne feare came to hys heart, that forthwith he fell down backward & brake his neck.

And thys same euill tidings, slue wyth sodayne care, hys daughter in lawe, the wyfe of Phinihes, saying in her death, the glory is gone from Israell.Euyll parentes, and euyll Chyldren. This was Elies plague, for sufferyng hys Chyldren to lyue wickedly. For where as God is not feared, at length he wyll sodaynely feare them. Feare I do say, is a marueilous monster, an Infernall Image, and a terrible vision to the soule: for feare is not for thynges past, but onely for thynges to come▪ and to take thyngs in the worst part, Was not Iesus Chryst oure God and sauiour afrayde, what tyme as he set before his eyes, the Paynes and sharpenes of death, Dolore afficitur anima mea vs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad mortem, My soule,Feare is like a monster of Hell. sayd he, is made heauy euen vnto the death? yea his feare was sutch, that for agonie, his droppes of sweate, were lyke vnto bloud. This was a great feare, euen in Chryst: but yet it made hym not gyue ouer, foreseeing the sealyng of our election by his death. But the feare, whych taketh mortal men, maketh them cowardly oft tymes. Through it Peter dyd sweare, he was none of Chrystes company: and that he knew hym not at all. Feare made Dauid to counterfayt, and go lyke a mad man,Feare in Chryst. for to auoyde Saule which persecuted hym. Feare made Athanasius, the Bishop of Alexandria, to hide hymselfe syxe yeares in a Caue, from the cruelty of the Arrians,Feare in S. Peter. Feare in Dauid. It causeth the Chrystians to flee, in the tyme of persecution: And sometyme the Christian through it, is forced to play the Idolater. As example. When the Tyrant Diocletianus The Emperour, in his cruell murderyng of the Chrystians, dyd commaund euery one to bee slayne, that would not Honour,Athanasius feare. and offer to his Idols: Marcellus the Bishop, as Eusebius affyrmeth, in a great feare, dyd Sacrifice to the Deuill: Lo here doth feare try religion. Sometyme feare wyll creepe so far into the conscyence,Feare of the Christians. Feare maketh men offer to Idolles. that it letteth in dispaire. As example of Iudas, whych is a good president to all traytours: and many tyrauntes through it, haue slaine them selues: feare often tymes, is very intollerable. For there is no touch stone, can better declare, the diuersitie of mettals, than feare wyll bewray the worthy, or vnworthy Manhoode of Men. As example. There was a lusty bloud,Example of Marcellus.
                         or a pleasaunt braue younge royster at Athenes, whose name was Aristogiton, as the Historiographer affyrmeth: whych commonly would talke and bragge, what good seruyce if neede were that he could do to Mars. All hys talke was of UUarre, how to deuyse Weapons of inuasion, to destroy the Enemy:Feare bryngeth desperacion, example. of Iudas. to traine forth Men, to giue the Onsette, wyth all lusty courage. And vpon a time, the Athenians prepared a myghty stronge Armye agaynst their Ennemies, and amonge all others, they had this Aristogiton in no small pryce: supposing him to be in deede, as he was in woorde. And callyng hym forth to take a charge when he harde, an acte to bee done in deede: Oh GOD,To proue a coward by example of a Greeke which was a great bragger. how hys Hearte was in hys Hose, for feare he trembled, and quaked lyke an Aspen Leafe, as though he had begon the fytte of a Tercian Ague. He could not tel what shyft to make, or whether to goe to hyde hymselfe: but at length Dame shame, whispered hym in the eare, and badde him wrappe one of his legges with roulers and Cloutes, as though he were lame: and so he dyd, & wyth pale Face, and staffe in hand, hee came haltyng and creepyng foorth, lyke a sheepysh Loute, lamentyng hys case, that sutch euyll had chaunsed hym.

But his hart was wyth thē all, sayd he, yet durst he not trauell, vntill hys Legge was whole. But when the people dyd see hym daunse so lyuely, like a Lubber in a Net. Lord how they laughed thys Carpet squyre to skorne. I pray GOD, the lyke feare be not found, among a great number of our People, that can Royst, Crake, Braule, Sweare, and Bragge, in ye time of peace: quarelling wyth quiet people, and lift vp lookes, frouning lyke Tigers. And when the Queenes maiesty shall haue neede to wythstande the Enemy, or suppresse the Rebell: that then they become not like vnto Aristogiton, wyth soare Legges, Agues, broken Armes, trēbling, lamentable Lookes, as bold as Geese, or Lyons of Coteswolde Heath. Sending theyr water to the Phisicion, to cloake theyr knauery, for lacke of Manhoode: or 
                           •
                        ls wyth Vnguentum aurum, can anoynt theyr Capitaynes hand, to blot them out of theyr muster Booke,A shift for freshe water souldiours. whych is a good Medicine. For feare in sutch case, there is not the lyke receypt, in all Bucklersbury, I assure you: many moe thynges could I speake of feare, but my matter is of Physicke. But thys Cordiall shall suffyce, for a Cowarde.
                     Now followeth anger, whych doth increase, inflame, and set theyr Bodyes vpon a fyre, with a sodaine burning heate: Cleane contrary to feare. For feare draweth the heate and bloude inwardly,What the passiō of anger is wyth feeble pulse, but anger doth cast it to the vtter partes wyth swyft Pulse as Galen affyrmeth, lib. ij. de tuenda sanitate. Counsaylinge euery one, that will preserue naturall health, that they vse sutch exercise, as may keepe warmenes temperately, neyther to mutch colde nor heate abounding. And although exercise commonly bringeth warmenes,
                           G
                                 •
                              l. de. Sani. 
                                 •
                              uen.
                         yet to the Idle bodies, when they haue no naturall heate, their bodies are made warme, by any other thyng, as Oyle, bathing in warme water, or going into ye Stoue. &c. But sutch heates are artificiall,Of heate artificiall, and naturall. to mooue the heate naturall▪ but they are all without, and not mooued of the principall inward heate. But anger or perturbation, is mooued of naturall heate, it needeth no meane to helpe it: as wee feele by our selues in colde weather, let our Enemy sodaynely appeere before vs,Of cholericke heate. or if we heare our selues shamefully rebuked, we neede no fyre, to kindle the flame of our choler, forthwyth we are in the house top, the holiest of vs all. For heate aboue nature, wyll quickly inclose the heart, and with swiftnes go further, seeking vengeaunce. Unto thys euil be Cholerik men most bent, which must vse often to correct Choler: or els to obserue an order whych a worthy Philosopher,A lesson against anger. taught a hasty Prynce, yt hee should before he dyd any thing, mooued by quicke and sodayne affection, fyrst, saye ouer the Alphabet, or the number of letters: thys Heathen rule, agaynst anger or rashenes, wyll not hurt the Chrystians. It declareth great pride and anger, to bee sodaynely mooued. As example. At euery light wynde, weake trees will mooue, and tremble with theyr braunches, from ground to the top of the same: whych wyth great storme and wynde, will skant mooue the great strong tree. Prouidence and pacience, make men strong, and cause them to get the victory of themselues: and to bee able to wythstand anger, whych is a common passion of cruell Beastes, Tyrauntes, & Fooles.Examples of wrath in Nero.
                         It should seeme by Domitius Nero, that he was an angry wretch, to murder hys Mother, to poyson his Scholemayster, and finally to sticke

hymselfe. In his maners at the borde, he was sone inflamed with anger: yt vppon a tyme hearyng but the french nacion named,A wrathful wretch in battayl. forthwith he brake two most costly drinking vessels, of an incomparable value, they were so rich and beautiful: he cast down all the meate from the borde, fallynge out with all the Discombentes without, any other cause (a very temperat man I assure you). When Ecelinus the Tyrant, in battaile had receiued a woūd forthwith he cast his weapon away, and roared like a mad beast, and in his cruel anger, rent his skin from his owne flesh, which, when his enemies espyed, they so laughed, that in a great rage and anger, he slue himselfe, (a very meeke person). Oh what victory had he vpon his ennemyes, thus to handle himselfe.
                     
                        Alexander the great sittyng in a dronken Banket,A wrathful part of Alexander in killinge of Clitus. vnseemly for a Prince beyng admonished reuerentlye of a noble wyse man called Clitus his owne nourishes sonne, to liue lyke a Prince in vertue, reioycing therein, more thā in victory. &c. the ingrateful Prince at his banket, with his owne handes, strake him through the body, letting forth the spirites of lyfe from Clitus, yt would not flatter a folish prince. For an open rebel is not so hurtful, as a secrete flatterer to a Prince, for they are like Cankers, most hurtful to them. What anger had Cain agaynst Abel, and Herod, in killing the hurtlesse children, that neuer offended him?
                     The Popes,The Popes▪ Law. which are so charitable (as you know to the liuinge christians) that they wil send them in burnt sacrifice to heauen: among them som haue torne one another with vyolence, out of their graues, rending out of their pontificall apparell, cutting of their fyngers, & burying them among the common harlottes, yea drawing them forth agayne, and heading them a fyt Sepulture for such saintes. Reade Platina in the lyues of Steuen the sixt, Sergius and Formosus.
                     
                     
                        Bubulam an excellent Paynter,Hypponax the Poet made such sharp verses agaynst a Paynter, that he caused him to hang him selfe in his rage. Saule killd himselfe▪
                         did so liuelye set forth the monstruous Image of a deformed Poet called Hypponax, that the beholders had greate pastime, and laughed therat. But in the meane tyme, the Poet wrote such nipping, sharpe, taunting Uerses, agaynst this Painter: that in a sodayne rage, he ran in to his house, and hanged himselfe. And to conclude, Saul was in such a rage, that he destroyed the Sacred high Priest and the Leuites, with the people in the citty of Nob, for receiuing of Dauid, the elected of God. And this shal suffice to warne you frō the passion of anger by these examples.
                     Then ther is an other perturbation of mynd, called sorrow or care, which is the greatest passion of spirites: because it is some folkes torment. Againe in an other, it maketh short worke. For care doth wound and smite ye hart wt a depe stroke, and draweth it togeather as a purse,The cause of sorrow and care which be maruaylous plagues. suffryng nothing to bee caried thether, to comforte the same agayne. And so the generacion of the spirites are letted, and the vitall partes by little and little do wither & wast away, and in this poynt sorrow doth differ from feare: sorrow receiueth his mischiefe at length, and feare at once. But in coloure pale, in pulse feble, in countenaunce heauy, in stomacke weake, they are lyke: but yet care is for

thinges past. As example, some for loue haue slayne them selues, as Cleopatra,
                        The differenc be
                              •
                           wene so
                           
                              •
                           ow and care a Queene of Egipt, after she had spent her pleasant yeres in loue, mingled with lust, when her husband M. Anthonie was dead, she fel into suche sorrow and care, that in thende, she caused her self to be inclosed in a tomb, suffryng two Serpentes to sucke at her breastes, vntil shee had finished her miserable lyfe with lamentacion:Cleopatras death. for al her riches & pompes colde not heale her sorrowful sicknes, but death was only her refuge, so great was her care But Iosephus handleth her death otherwayes.
                     Into what lamentable case fel Queene Dido of Carthage, whiche, was ye daughter of Belus the king of Tire,Didos death. which carefully finished her lyfe in fyre, for the losse & loue of Eneas, as the Poet fayneth? Leander, a worthy yong man, was wonderfully rauished for the loue of a fayre mayden called Erus, which dwelled in an Ilande in the sea Hellesponte.The story of Leāder, Whiche dyed for loue of Erus And this Leander in a Towne called Abidus, the sea passing betwene them both: which Water and salt streame cold not quench his loue that he bare vnto Erus, his affection was so greate, that euery night he would swim ouer this flood, vnto his deare Erus vnto a place called Sestos, whereas shee dwelte, supposyng his pain to be heauenly pleasure. He vsed this so long, that in the ende Neptune frowned, and commaunded Aeolus to rayse vp a storme and tempest against Leander, in which he carefully finished his lyfe. In the morning Erus looked ouer the walles,The death of Leander and Erus for loue. beholding the dead body tossed amonge the rockes: therwith she was sodaynly wounded, with sorrow and care, and with a pittiful crye, cast her selfe from an high Toure into the sea wheras she finished her lyfe, for the loue of Leander.
                     The wyfe vnto Duke Proteselaus, did continuallye weepe for the death of her husband,A noble woman wept to death, for the death of hir husband. vntil she dyed. Sutch loue of late in this realme, hath bene inclosed in the hart of a certayne worthy lady, that for the absence of hir liuing husband, hath ended her lyfe with care, so that after the nomber of many Salt teares, the Salt water was her last drinke, and death her refuge. This affection called loue, bringeth more sorrow with it, then eyther prisonment,Loue is a conquerour. pouerty, or sicknes: as we may reade and see by experience, into what seruitude & bondage it bryngeth people. And doth degenerate many, in a maner out of kynd, making thē more effemin at thā womon: changing Mars into Uenus It altereth complexions, maners & conditions, and maketh of free men slaues, of wyse men fooles, of rychmen beggers, it bringeth man
                           •
                         sicknesses, yea, incurable, through long sorrow and care. Somtyme it doth depryue the wittes and sences reasonable, and maketh Men more madder then Dogges, crueller then Wolfes, more shameles then Apes, rē
                        ting their clothes, waking in their beds, fasting at their bordes, as wyse as Geese, yea, and fynally, what a greate nomber do kill themselues, by strangling, sticking, and drouning: when they cannot obtayne their purpose, and incurable sute? Thus they be rewarded that fall into such doloure and care in this folish affectiō of mind called loue.The fruits of Loue. And if thei might obtayn their purpose in their foolish fyshyng in the flood of fantasy: what shoulde they then get? perhappes nothing but a Serpent, which would alwayes sting them,

or els a weate Ele by the tayle, whych would quickly deceiue them.
                     There is an other affection of the minde, very perilous, daungerous, and incurable, which is cousin G
                           •
                        rmain vnto frensie, whych is called Ielousie: or a greedy foolysh affection of the minde, neuer quieted,Ielousie is cousin Germain to Frensie, marke the fruicts therof. but euer tourmē
                        tyng it selfe, burnyng in a continuall fire. This inward spirituall Uengeaunce, doth make domesticall debate betwene man and Wyfe: and tourneth theyr house of libertie, into a miserable prysone. Double bondage to eche other, with quarelyng in presence, mistrusting in absence, fearyng them of theyr owne house, doubtyng the straunger, yea, and men often tymes mistrustyng their own Chyldren, not to be of their own Generation, whē they haue no argument to the contrary, but deuilish ielousy. Ielousie often tymes breaketh chastitye, amongest them that doe professe Godly Matrimonie: and causeth the one part to desire liberty,The hell of Ielousie. to be out of the fire of that louing Ielous Purgatorie. For some there be that do say, there is no more torment in hell, among the infernal Furies, than there is here in this world amongst Ielous women, which neuer had good opinion of their husbāds: and some men also of their wiues, although they were locked vp in a closset, they hauyng the keie, and sealyng the doore, yet they thinke they are beguiled. Yea, some be so friendly, that they be Ielous of other mens wiues:what spirite Ielousie is. and some women folowyng that example, do the like to other Womens: husbands. Here is marueilous kyndnesse, thus to crucifie them selues to the fyre of follie: but the effect thereof, worketh mischief to them selues, and others. As it is wrytten of one Phanus, which loued his wife wyth sutch Ielousie, that he would neuer suffer her to go out of the doores:How a Ielous foole beguiled himself he also prouyded, that none came in at his gates, or doores, but a great noyse was made through crackyng and tinglyng of Belles whych hanged at them, at which sound with all speede, he would run to see who came in. He so longe vsed this order of watchyng at the Gate, that in the meane tyme hys deuout wyfe gaue hym a Barnards blow, lettyng in her companion, when it was darke, by a broken place in the roffe of the house. Whych, when it was perceyued by the next Neighbours: Lord how they commended Phanus,
                        Ielousie causeth adulterie for so diligent and wittie keepyng of his Gates. Here you do see, that Ielousye bryngeth adulterie, yea, and sometyme it causeth murder: as Helena after the death of Menelaus, fled for succour vnto Poliso, wife to Clipolemus ye kyng of Rhoedes, sonne vnto Hercules, whych burnt with sutch Ielousie towards her husband, that she commaunded her to be hanged vpon a tree.
                     
                        Procris, daily burnyng wyth Ielousie of her husband Cephalus, which was taken in loue wyth an other woman, dyd daily pursue him, from place to place, through fieldes and Wooddes, &c. And vppon a tyme, when Cephalus went foorth, wyth hys Darte in hys Hand, into the Forest, to seeke hys pray: hys Ielous Wyfe pursued hym, and closely shrouded her selfe in couerte, amonge the Brakes, to beholde what her Husband dyd. But as shee moued her selfe, the couert dyd shake, wherein shee was hydden: her husband perceyuyng that, supposyng that shee had bene a Wylde Beast, foorthwyth caste hys Darte,
                           Procris dyd seeke her own death through Ielousie. and vnwares s
                           •
                        ue

his Ielous wife. Well ridde of an euyll sore: O how craftely she did beguile hym.
                     O what Ielousie was betweene Antiopa, and Licus her husband, the Kyng of Egypt,The Ielousie of Antiopa. and what a cruell Murther came thereof, I neede not to fetch no more Examples from old, of the forgotten World, and time past. For thys Euyll is to common, as wee do see by dailye experyence, and a Merueylous plague, both pryuate and publique: the effects thereof are nothyng but miserable vexacion, Dolour, Care, Agonie, and dispayre. And this is to conclude, there is no remedye, but pacyence perfo
                           •
                        ce: for the olde Prouerbe is, that Heresie, Frensye, and Ielousie, be so bred by the Bone, that they wyll neuer out of the flesh, therefore vse no Phisicke for it.
                     There is also an other euyll, ioyned to condicions of wycked Men, whych is none of the passions of the Mynde, nor yet an infirmitye of Nature: but rather to bee numbred among the synnes Mortall, whych is an euyll most intollerable, and moste odious of all vnto a good Nature, whych is called Ingratitude, churlishnes, or vnkyndnesse. I counte it not onely ingratitude,Ingr
                              •
                           titude 
                              〈…〉
                            es 
                              〈◊〉
                            Churlishnes. to be vnthankfull to them, of whome wee haue receyued benefites, but also to do harme to them, by whome wee bee preferred. As example There was no greater dignitye, next vnto Chryst, than to b
                           •
                        e one of hys Apostelles, as Iudas was Also none could bee more trusted than hee, whych kept the Purse as he dyd. Christ gaue hym power to doe Miracles, equally wyth the twelue. He suffered hym to sy
                           •
                         at hys borde, and feede wyth hym in hys owne Dish: 
                           •
                        here could bee no greater kyndnesse than thys, a Mortall man, to syt wyth Gods onelye Sonne.Luke xxii. Math. 
                              •
                           xvi. The 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Iudas that most 
                              ••
                           grateful villayne, his example to a
                              •
                           l 
                              •
                           hu
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           s But thys Uillayne, vngratiously and ingratefully respectyng none of these Benefittes, but lyke a trayterous 
                           •
                        horle, sought hys Maisters Bloud, betraying him to the shamefull death of the crosse. Thys Ingratitude of Iudas, is a goodly president, vnto all Traitours agaynste Prynces, by whome they haue receyued Benefites: and many seruauntes, whych haue ben brought vp from rascall and Beggers states, and through theyr maisters, haue bene preferred into the callyng of estimacion, Wealth, and Worship, whych afterward haue sucked the bloud of them which gaue them first their sucke, and nourishment in theyr aduersitie. O what a monster, and a deformed infernall Serpent is this ingratitude, it is the mother of treason bred in 
                           •
                        ell, enemy to liberality and gentlenes, and is of the ryght lyne of Wrath and enuy, spronge of a deuelysh petigree, worse than wylde beastes. Whych, when they are made 
                           •
                        ame, and receyue any Benefite of theyr keepers▪
                        Gratitude of 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •••
                           stes. they wyll not rent and teare theim: but phaune vpon theim, waggyng theyr tayles, and run about and leape for ioy. As by example, we may see of Horses,
                           
                              •
                           oth god and Nature do abhor ingratefulnes. Dogges, Beares and Apes, whych wyll reioyce in the syght of their Maisters▪ and many tymes, put theyr Lyfe in venture for theim. Although I myght bryng forth many notable Examples to proue thys, it neede not, it is so manyfest. The Scriptures of GOD 
                           •
                        ry out agaynst it, the Lawe of Nature doeth vtterlye reiect it. There is no man worthy to bee called a Gentleman, although hee can auaunce him

selfe of a petigree infinite, and boast neuer so mutche of his byrth, and is a Gentleman borne in deede. If he be infected with ingratitude,To know a very Gentleman. hee is degenerated from his ryght kynd: and is become a counterfet gentleman, & a natural churle, of the right line of Nabel the ca
                           •
                        le, which abused the gentlenes of Dauid, whose wrath was quenched through the beauty, lamentacion, and liberality of Abigael his wife.The shamfull ingratitude of Theseus the son of Ageus. king of Athēs
                     
                     Who can forget or remember without teares, the Traiterous ingratitude of Theseus, the Sonne of Ageus, the king of Athenes, which was a lustye, beautifull and valiante knighte: wantinge no gifte nor grace, that nature might do vnto him He excelled all men in his dayes, in manlye actes, sauing Hercules: he sleu a terrible cruel Bull in Attica in his yong yeares. And when he was xxiiii, years old, by lotte, and desteny of the people of Athenes, he was appoynted and condempned, to be cast vnto a horrible Monster, in the Labyrinth of Creete:The Monster of the Labyrinth. which monster had deuoured many thousandes before, his foode was onely the fleshe of Mankynde, hee cryed and roared out for his pray. This guiltlesse knighte was inclosed in a dungeon harde by, voy
                           •
                        e of all com
                           •
                        orte, bewaylinge his fatall desteny: thus to be cut of in his youthful dayes, beyng a kinges sonne.The greate griefe and lamentacion of Thes
                              •
                           us whē he was in prison, Nowe voyde of all frendship, helplesse, hauinge no su
                           •
                        coure, crying out agaynste the Goddes: Cursing the day of his birth, that he receyued his lyfe within the body of his mother beyng a noble Queene, should eftsones now be buried within the infernal bowels of this horrible monster: voyd of all mercy deadly to behold with venemous Teeth, and flaming eyen, pouring forth poyson at his Mouth, with most noysome ayre and stynke, and his infernal kenel. Thus death approched neare vnto Theseus: which grieued him nothing so much: as to remember the pleasaunt lyfe which hee sometime had, acompanying ye amorous ladies, which wer ful of al courtly courtesye, and the worthy knightes, among whom he alwayes atchieued euer the victory: yea his Musicke was tourned into mourninge, and his libertye that somtyme he had in the sweete Woods & Fields. Was now chaū
                        ged into a little darke Dungeon, for there is no greater aduersity, then in miserye to remember prosperitye.The noble pitiful Lady Ariadne▪ did cō
                           fort the miserable Theseus. & set him at libertye. But Ladye fortune smiled vppon Theseus, and opened the Eare of kynge Minos Daughter, called the Ladye Ariadne, and her syster Phedra: which so pittyed Thesius, that with all spede priuilye sente for the Porter of the Dungeon, not farre distaunte from the Labyrinth, whom with fayre woordes, they entreated to open the Prison Dore and so entred in, beholdyng this lamentable knight: who most humbly kneled downe to Ariadne, commending himselfe to bee her Graces bonde and thrall, durynge his lyfe. To this ende, that if it woulde please her Honor, to inuent some spedye waye to deliuer him frō thys deadlye Monster. Ariadne then cast her pittifull Eyes vppon thys lamentable Theseus beynge secretlye wounded with the worthynesse of hys Person. Pittyinge his miserable estate, sayinge: it was more fitter that shee should serue him as a Wyfe than he hyrs as a thral beyng a kyngs

sonne. And they concluded of the enterpryse how to kil the Monster: and afterward, she, her syster, and the Porter, al to bee imbarked in a barge for Theseus sake, and to flye her fathers land for feare of death. With all spede she prepared balles of waxe and hayre, that Theseus myghte cast into the Monsters mouth,Ariadne fled a way for Theseus sake, forsaking her fathers land. to keepe him occupyed, vntill with sharpe weapon hee might kil his grie
                           •
                        ly course, or bring his monstruous carcasse to the groūd, which came to passe with al spede accordingly, within the secrete caue, or Labyrinth: from whence Theseus came, by the guiding of a Clue of threde deliuered him by the hand of the Lady Ariadne, and so came secretly forth from the caue, and these iiii. with all speede passed away▪ in the night tyme to a country called Enupie, whereas they were rychlye embarked, hauinge wynd and weather toward their iourney,The crafty t
                              •
                           easan of false▪ Theseus vntil at length they came vnto an Iland in the middest of ye raging seas, wheras no man did inhabite, but wyld beastes only There he arryued with his wyfe and syster, the Por
                           •
                        er and Mariners, which after their long trauell vppon the Sea, wer sodenly beguyled with sweete sleapes vppon the land. After the which awaked Theseus and secretly comaunded his Mariners to way their Ankers, and spread their sayles without the sound of whistel or other noyse▪ for f
                           •
                        are of waking Ariadne, whom he left sleaping soūdly, among the swete flowers whom a litle before he had imbraced with folding armes. And secretly taking Phedra by the hand traiterously he toke his leaue with silence aborde they went, and away they sailed. At the length Ariadne awaked, puttynge her hand asyde, feeling her couch al could wher Theseus lay: vp she start wt a tremblyng harte, lamentable looke, and deadly cry running to the rockes of the sea. When the ship was almost out of sight, she did hold vp hir hands to the heauens, and cryed out, bewayling her miserable estate, thus to be left alone without any cause, forsaking her own fathers land, for the loue of Theseus, which had forsaken her for her sister. Then called she to remembraunce, how he was by her deliuered from a Monstruous beast and hee hadde lefte her in a Solitarye Ilande, imprisoned with in the Sea, to lyue amonge the Wylde Beastes, moste ingratefullye forsakynge her.
                     Then Ariadne rent from her, her womanly apparel, making a weffe therof vppon the end of a pole, standing vpon the toppe of a Rocke, crying out Returne, returne, Theseus againe, my deare Theseus, take pitty vpon me▪ who loue thee most.The death of Ariadne. And when she was past all hope, she kneled down and did kisse his fotesteppes, cursyng her sleape, lying her downe in ye bed wher Theseus lay bewailing her fatal desteny. That he should preferre the beauty of her syster, before her vertues, and fynally forgetting her benefytes. This lamentable story she did wryte in barkes of trees: but some do affyrme, her tongue was cut forth, & how she wrought her misery in a cloth, and thus finished her woful lyfe.
                     Ouid doth tel this lamentable storie at large, describing vice & ingratitude which among al other euils, is most intollerable, and the greatest griefe to them,Ingratitude hath killed many a man. yt be of good natures. And nothing soner doth wound the hart, as when the child shall shew ingratitude to the father, the wyfe to ye husband,

the friend tourne to an ennemy. These be such griefes, that it passeth my pore pen to descrybe what paines they bring to the hart of a gentle minded man. Thus do I end of Ingratitude or churlishnes, which hath ended many.
                     There is a passion of the mynd▪ called a sodayne Ioye,Of sodain ioy whiche is of suche force, that the hart casteth from her the vital bloud, that oftentymes it cō
                        meth to passe, that for lacke of strength and liuely power in the hart, the body is killed before the hart do cal back agayne the warme spirites, or blood of lyfe, as we may reade by example.
                     There was a noble matrone of Rome, whiche when a false messenger tolde her that her sonne was slayn in battell:Example of sodayne ioy. shee past the tyme of mourning according vnto nature. But vppon a day, her sonne yet beyng alyue, came vnto her, whose presence moued her spirites to such sodayne ioy, that in his armes she fel doune deade, and neuer reuiued agayne, Valerius Maximus Capite de morte non vulg. sayth of a noble consull of the Romaynes called M. Iuuentius Thal. as he was in a Temple doyng worship, and offring to his goddes, in the Ile called Corsica: letters wer sent him from the whole Senate, which he brake vp, and reade theim.Iuuentius the Consul dyed sodaynly for ioy. And was smitten wyth sutch sodayn ioy, passyng all measure: that or he had finished the readyng, hee fell downe deade, in the presence of all the people, before the Sacrifice in the Temple.
                     Who can forget the noble olde learned Diagoras Rhodius, when in hys presence, his thre valiaunt Sonnes,Diagoras Rhodius did expyre the breth of lyfe for sodayn ioy preuailed in the victory of worthy knighthoode, aboue all other men, and were crowned wyth the Garlands of honour, with the prayse of all the multitude, at the hyll Olympus? These noble young men came, and cast theyr crownes wyth flowers vppon theyr Fathers head: who for sodayne ioy, gaue vp the Soule, and dyed in theyr armes. Thys was a sweete pleasaunt death. of noble Diagoras. Reade thys storye, Cicero lib. i Questi. Tuscul. whych sayth,A pleasaunt death. Diagoras had but two sonnes. But A Gellius sayth he had three sonnes.
                     Some doe dye wyth extreeme laughing, as dyd the Poete Philemon, sayeth (Valerius Maximus) when he satte at Dynner,Philemon the Poet dyed laughing at a
                              •
                            Asse. when an Asse came stalkyng to the Table, and with his sweete face, stretched forth hys Neck, wagging hys eares. The Poete beholdyng his auncient Countenaunce, and hys sadde comely grace: began to smyle at this loutish beast, or foolysh Asse. But when the Asse, lycked a Fygge from the Table, hee dyd eate it so manerly, wrything, and mouing wyth his Lippes: that the Poete thereat so conceited, was smitten into an incessable laughing, vntill death did end his pastime. Againe there be, which haue bin smitten wt sutch inward ioy, that they haue sodainely dyed thereof, when they haue done a mischief, in bloudshedyng, vengeaunce, or cruell murther,Some do reioyce so much in vengeance, that they haue dyed for gladnes. as manye Tyraunts haue, Example of the Tiraunts Sophocles, and Dionisius, as affirmeth Plinius secundus lib vij. cap. liij. In which chapiter, you may read of many sodain deathes, most fearful to be heard. Thus many for gladnes of the destruction of their enemies, haue quickly died: a iust reward, torid the world of Tiraunts, which haue died in so hellish, and enuious infernal zeale, reioycing in taking vengeaunce.
                     
                        Also there is an other passion very feareful to mankind. As when lusty wealthy people,Some do kil themselues whē they haue spoyled their goods. & fallen into det: or els become murderers and traitours. haue spent, spoiled, and Prodigally consumed their goods: then looke they behynd them, and call to remembraunce theire pleasaunte dayes, their honour, riches & great possessions. And when their old freindes forsake theym, when wealth doth flye theym, and miserye take holde of them, then eftsones for lacke of magnanimity, despayre doth imbrace thē As by example, it did to M. Otho, a noble young man which prodigally cō
                        sumed among the lusty gentlemen and Ladies of the Romaines, an infinit substaunce, and when he had runne beyond his race, he thought ther was no way to be his reliefe, but to kil his mayster the emperoure Galba, and through his riches to pay his debtes. But when he missed his purpose of riches, although he was Emperour, he became like vnto a noble Shippe, whose Mariners had cast out al the ballis, ouerwhelmed the barke of their sauegard among the feareful streames & rough rockes:The death of Otho for care. In such case was Otho, who to redeeme honour and liberty, sought to kil his mayster Galba the Emperour, which he so dyd, and was Emperoure for fewe Dayes. But to conclude in fyne for lacke of wealh, to furnish his pompe and grace, to guyde himselfe in meane, with sharpe dagger he persed his careful hart & let forth the spirites of lyfe. Loke further in Sueton of his lyfe. This Man lacked the worthy magnanimity,The wisedom of Deonisethe tyraunt in aduersity. of some worthy kynges, when they wer expulsed and banished from their Landes, and honoures, as Dionisius the tyraunt, who beyng a king and for his great cruelty and sheadynge of the giltles blood, was deposed from his croune and honour, and banished like a vacabond from his landes and people. What, did he cry out, wepe, or dispayre lyke a beast, & hang himselfe? No forsoth not at al. What then? Mary with a lusty manly courage he defyed the spighte of Fortune, and forth hee went to Athens,The king of Boem, what he did in the tyme of pouerty. wheras he became a pore Scholemayster, teaching yong children goodlye letters both in the Greeke and Latin, and liued quietly. Reade Tully of him. Suado
                           •
                        opus the king of Bohem, when his land and cities were subdued through Arnophus the Emperour: he kylled not himselfe, but did chaunge his princely apparel and put on the habite of an Hermite, and accompanied with two solitary men, wente into a wildernesse, whereas he continued stil vntill his death: quyetlye seruinge God, imbracinge the Crosse of Pouertye, as a pleasure to bee rydde from a wicked world.
                     Ualerius of whom Eutropius wryteth, beinge a noble Emperoure, makinge Warre agaynst Mesopotamia:Ualerius the Emperours misery to Sopores the Persian king. hee was ouecome by Sopores the kyng of Persia, and euerye tyme the sayde Sopores didde take his Horse, Ualerius did lye downe prostrate, and was his fote stole, all his life: yet woulde hee not kill hymselfe for care, as manye miserable Men haue done, when they haue spent their tyme most prodigallye consuming theire landes treasure, & riches, with dishonour in abhominacion, wasting theyr welth vaingloriouslye, foolishly, and most beastlye amongest a great Nomber of Parasites, Baudes, Curtisaines, knaues, and common Whores.

In fyne▪ when they haue gotten the hatred of good People, which moste do abhorre wickednes, then they runne vnto their owne conscience, whych most doeth feare them. Then for lacke of grace and magnanimitie,The end of men in desperacion. they flie into the dungeon of desperacion, led thither, through feare and shame, not foreseeing theyr present payne, and endlesse Tormentes in the Life to come. Forthwith in a maze they drowne, hange, sticke, poysone, and burne them selues, and breake their owne Neckes, as did Nero the Emperour, who slue hymselfe, wyth his owne Knife, when he was .xxxii. yere olde. Reade Pontanus de stellis, lib. xxxv. and Eutropius of hys death.
                     Did not Sardanapalus, the last Emperour of the Assirians,
                        The ende of Sardanapalus. which was more effeminate than a Woman, and more Lecherous than a Beast, wyth all hys Pompe, willingly burne hymselfe in Fyre? Of hys Death read Sabellicus. Deoclesian, the persecutour of Chrystes Church, dyd poyson hymself. Iudas the traitour hanged himself. Brutus,
                           Deoclesian slue himselfe. The death of Iudas.
                           The death of Brutus.
                         which was one of them that gaue Cesar the .xxiiii. deadly Woundes, whereof he dyed in the Senate, when as he was slayne by Treason: in the ende kylled hymselfe in despaire, with his owne Sweard, and his wyfe Porcia hearyng thereof, strangled her selfe wyth eatyng of coales. Reade thereof in Plutarcus. Some do kyll thēselues for shame, as Lucretia dyd, whych was violated by Tarquine the proude, the last kyng of the Romaynes. Other some,Lucretius. rather than they would make their Bodyes vnchast, and beguyle their husbandes: haue slayne them selues, as dyd Saphronia a Noble Woman of Rome, to be rid from the temptacion of Decius a Prynce of the Romaynes. But few womē now a dayes,Saphronia wil take the matter so vnkyndly, or put them selues in sutch Daunger, I warrant you. Of this Woman reade in Eusebius. Other many haue had sutch Torment of conscience, or els sutch weakenes of the spirites,Sergeant Hayles of Kente that haue drowned them selues: as dyd Sergeant Hailes of Kent, whych was a wel learned Gentleman in the Lawes of this Realme, & finally, was ouerthrowne in the Battayle of Antichryst. Many Examples of Desperacion, I coulde bryng in, of the most fearefull Deathes of Men and Women, aswell in this our age▪ as from old. But these shall suffyce for our Examples, what euils doe come through these Passions of the Mynde, and perturbacions of the spirites, whych brynge men to despayre, and then to Death, and finallye to dampnacion.
                     For they whych kyll them selues, doe lose theyr hope in GOD, because that they synne agaynst theyr owne Soules, and dye in Murther:To die in desperacion, is to renounce saluacion. for it is wrytten. Thou shalt not kyll. And God doeth abhorre the Bloud thurstie, and no man ought for to dye, but by the iudgement of the Lawe of Nature: that is, when he can no longer lyue: beyng preuented by sickenesse, Age, or els valyauntly to dye in the defence of his Countrey, the gates of Heauen bee not shutte agaynst, sutch no nor agaynst them whych bee hanged, and suffer condempnacion for theyr Offences, by the Lawes of Men, if they doe dye in the Chrystian Fayth, and not lyke to desperate Ruffians. But who so kylleth hymselfe, there is no hope lefte, but the Gates of Hell shall receyue hym: because he lacketh fayth in the tyme of trouble, and pacyence in aduersity. As Saule did whych slue hymselfe.

But Ezekias, when he heard tel he should dye, & the day of death appointed him:Example of Saul, which died in desperacion. he dispayred not, but humbly made his prayers vnto God, which prolonged his dayes. And seing that God hath put the soule within the Body, of reason it is he, that must let it forth againe. For what seruaunt is he that dare take his maisters treasures from his Chest: without hee haue his key or other his lawful warrant? what souldier dare bee so bolde to goe out of raye, before the captayne commaunde him? And who dare kill himselfe before it please almighty God to take him?Example against desperacion. None but they whiche will refuse to dye honestly, who in their liues, haue neither bene faythful, nor fruitefull, pacient, nor pittiful. Or haue bene subiect to any singuler heauenlye vertue, Iob,
                           The pacience o
                                 •
                               Iob. Cha. i.ii.iii
                           And his wiues wickednesse.
                         in all his troubles, when his goods and Chattel were destroyed, and his own natural children slain, his body sore deformed, yea and for agonie did curse the day of his natiuity: yet finally, his greatest plague was, the ingratitude and malice of his owne wyfe, who most wickedlye gaue him counsayle to curse God, despayre, and dye: For all this he killed not himselfe, but paciently reserued his plagues sayinge. The Lord hath geuen me, and he hath taken awaye, his will bee done. And in the end, you may read what consolacion he receiued at the hands of almighty God: & vnto this marke let all Christian menne flie. Like as in Adam we be al dead, so in Christ we do all liue.i. Cor. xv. Furthermore we haue no plagues that fal vpon vs. what trouble soeuer it be, eyther of the body or the soule: but Adame was the cause, whose children we be,Adam began our plagues. whose plagues we suffer: as misery of mynd, bōdage, sicknesse, pouerty. &c. Euen so on the other syde, there is no conselation, or quietnesse of mynd, pacience, ioye, or long suffring, or any other giftes of nature, or Grace: And finally life euerlasting, but al do spring through Christ, who is the beginning, the ende, and the reward of al good thinges. And for as much as we be all imbraced with miseryes,Christ giueth all comfort. and infinite aflictions, and daily cares mouing vs to be weary of this world, and that we haue no dwelling place of continuance here on earth: Let vs humbly obey the commaundements of God, which are for our owne profites, that is to saye, to hope, trust, and loke for helpe at his hande, as the Woman of Canane did, which came to Christ in the tyme of hir trouble, hoping in him, neither killing hir selfe neither her daughter.Who must help vs in the tyme of trouble. The fruites of her fayth and hope, was quietnesse of conscience, and health of Bodye. And why so? Because shee came to Christ in the tyme of hir trouble, for not onlye by hir, but by all the holy Scriptures, we be taught to goe to christ in the tyme of trouble. For there is a promise made, cal vpon me in the day of trouble, and I will heare thee, helpe, and deliuer thee. Also there is another promise of God, saying: if we dye with Christ, we shal liue with him. If we be pacient, we shal also rayne with him for euer. Now this we see to dy with Chryst, is not to dispayre, or to be more impacient then wyld beastes, whiche in most of their rages will not kyll them selues.The best regiment of life. But to conclude, for all infirmityes of the Body, let vs seeke the comfort of Gods meanes, whych is the Phisicion: and for the griefes of Mynde, imbrace the heauenly Phisicke, contayned in Goddes woorde, whych is the pryncipall Regiment.

And furder for a meane betweene them both, that each of vs doe walke in such callyng in this lyfe: that we may be necessarye members, one vnto an other, in the common wealth, to profit each other, and hurt no body. To trauayle for the fruites of the earth, or any other riches, gotten by honest pollicy, and after to spend them accordingly. By prouiding for our selues against the tyme of aduersity. To obey rulers, & pitty the pore, to do as we would be done vnto. To despyse a wicked lyfe, and feare no kynde of trouble, that it shall please god to lay vpon vs. This is the summe of Christen religion, of a honest lyfe, and of a happy end.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     THese perturbations of the mynde, are wonderous feareful, God deliuerer vs al from such infernal plagues, from henceforth. Nowe I thanke you, that you haue shewed me them, euen as I haue felt thē Furder by good examples. you haue wel perswaded me, and finallye with good consolation, you haue healed my woundes of careful miserye. But when al our Phisical remedies wil not helpe, good mayster Health, I pray you seyng that death is ye end of our mortal race, and 
                           •
                        inisher of life, teach me the signes and tokens, of yt most Monstruous fearful Death, and how I might know them. Wherby I might not vaynly trust in this life: which is but lent for a tyme.
                  
                  
                     Health.
                     
                        AFter the day, followeth the nyght, and after lyfe, approcheth moste fearful death: the end of all things, and these haue their tokens and signes before them. As when the daye passeth awaye, it is manifest to euery creature:The cause of the night. the Sonne withdraweth his excellent Lyghte drawing home his beames from vs. Hiding himself, or through his swifte course in his circle. The darke vnmoueable earth doth take from oure eyes the benefits of his bryghtnes: & eftsones it is called no more day, but night and the time of silence or darknes. Euen so, when the spirites of life, haue worne their vesselles, or instruments: or when the grosse humour of Melancholie, or earthly complexion. with extreame cold, haue conuinced, quenched, and wyth force ouercome the warme moystnesse, and Uitall liuely Well spryng of the bloud, the fountayne of Lyfe. Then the body & soule waxe weary of eche other, or when they fall to deuision, or begin to be at debate within them selues, then they neuer sease, vntill they doe come to vtter dissolucion. For thyngs with them selues, beyng at debate, shall quyckly be desolued, whether it be a publyke wealth, or a priuate Body. And all for the want of Unitye. As example. When there is good agreement,Whath mischiefe doth chaunce to the whole body for want of vnity. that is perfecte temperament, in the fower Complexions: then the Body, standeth in good case. But when one Humour doth greatly abound his three Fellowes, gettyng the Uictorie, then for lacke of Unitye, or agreement among them selues: the whole Body is in daunger to giue place

to one & yeld to death As example If choller get the preheminence, then he wil put his three fellowes to the walles: he bringeth in agaynst himself, and then also Iaundice, Tercians, red Leprie, Frensye, headach, Pleuresye. &c. When flegme getteth the rule, then dropsy with a swollen bellye, Face and Legges. &c. doth geue the onset agaynst nature. Euen so in the cold melancholy, Consūption, quarten &c. when it beareth the rule. All these haue their proper tokens and signes going before them and their effectes are death, when they dooe extreamlye rule, vnlesse they throughe the wisedome of the learned be helped. But if they doe meanly abounde, it is not mutch amisse: as if choler do somwhat exceede in drynes and heate, then the coldnes and moister of Flegme, wil pacifye her, and bringe her agayne to her good estate.When the complexions doe want vnity, then the body canot long cō
                           tinue aliue. If Melancholy through coldnes, and drynesse do harme, the blood with his warmenes and moystnesse: wil reduce, and call hir backe from killing the body, and thus one neighbour wil naturally helpe another And whē they wil not accord, or gree in vnity, than purgations. &c. are prepared to helpe the weaker, & expulse the vsurper within the comon wealth of the body which is the mansion of the Soule. or spirites of lyfe after the Philosopher. And as for the most principal humour, or bloud in Sanguine persons, when it beginneth to corrupt, or the body at point of daunger, these sygnes wil come togeather.

                           Signes of sicknes of Blood.
                           Slownesse.
                           Idlenesse.
                           Dulnesse.
                           Yauning or gaping.
                           Stretching forth the armes and legges.
                           No delight or pleasure.
                           Sweete Spattel mingled with bitternesse.
                           Much heauy sleape, with dreams of red colour, or bearyng burdens great and heauy.
                           Perturbacion of the senses.
                           Red grosse vrine stinking.
                           Little appetite or none to meate.
                           Red face with much sweate,
                           Of these signes come stinking feuers. Pestilence, Squinaunce, bloody flixe, &c.
                        
                        
                           Signes of ye sicknes of choler.
                           Yellow colour in the skin.
                           Bitternes in the mouth.
                           Pricking in the mouth of the stomacke▪
                           
                           Heate aboue nature.
                           Lothsomnesse to meate.
                           Lamentacion or great griefe of mynde.
                           Drinesse coueting drinke of sondry kyndes.
                           Uomittes of yellow and greene.
                        
                        
                           
                           Signes of the sicknes of choler
                           Small or no sleape, but fearful fyery dreames of stryfe. &c
                           Yellowe vryne, little residence, & much yellow fome.
                           Of these signes come Iaundice, Tercians, Pleurisies, madnes. Collickes &c.
                        
                        
                           The signes of sicknesses of melancholy.
                           Pale colour in the face.
                           Sowernes in the mouth.
                           Belching of wynd.
                           Little sleape, yet horrible and infernal dreames.
                           Much thought, pensieuenes, and care.
                           A desperat mynde.
                           More leaner, then before in the body.
                           Straightnes in the stomacke.
                           Eluishnes, of countenaunce, and taunting in woordes.
                           Coldnesse, starting, and fearful.
                           Whyte, thin vryne.
                           Of these come Quartens, Morphew, Leprie, Cāker, madnes, hardnesse of the Spleene. &c.
                        
                        
                           The signes of the sicknes of Flegme.
                           Sluggishnes, and dulnes of memory.
                           Forgetfulnesse.
                           Much spittyng.
                           Much sleepe.
                           Paynes in the head, specially in the hinder part.
                           Swelling in the face and cheekes.
                           Euil digestion.
                           Whyte dropsy lyke in coloure.
                           Pacience with doltishnes, lacking liuely quicknes.
                           Dreaming or going naked, drowning or of Snow
                           Of these come Quotidians, Dropsyes, Palseye, fallynge sicknes. &c.
                        
                     
                     And to helpe all these, there are singuler good medicins: both in the Simples, and chiefly in the compoundes. But yet brother Sicknes note Hippocra
                              •
                           es. the wel and chiefe tree, from whence the good order of Phisicke first did spring, which is a general text. Uppon whose wordes. C. Galen. &c. doth comment and wryte at large, his great workes. He wrote one small worke also called ye 
                        Aphorismes, wherin is great knowledge. But to our purpose For this place of signes dedly mark what hee saith in som of those Apho & Praeno.
                     
                     Whosoeuer beyng an healthful body, is sodaynly payned, and quickly after hath lost his voyce, and starteth withal: he shal dye within seauen daies,
                           Quicu
                                 •
                              que saui dolore capitis repente. &c. Apho Hyppo.
                         next folowing after. It is not only through the inflamacion of the Spirites but also by the vniuersal matter, drawen into the brayn, from the stomack. &c
                     If one be amased, & fal into idle talk of ye prick into the head, it is deadly.
                     A c
                           •
                        nuulsion, shrinking, or cramp in the senewes, after a purgacion,
                           Ex capitis 
                                 •
                              ctu &c. Aphori. vj. Conuulsio a. veratro lethal
                                 •
                              a est Aphor.
                         is very perillous or deadly.
                     A conuulsion after the taking of Elleborus, deadly.
                     
                        A conuulsion after a wound, is deadly.
                     
                        
                           Considera
                                 •
                              e vero con
                                 •
                              enit etiam oculorū praeno. Hipp. Capi. 4.Who so is dreadfull or heauy in a Frensie, the signe is deadly.
                     It behoueth the Phisicion, to consider the eyes of his Pacient, when hee sleepeth: if there appeare any whyte thyng betweene the eye liddes. If hee haue had no laxe, nor receiued any pocion to purge before: it is a signe very terrible, and present death.
                     To be deafe in a longe Feuer, if the body be weake: it is a token of death.
                     It is an euyll signe, when one hath a crampe, in bleedyng at hys Nose. or els sowneth wythall.
                     A stoppyng in the throate, or suffocacion fallyng to one whych hath a feuer. and a swellyng in the throate, is a perilous deadly token.
                     Who so in an Agewe, can neither tourne his Necke, nor swallow hys owne spattle, death is at hand.
                     If a 
                           •
                        runkard do sodainly lose hys speach, hee shall sodaynly dye of a Crampe,
                           Si obrius. quispiam repen
                                 •
                              e obmutuerit. Aphor pars .ii.vii.
                         or conuulsion: vnlesse he fall into an Agew, or els receyue power to speake agayne, when he hath digested the surfet
                           •
                        e.
                     They whych be swelled in the backe, before they come to the age of .xii. yeares: if it chaunce of the shortnesse of breath, or els a very stronge cough, shall sone dye.
                     A voluntarie laxe, comming after apleurisie, or the sickenes of the lunges, is a deadly token.
                     
                        
                           Mulieri grauidae si mammae. &c. Apho. pars. 3.
                              •
                            
                           Inquibus mor. men
                                 •
                              e. &c. pho. pars. 31.Who so in the empty place in the stomacke, hath foule rotten matter, or els the dropsy: if they be eyther so cut, or burned, whereby all the Water runneth forth, surely it is present death.
                     Who so hath his spattle stinking, when it is burnt vpon the coales, and also if his haire do easely fall from his head, it is a signe of death.
                     A laxe or great cough, wyth spittyng filthy matter, is deadly,
                     Who so often times are weakened, and lose theyr strength without some many
                           ••
                        st cause shall haue sodaine death.
                     
                        
                           
                              Quibus hepa
                                    •
                                  aqua plenu Apho. pars 
                              
                                 •
                              .8
                           
                              Quibus in febribus morbus regius & Apho pars. 
                              
                                 •
                              .35.
                        When a womans breastes doe deminish, beyng with Chyld: it signifieth the Chyld is dead.
                     To be discontent in the tyme of sickenes, when thynges are giuen in medicine, it is an euyll token, for the contrary is good.
                     In euery sickenes, if Melancholy or blacke choller, bee eyther purged vpward, or downeward wythout medycine, it is both perillous, and deadly.
                     Who so euer bee Splenetike, and haue a bloudy flixe, if it longe continue: then they fall to the dropsy, or els theyr foode, shall passe through theyr guts, not digested: this is a deadly signe.
                     Who so euer haue their lyuer repleted, or filled full wyth Water: and if the same water breake downeward to the belly, it is present death.
                     Who so in h
                           •
                        ate Feuers, is taken with the yellow Iaundice, in the seuēth ix.xi. or the .xiii. day, it is good: so that hys right side waxe not hard: but if these dayes want, and the side waxe hard, it is deadly.
                     A wound in the brayne, heart, diaphragma, or midriffe, small Guts, stomack and liuer, is euer death.
                     If the yellow Iaundice come before the vii. day, it is perilous.
                     In laxes, blacke stooles are euill: except purgacions cause them.

To haue any Melancholie stoole, in the beginning of any sicknesse: it is a signe deadly.
                     So is a bloudy flixe, begynning wyth a Melancholy sicknes, lyttle pieces of flesh, appearing in a bloudy flixe is present death.
                     If a Woman wyth Childe be sodainly taken wyth any grieuous sicknes, it is a present death.
                     It is perilous for a Woman wyth Chylde, to haue a great laxe.
                     A Woman with Chyld, if she be lettē bloud, it kyll
                           •
                        th her chyld:
                           Mulierē v
                                 •
                              er
                                 •
                               gerent
                                 •
                              m▪ &c. Apho pars. 3 the nearer the birth, the greater perilll.
                     A woman hauing a Crampe or conuulsion in the temperate tyme of her termes, is perilous.
                     He whych hath an ague, beyng taken with a conuulsion is in Daunger: who so hath a conuulsion before his feuer, is in no sutch perill.
                     Feuers, whych do not giue ouer the third day▪ are perilous.Of Feuers
                     
                     In a long agewe, if the outward members are very cold, and the inward partes hoat and dry: death is at hand.
                     In a longe feuer, when the Lippes, Nose, or mouth be drawen a wrie or disgrased: so that the pacyent can neither see or heare, and is in weakenesse, death at hand.
                     If any hauyng an Agewe, sweate in these dayes, it is good, if not, it is perilous .ii.v.vii.ix▪ xi, xiiii.xvii.xxi▪xxvii xxxiiii.Of Sweat
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Who so hath the Pestilence, and bleedeth not before twelue Howers, or sleepeth eyght howers after bleeding: death is at hand.
                     Cold sweate wyth a sharpe Feuer, signifieth death.The signes of dea
                              •
                           h by the face▪
                        
                     
                     If the face of a sicke man be chaunged from the healthfull estate, wyth a sharpe nose, hollow eyen, writhen Temples, cold Eares, contract
                           •
                        d in the extreame parts, lyke aleafe when it is drye, hard s
                           •
                        in in the foreh
                           •
                        ade, and dr
                           •
                        , pale faced, little or no sleepe, bityng or tremblyng of the Lippes. &c. Th
                           •
                        se are signes of death▪ sayth Hippocra. in libro primo praeno. capit. iij. beginnyng at Conside
                              •
                           are por
                              •
                           o hoc modo co
                              •
                           uenitin morbis acutis. &c▪
                        
                        The signes of death by the eyen.
                     
                     If the pacyent can not abyde the lyght of Sunne, syre, or Candle, but flie the same, or weepe inuoluntarily, wythout cause, or make one eye appeare less
                           •
                        r than the other or goggle wyth them, lookyng murch a squynte, except the eyes were so in health, or els haue the whytes tourned into bloudye red, or haue darcke or blacke small veines in them wyth vnstablenesse, and concaue holownes, or open in the sleepe wyth the ne
                           •
                        ther Lippe hangyng downe, and the vpper Lyppe drawen vp. &c. Surely death is at hand, Hippo. prono.
                     
                     Feele also the Pacient when he lyeth in his Bed, his armes, sides, Necke,The signes of death by lying in the 
                              •
                           ed breast, and Legges, whyther the partes be payned or flexible, or haue loste theyr strength and are styffe, if he lie vpward: except it were his old custome, and shrynke to the beddes 
                           •
                        eete wyth casting abroade the handes and 
                           •
                        eete, sleepyng wyth a wyde
                           •
                        open mouth, and couet to lye naked, death, death, and the graue are at hand Hipp
                              •
                           cra. prono.
                     
                     If the Pacyent lye in hys syckenesse, vppon his belly, except custome moue it, and so doe sleepe: it signifyeth a great syckenesse in the Breast, or

belly. Or els to be mad, and lose hys wittes, through the malignitie of the sp
                           •
                        rites▪ and to sitte vppon their buttockes in their sicknesse,Signes of death by the teeth. of a sharpe sickenes, it signifyeth the perill of death, or great inflamacion in ye lunges. As Hippocrates sayth in the Prae. Capi. vij. at in ventrem decumbere. &c.
                     
                     To gnash or grinde the teeth in Feuers, is eyther a great vexacion of the minde,Signes deadly by woundes. or madnesse at hand, or els death: For it is an affection of the Sinewes Notwithstanding young chyldren, tormented wyth Wormes are not in thys perill alwayes, when they do gnash the Teeth.
                     In a stroke of a deepe wound▪ when conuulsion followeth: and no matter, or corruption commeth to the wound so
                           •
                        e after, if the body be pale and swarte in colour,Signes deadly by the handes. and dry wyth weakenes of digestion, death approcheth. And this affyrmeth Hippocra. de signis ex vlcere. Cap. viii.
                     
                     Who so in a sharpe Feuer, sickenesse of the Lunges, frensie, or paynes of the head, doth wrythe the hand to his Nose or face, as though he would kill Flees or Flies,Signes deadly by 
                              •
                           he breath. or k
                           •
                        yt a knotte, or brush hys clothes, or els pull vp Rushes this is a presēt signe of death, sayth Hippocra. lib. primo. prae Capi. ix. de gestaculo manuum.
                     
                     Shortnesse of breath, and of lytle force, doth signify great dolour inflamacion and madnesse,Signes deadly by sweate. commeth of great breathyng, like a Bull, or a wild beast. Cold breath, wyth the coldnesse of the nose and mouth, Death draweth neare, wyth fare well vain World, wyth flesh, and bloud: Reade Hippocrates prae. vbi inquit, spiritus densus dolorem significat. &c.
                     
                     
                        Signes deadly by swellīg.Sweates are best in sharpe Feuers, in the dayes of theyr decrees, or iudgments: but the contrary are perillous. As when sweate is cold, specially in a sharpe feuer, death approcheth: for cold sweate, commeth from grosse matter, without the spirites of liuely warmnes. But i
                           •
                         it bee but a meane leuke warme sweate,Signes deadly by spattle. called a faynte sweate: then it doeth signify a longe sicknesse.
                     If the breast be swelled with throbbyng, beating, or trouble in the breast, or the vpper part of the same: and therewith vnstable, fearefull eyen vtter madnesse, or death doe approch. But bleedyng at the nose wyll helpe it, specially in younge persones: but hardnesse in those partes, dolour, and swellyng, is death.
                     Spattle when one spyttes, beyng whyte, lyght, and sweetish, not varyable in colour, and also very easy drawne forth▪ is good: but if it be sweatye filth wyth matter, or blacke and stinkyng, wyth yelownes▪ greenenesse, or blacknes. &c. Filth which is called pus a putredine, there is perill of death, And that which is good, is of the benefite of the bloud: and goodnes of digestion, and the goodnes of flegme and bloud.
                     It is perilous, not to neese, in the time of sicknesse: but so neese vehemētly, is perilous also.
                     Water, as Dropsy betweene the skyn, and the flesh, commyng of a sharpe Feuer is euer perilous and euill in this case: when the nayles appeare darke and pale, and the priuy members and stones doe swell, it is a great token of death. Reade of thys, Hippocrates in libro secundo praeno. De aqua inter cutem.
                     
                     
                        Who so doth wake long, and can not sleape, eather a great sicknes doth approach, or els madnes, through an inflamatiō. Who so breaketh his sleap o
                           •
                         his common custome, and falleth into much waking in the night, this is an euil sygne, and goeth before a perilous euil.
                     In al sicknesses hardnesse of the beallye, or costifnesse, vile stinke, blacke stooles, or bloudy flixes, are very perilous, but breaking of wynde downward, at the stoole is good▪
                     
                     To vomit whyte flegme, not very grosse or yellow, is good, but muddye darke or blacke, it is perillous. But to vomit sondrye coloures of ech sorte it is most perillous and deadly.
                     To bee vnnatural dry, with a Feuer hedach, shortnes of breath, muche sweete spattle, high coloured, great veynes, prickinge in the syde, it is ye sygnes of ye perilous pleuresy, & death except digestiō & blood letting. Of blood letting I haue spoken in place, & thus I do end because tyme is so passed or els I would haue spoken more of the Crises, or iudgement, and of pulse, and vryne with a regiment agaynst the sweate and the fearful plague called Pestilence: which I pr
                           •
                        y God deliuer vs from. I pray thee take all my talke in good parte: and thus I commend thee to the liuing god, that hath made both heauen and earth, to helpe and preserue thee with his healthful medicines, and good defence agaynst all sicknesse, sorenesse, and woundes, contayned within my little Bulwarke.
                  
                  
                     Sicknes.
                     I Most hartely thanke thee, gentle Health, God bringit so to passe: and graunt vs after this lyfe, a blessed estate euerlastinge whereas is no misery and wretchednes. But happinesse and perpetual blessednes, wt Christ our God. Amen.
                  
                  
                     The ende of the Dialogue, betweene Health and Sicknes: By william Bulleyn, Marcij Anno salutis. 1562.
                  
                     
                        Though our giftes bee neuer so small,
                        Yet let vs geue thankes to God for all.
                        And who of talentes hath great store,
                        Their accomptes to god shal be the more.
                     
                     
                        VV.B.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  An Index of the booke
                  
                     
                        A
                        
                           A Good Richen, is a good Apothicaries shop
                        
                           1
                        
                        A pocion must bee geuen at three sondrye tymes, to remour and expulse matter from the stomacke
                        2
                        A caue
                              •
                           t to beware
                        Idem
                        An example betweene a Simple and a compounde medicine.
                        4
                        Achab did kil Naboth for his vineyarde.
                        6
                        A cauiat for Sommer.
                        11
                        A Clister to mollify the belly in the tyme of daunger.
                        14
                        A good note to be obserued, when nature is weake.
                        Idem
                        A plaster for the flixe.
                        15
                        A consideracion in Eatynge and Drinkinge to be hadde, and of the variety of meates
                        Idem.
                        A cause why the soule departeth from the Body.
                        Idem
                        A good rule to be obserued.
                        16
                        An orore for the dyeting of sutch as be sicke of sharpe 
                              •
                           euers.
                        Idem
                        As the complexion is▪ so man requyreth his foode in the tyme of health, thynges like to his nature, but in sicknes the cont
                              ••
                           
                           rye.
                        Idem
                        Aires are to be obserued in sicknesses, as in health.
                        17
                        A sygne of digestion.
                        18
                        An example of Brute beastes
                        Idem
                        An Hickop after a Uomitte is perillous.
                        Idem
                        A goodly way to helpe the Hickop, after a vomitte.
                        20
                        An expulsiue for an Idle loute.
                        Idem
                        A good reward for diligent labor.
                        Idem
                        All the woorkes vnder the Sonne, are nothinge but vanitye, and afflic
                              •
                           ion to the mynde.
                        23
                        Athanasius feare.
                        24
                        A shift for fresh water Souldiers.
                        Idem
                        A lesson agaynst anger
                        Idem
                        A wrathful wretch in battail.
                        25
                        A wrathful part of Alexander, in killing of Clitus
                        Idem
                        A noble woman wept to death, for the death of her husband.
                        Idem
                        Ar
                              ••
                           on
                              •
                            fled away for Theseus sake, forsaking her fathers lande.
                        27
                        A pleasaunt death.
                        27
                        Adam began our plagues.
                        29
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        B
                        BEware of drying medicines in Somme
                              •
                            for Cho
                              •
                           ericke personnes.
                        11
                        Boxing is good for a Ludber.
                        20
                        Boxinge doth drawe forth euil humours.
                        Idem.
                        Boxing doth stop the termes, when they do abound
                              •
                           .
                        Idem
                        Both God and nature abhorre ingratefulnes
                        26
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        C
                        Compounded humours may not be purged with Simple medecines for they are 
                              •
                           o weake.
                        4
                        Cowe, Sheepe, and Plowe, be our nurses.
                        8.
                        Cold doth take, and is not taken.
                        6
                        Choler is sone drye, therfore purge but little, but the fleshly body hath much moysture, therfore purge the more.
                        
                           1
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        Cold medecins to the whole, but warme to the sicke must be geuen.
                        Idem
                        Certayne causes which lette medicine to worke
                        
                           14
                        
                        Corrupt ayres bring sondry diseases.
                        
                           17
                        
                        Cholericke persons most not fast much.
                        21
                        Christ giueth al comfort.
                        29
                        Cleopatras death.
                        25
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        D
                        Dreames do admonish menne to feare God
                        6.
                        Death is the end of lyfe.
                        14
                        Drunkar
                              •
                           es what the doe.
                        22
                        Didos death.
                        25
                        Diag
                              •
                           ras Rhodius did expire the breath of lyfe for sodayn ioy.
                        28
                        Deoclesian slue himselfe.
                        29
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        E
                        
                           Elleborus albus, the poyson therof
                        10
                        
                           Example of waxe and fyre.
                        14
                        Extremes be perilous thinges.
                        Idem
                        Extreme heate & cold be euil.
                        
                           15
                        
                        Exercise before meate.
                        
                           17
                        
                        Equitacion is very wholesome.
                        19
                        Examples of sodayn feare.
                        23
                        Euill parentes, and euil children.
                        24
                        Example of Marcellus.
                        Idem
                        Examples of wrath in Nero.
                        Idem
                        Examples of sodayn ioy.
                        27
                        Example of Saul, which dyed in desperacion.
                        29
                        Example agaynst desperacion.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        F.
                        Fower thinges considered, attraction dissoluing.
                        1
                        Feruent prayer vnto God, dooth mittigate his wrath
                        17
                        Fear is lyke a monster of hel.
                        
                           24
                        
                        Feare in Christ.
                        Idem
                        Feare in sainct Peter.
                        Idem
                        Feare of the Christians.
                        Idem
                        Feare maketh men offer to Idolles.
                        Idem
                        Fooles be affraid of the Mare in their slepe
                        22.
                        Feare bringeth desperacion, example of Iudas.
                        24
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        G
                        Good counsayle in the tyme of trouble.
                        7
                        God the very Phisicion
                        9
                        God doth woorke by Mitacle, and meanes.
                        Idem.
                        Gods vengeance.
                        23
                        Good intententes, and good actes be twoo thinges.
                        4
                        Gratitude of domme beastes.
                        26
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        H.
                        How to prepare medicine
                        3
                        How to know what humour do abounde by his proper token.
                        Idem
                        He which loueth God shal haue hartes rest.
                        10.
                        How to know whether Choler be purges, or no.
                         
                        How to quicken the stomacke
                        
                           15
                        
                        How to prouoke vomit, and how to stair it.
                        16.
                        How the stomacke must be prepared toward sleape.
                        22
                        How to auoyd euil dreames
                        Idem
                        Hippocrates vpon sleapes.
                        Idem
                        How a ielous foole beguyled himselfe.
                        26
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        I
                        Iohn Preston, called Iohn of stonham.
                        2
                        It helpeth much to Nature, to prouoke vryne.
                        
                           3
                        
                        Ignoraunt Barboures, their fruites.
                        4
                        In Adam we haue our fal.
                        6
                        Infidelles haue singuler giftes of God.
                        9
                        In Elleborus you shal know how to correct the same.
                        14
                        Idlenes the mother of mischiefe.
                        18
                        Idlenes bryngeth mischiefe to the body and soule, and pouerty.
                        Idem
                        It is not good to be trimmed of ye Barbour at night, but in the morning▪
                        
                        
                           19
                        
                        In this lyfe we haue our purgatory, and yt we feele and perceiue.
                        6
                        Ielousy is cousin germain to frensy, marke the fruites thereof
                        26
                        Ielousy causeth adultery
                        Idem
                        Ingratitude or vnkindnes, called churlishnes.
                        Idem
                        Ingratitude hath killed manye a Manne.
                        27.
                        Inuencius the Consul, dyed sodaynlye for ioye
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        K
                        
                           KYnges and Quenes be subiect to the miseryes of this Worlde, and haue no perfite felicitye, before their mortall ende. and beginning of immortall lyfe.
                        7
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        L
                        Lyke as Heate consumeth Snowe, euen

so doth Phisicke money
                        2.
                        Lurking humours how to find them and expulse them.
                        3
                        Let no man be angry with an other mans folly.
                        10
                        Little trauel for the sicke.
                        18
                        Loue is a conquerour.
                        5
                        Loue maketh beastly fooles.
                        Idem
                        Lucretius.
                        29
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        M.
                        Mens natures must be obserued, a little medecine will worke much of some men, and a stronge medecine will seante worke on some other men.
                        2
                        
                           Methodici be Phisicians, that obserue certayn rules by art.
                        Idem
                        Medicines solutiue, why they are giuen
                        Idem.
                        Melancholy the worst humour of Nature begatte a sonne called the Quarten.
                        4.
                        Matter in the Ueines must be lette out by bloud letting, and in the Belly, by clister, in the Breast by vomit.
                        5
                        Mannes lyfe is both shorte and miserable.
                        6
                        Medecine doth chaunge, and meat is chaū
                           ged.
                        7
                        Medecines for feeble stomackes to purge gently.
                        10
                        Menne, Women▪ and Children, must take medecines, according to their strength and age
                        11
                        Muche humour must bee purged by little & little and not at once.
                        12
                        Much watch causeth raw humoures in the stomacke.
                        22
                        Moderate walke after Meat, profiteth.
                        17
                        Modera
                              •
                           e exercise is a suffrayn thing.
                        18
                        Men do dreame according to their temperament or complexion.
                        6
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        N
                        Nature hath many hidden desyres, vnknowen to the Phisicion▪
                        
                        10
                        Nature hath prepared that one creature dreadeth and feareth an other
                        12
                        Note which is the most wholesome ayre to dwel in.
                        
                           17
                        
                        Neesyng doth help women in their trauell▪
                        
                        20.
                        No man or beast, can liue without Sleape.
                        21
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        O
                        Of sweete fleume.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        Obseruacions in blood letting.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        Of the tyme of medecine.
                        7
                        One may slepe after Pilles, but yet beware of old pilles.
                        8
                        Of the quantitye of matter to bee purged.
                        12.
                        Of ouermuch purging the bodye, the remedy to helpe the same.
                        13
                        Of Syrupes and drinkes.
                        15
                        Of fricacion the vertue therof.
                        18
                        Of neesing the profite thereof.
                        20
                        Of sweates profitable and vnprofitable to a common wealth.
                        Idem
                        Of two kyndes of sweates, natural, and artificiall.
                        21
                        Of good and bad sleepe.
                        
                           22
                        
                        Of the sodayn alteracion of the mynd, from ioy to care.
                        23
                        Of feare what it is.
                        Idem
                        Of heate artificial and natural.
                        24
                        Of Cholericke heate.
                        Idem
                        Of sodayn ioye.
                        28
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        P.
                        Propertye and place must bee obserued.
                        2
                        Preparatiue must bee fyrst geuen, and then Purgacion.
                        Idem
                        Purge that which should be purged, or els medel not.
                         
                        Purgers of Flegme.
                        4
                        Purge vpward in Sommer, and downeward in Wynter.
                        
                           5
                        
                        Place where medicine should bee ministred conueniently ioyned wyth tyme.
                        6
                        Prospe
                              •
                           ity is very slippery.
                        Idem
                        Pilles may be made of all kynde of medycines.
                        8
                        Poore men be exalted through vertue,
                        9
                        Purge flegme more than choller, and Melancholy more than flegme
                        12
                        
                           Phisicions ought to haue a perfect knowledge of the nature of places and aire▪
                        
                        17
                        Pleasaunt people they are.
                        Idem
                        Poxe is clensed by sweate.
                        21
                        Pleasure is noysome to the disquiet heart.
                        23
                        Procris dyd seeke her owne death, through ielousie.
                        26
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        S
                        Scamonie is perilous, except it be wel prepared, and killeth many.
                        
                           3
                        
                        Signes manifest, declaryng what humors beare the greatest rule in the Bodyes of men and women, without which i
                              •
                            is not possible to purge accordyng to arte, but rather to kyll.
                        
                           4
                        
                        Signes to know when Melancholye approcheth, after whom commeth the quarten.
                        Idem
                        Sorrow is for things past, and feare is for thinges to come.
                        6
                        Sodain gotten substaunce remayneth not long
                              •
                           .
                        10
                        Signes of death, through purgyng of the body.
                        14
                        Short sicknesse, thin broth: longe sickenesse thicke broth.
                        
                           6
                        
                        Sweete ayre to be made in the time of sicknes with perfumes.
                        17
                        Signes of death by the teeth.
                        32
                        Signes deadly by wounds.
                        Idem
                        Signes deadly by the hands.
                        Idem
                        Signes deadly by the breath.
                        Idem
                        Signes deadly by sweate.
                        Idem
                        Signes deadly by swelling.
                        Idem
                        Signes deadly by spattle.
                        Idem
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        T
                        The fruict of rash ministracion of Medycines.
                        
                           1
                        
                        The vertue of bitter medicines is greate.
                        2
                        The cause of sicknesses.
                        Idem
                        The chiefe signe of digestion.
                        3
                        That humour whych doe abound purge the same.
                        Idem
                        The Manna of Calabria is the best in the world, and falleth in the Night as dew vpon flowers and leaues.
                        4
                        The fire will get the victory▪ if the Water be not equall, or haue the maisterie.
                        ibi.
                        To know when medicines hath wroughte theyr effect.
                        
                           5
                        
                        The humours regions, are chiefly to bee considered.
                        Idem
                        The day naturall, and the Day artificiall.
                        Idem
                        The fower complexions raigning euery one sixe howers.
                        Idem
                        The aged, the very young weake folke, and Women with chyld, may not bee let bloud.
                        Idem
                        The hope of the lyfe to come.
                        6
                        The soule neuer sleepeth.
                        Idem
                        The troubles of the minde, be greater than the crosses of the body.
                        Idem
                        The obseruacion of complexions.
                        8
                        To giue medicine in the fit of a Feuer is perilous.
                        Idē
                        
                        The life of the plain People in the Countrey.
                        Idem
                        The end of wycked men.
                        9
                        The Goute loueth rych men, but is afraied of poore folkes.
                        13
                        To coole the mouth.
                        Idē
                        
                        The causes why medicines work immo.
                        14
                        Tenasmus what it is, & how to helpe it.
                        15
                        The earth is mother of euery liuīg thing.
                        id
                        To feede of diuers sortes of meates corrupteth the body.
                        Idē
                        
                        To eate both fish and flesh together, hurteth the flegmatike body.
                        Idem
                        The melancholy.
                        16
                        The Sanguine.
                        Idem
                        The practise of Idle people,
                        18
                        The Heathē ar better, thā many christiās.
                        1
                        Thre things to be obserued in fricaciōs.
                        
                           19
                        
                        The cause of vomit and when it helpeth, and when it hurteth.
                        Idem
                        To helpe 
                              〈◊〉
                            Hickop.
                        Idem
                        Tucke, and Raper.
                        20
                        The Carter doth daily help the courtier,
                        id
                        The great goodnes of fasting, both for th
                              •
                            soule and body.
                        21
                        The rich vse gluttony, & the pore penury,
                        id
                        The vertue or benefite of sleepe or rest.
                        idē
                        
                        The cause why a drūkard do di
                              •
                            sodainly.
                        22
                        To whom watch is good.
                        Ibidem
                        The afflictions of the minde, is hard to bee helped.
                        Idem
                        The ix. heauenly Muses, can smally cōforre some careful hart, when it is in care.
                        23
                        The sacred gift that the nine heauenly Muses haue, and can giue to others when they be in trouble.
                        Idem
                        The names of the nine Muses, with theyr giftes.
                        Ibidem
                        
                           The perturbacion or sodayn mocion of the minde, must be well obserued.
                        Ibidem
                        The ielousie of Antiopa.
                        26
                        The treason of Iudas, that most ingratefull villain, his example to al churles▪
                        
                        idē
                        
                        To know a very Gentleman.
                        27
                        The sh
                              •
                           mefull ingratitude of Theseus, the sonne of Ageus, the kyng of Athenes.
                        idē
                        
                        The Monster of the Labyrinthe▪
                        
                        Ibidem
                        The great grief and lamen
                              •
                           acion of Theseus, when he was in pryson.
                        Ibidem.
                        The noble pitifull Lady Ariadne, did comfort the miserable Theseus, & set him at liberty.
                        Ibidē.
                        The crafty treason of false Theseus
                        Idem
                        The death of Ariadne.
                        Ibidem
                        The death of Otho for care.
                        28
                        The Wisedome of Dionise the tyraunt, in aduersitie.
                        Ibidem
                        The king of Bohem, what he did in the tyme of pouerty.
                        Idem
                        The end of men in desperacion.
                        29
                        The end of Sardanapalus.
                        Ibidem
                        The death of Iudas.
                        30
                        The death of Brutus.
                        Ibidem
                        To dye in desperacion, is to renounce saluacion.
                        Idem
                        The pacience of Io
                              •
                           .
                        Idem
                        The best regiment of lyfe.
                        Idem
                        The cause of the Nyght.
                        Idem
                        The signes of death by the face.
                        32
                        The signes of death by the eyen.
                        Idem
                        The signes of death by lying in the bed.
                        idē
                        
                        The signes of a pleurisie.
                        33
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        V
                        Use maketh the labour easy.
                        18
                        Uomit helpeth the flixe.
                        19
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VV
                        When purging medicines are giuen, first minister herbes & drink to prouo
                              •
                           e Urine.
                        2
                        When one discendeth into himself, he shall behold fearful thinges.
                        6
                        Wicked spirites, do molest our spirites.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        What thing is best for mankinde.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                        Why purgacion worketh not naturally.
                        8
                        We
                              •
                           ke stomackes, can not away wyth stronge medicines.
                        Ibidem
                        What harme winde doth in a Feuer, or after purgyng.
                        13
                        When the pacient is in perill, the remedie to helpe him.
                        
                           14▪
                           
                        
                        What k
                              •
                           ndes of meates do cause good bloud.
                        16
                        What hurt commeth of an empty stomack when ye goe to bed.
                        Idem
                        UUhat ayres corrupteth the bloud.
                        17
                        UUhat situacion is best for a house▪
                        
                        Idem
                        UUhat profit commeth by exercise.
                        
                           18
                        
                        UUhen to vse rubbing, or frication, and wherefore.
                        19
                        UUhen to trauayle or play.
                        Idem
                        UUhat persones may best vomit.
                        Idem
                        UUho may worst 
                              •
                           omit.
                        Idem
                        When to vomit.
                        Idem
                        When it is good to bleede.
                        20
                        UUho must not bleede.
                        Idem
                        UUho ought to swear, and who not.
                        21
                        UUhen sweate is not good.
                        Idem
                        UUhen sl
                              •
                           epe is perilous.
                        22
                        UUhat dreames do signify.
                        Idem
                        UUhat spirite gelousie is.
                        26
                        Who must helpe vs in ye time of trouble.
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                        UUhat mischief doth chaunce to the whole body, for want of vnity.
                        30
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   