
      
         
            
            
            ΔΑΦΝΙΣ ΠΟΛΥΣΤΕΦΑΝΟΣ.
            An Eclog treating Of Crownes, and of Garlandes, and to whom of right they appertaine.
            Addressed, and consecrated to the Kings Maiestie.
            By G. B. Knight.
            Quod maximum, & optimum esse dicitur, oportet esse Vnum. ex Arist. Top. li. 7.
            
            Iohn  Morris.
            AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld for Thomas Adams. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            QVOD DEVS CONIVNXIT, HOMO NON SEPARET.
            Math. 19.
            Quatuor hasce cruces clypeo coniunxit in vno
(Quas ergò nemo separet) ipse Deus.
         
         
            
            INVICTO, PACIF. FOEL. AVG. CHRISTIANISS. FIDEI DEFENSORI, IACOBO D. G. MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, GALLIAE, & HIBERNIAE REGI, DOMINO SVO CLEMENTISS. HAEC STEMMATA, & DIADEMATA, I. HAS GENEALOGIAE AVG. ET IMPERII BRITANNICI LEVES ADVMBRATIONES, GEORGIVS BVCVS E Q. R. S P. C. L. M. D. D.
            
               
               
                  MOST SACRED SOVERAIGN:
            
            I haue aduentured to present your Maiestie, not with a faire pourtrait, but with a slight shadow of your imperiall greatnesse, Which I began long since, but then the end was in nubibus, or in abeiance (as our Lawyers say) for I could not finish it (according to my proiect) vntill such time as he, which should be sent, Expectatio gentium (Britannicatū) should come, who was ordained from aboue to weare all these crownes and garlands, and to reduce this whole Isle (with the hereditary Kingdomes, and Prouinces thereof) to one monarchie, and entire Empire, as they had been in the times of diuers ancient. British Saxon, and some English kings of the Norman, or Danish race, as it shall hereafter appeare. The foundation of this great worke hath bin layd, by many Kings your Maiesties ancestors (I meane by alliance, not by armes for those plots were frustrate) but as lately by King Henry the eight when he mediated the mariage of his sonne the Prince of England with the Princesse of Scotland your Maiesties mother:Vide R
                     •
                  . Ascam
                     •
                  in Toxophil. of the Iustnes of this vnion.
                as also in this maner many ages before the good king Malcolm
               Capito, vt Buchanā.
               Cammoir proiected this worke (and that with happy successe) by the mariage of Margaret daughter of the Saxon Prince Edward Exul,
               
                  Buchanan rerū. Scotie. lib. 7. heire of the great Edgar) out of which royall bride-bed your Maiestie is issued. Likewise Alexander the first maried Sibilla eldest daughter of William Duke of Normandy king of England. The first Dauid also king of Scotland maried Matilda daughter of the Earle Waldeof and of Iudith neece to the said King William: King Alexander the second maried Ioan Plantagenet daughter of King Iohn. King Alexander the third maried Margaret Plantagenet daughter of King Henry the third. King Dauid the second maried Ioan Plantagenet daughter of King Edward the

second. King Iames the first maried Ioane daughter of the Duke of Somerset Grandchild to King Edward the third. King Iames the fourth your Maiesties great Grandfather maried Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry the seauenth, and of Queene Elizabeth Plantagenet daughter and heire of King Edward the fourth. But these Princes maried onely but daughters of England; but You (most sacred Prince) the great IACOB,
                  An Do. 1603. Iul 25. ap. Westminster.
                enthronized vpon the Patriarke Iacobs fatall stone, and vpon Saint Iacobs Festiuall espoused solemnely faire England her selfe. And all the former matches were but preparatiues, & (as I said) foundations of this great worke, which your Maiesty (whom I may now call an English man, as well for being descended from so many English Princes, as also for that your Maiesties Father was an English man, and your mother Princesse, and heire of England) hath by diuine preordinance now finished and accomplished in plenitudine temporum; and that by iust right, for in your sacred person are iointly met, and coalesced, the royall blouds, interests, and titles not onely of all Great Britaine, but also of France and Ireland. Which to prooue will not require much search, nor study, for they are euident, and I will for breuities sake but thus point at them. For some of them namely Scotland (the Crowne and Scepter whereof (missa per innumeros auos) your Maiestie hath borne from your infancy) all men know and acknowledge your ancient royall right,
                  His Maiesties title to Scotland & to Ireland. G. Buchan. and estate therein. And your Maiesties title to Ireland will be manifest in your Genealogie herein deduced from that great Plantagenet King Henry the second,Lionel Plantag. Du. of Clarence, third sonne of king Ed. 3. maried Eliz. daugh & heire of VVil. Murc-Burk Erle of Vlster L. of Connacht: from whom the Dukes of York are descended. Camden in Hiber. the first English Prince Lord of Ireland, & from his heroycall posteritie (as well Marches as others) who haue been continually seysed thereof vntill this day. 
                  His Maiesties title to France, see it more a
                        •
                      large in the Argumēt
                So likewise your Maiesties tytle to the Crowne of France sheweth it selfe clearly in the ancient possessions of these royall Plantagenets here presented, your Maiesties Progenitors first Dukes of Normandy, then of Aquitaine, Earles of Poictow, of Aniow, of Maine, of Touraine, and of

               Britaine, and after of Angolesme: And lastly Kinges of all France in the right of Isabell or Elizabeth sole daughter, and heyre of Philip le bel King of France mother of King Edward the third,Vide 1. Froissar à Tom 
                     •
                  
                who made a most renowned and happy entry vpon that his royall inheritance: & hee his great heires were not onely titulare Lords, but also actuall possessors of France many yeares, and yet to this day in token of that ancient right) haue seysine of a Gersey, Garnesey, Aldern
                     •
                  y, &c. are parcels of Normandy, and so consequently of France yet possessed by the K. of Eng.
                part of that kingdome, notwithstanding that counterfeit hethenish law Salica maintained by all the power of France many ages against them.
            
               
                  His Maiesties title frō the British Kings.
                Your Maiesties tytle, and descent from the ancient kings of great Britaine (and which is least knowne) may thus redily be deriued. The Welsh Bardes, as also our best heralds record thatRussin. 
               Rhese ap-Gruffith (surnamed Atgluid) prince of Southwales about the yeere of our Lord 1196. (and issued from Cadwallader the last British King) had a daughter named
                  Faire Iulian. 
               Gwenlhian maried to Edmund. 
               Edneuet Vachan Lord of Bransencle, and chiefe Iustice of Wales, and bare to him a sonne called Gerion, or Ieronim.
               Grono, this Grono hadTheodore. 
               Tedor, Tedor had Grono, Grono had Tedor, Tedor had Veridik.
               Meredith, Meredith had Owen. Which Owen maried Catherine (widow of king Henry the fift, and daughter of the French king Charles the sixt) by whom hee had Edmond creaeted Earle of Richmond by King Henry the sixt, his brother vterine. And this Edmond was father of King Henry the seauenth, who was father of Queene Margaret your Maiesties great granmother, &c. But some deriue your Maiesties British race from a namelesse, & a good namelesse daughter of Gruffith ap Leolhin (a Prince 
                  •
               f Wales about the yeere 1051) vpon whom (as they pretend) Fleanchus thane,
                  D. Povvel in Historie of the Princes of Wales.
                or Steward of Abria flying into Wales for suc
               
                  •
               our) begat vnlawfully a sonne, who should be ancester to all the 
                  •
               hiefe Stewards to this day: But this being not acknowledged by 
                  •
               he best Scotish Historiographers, & the thing not honourable, I may well pretermit it. Lastly, to finish all these your Maiesties

natiue titles to these many Diadems mentioned in this Poësy, I haue inserted a Genealogy of the Saxon Kings drawne from the first vniter of the heptarchye,
                  His Maiesties title from the Saxon kings.
                and the Godfather of Anglia King Egbert vnto Matilda the Empresse, daughter and heyre of King Henry the first, and mother of this great Plantagenet King Henry the second, ancester of all the English Kings vntill this day. And from him this poesy is a continued pedegree vnto Queene Elizabeth the first, and from Her to your Maiesty, and to your Maiesties most excellent Sonne Henry, The Prince of Great Britaine.
            
            Now it resteth that I answere, or excuse some faults found in this Poesy. for some note that I am too long in my induction, notwithstanding I propound in the first stanze. Others reproue me because I began no higher. Others charge me that I haue concealed, and coloured the faultes of bad Princes.
            The first obiection is answered in it selfe. The second i
                  •
                answered in the Argument following. The third may not onely be answered but maintained by the rule of Christian charity,1. Peter. 4. Math. 7. which (as the Apostle teacheth) operit multitudinem peccatorum, and the Euangelicall law of Talion prescribeth Quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Vultis vt faciant vobis homines, & vo
                     •
                   facite illis. And I my selfe claim: the benefit hereof, for I confesse I haue other faults besides these. I am ignorant, I am poore,M. Scaurus ita suit patritius vt 3. supra cum etatibus iacuerit domus eius fortuna, &c. and I am as obscure as M. Scaurus was (of whom As
                     •
                   Pedianus maketh mention) and so haue been euer since th
                  •
                fatall iourney at Bosworth: and had then perished vtterly had not the Princely Humanity of the great suruiuing Howard preserued my young orphan ancester: which with my best seruice (as I am bound) I will euer acknowledge to tha
                  •
                most illustrious family of Norfolke the Durateus equus o
                  •
                great Captaines, graue Counsellours, high Seneschalles Marshals, Treasorers, and Admirals of England: besides many other herïocall Gentlemen fortunate, and faithfull to the

               
                  
                  ANGLIAE REGVM PROSAPIA A TEMPORE QVO ANGLIA APPELLARI CAEPIT, NIMIRVM AB EGBERTO REGE PRIMO EIVSDEM MONARCHA▪ VSQVE AD HENRICVM 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     .
                  royal genealogical tree
                  
                  I. W. S. delineauit.
               
               
               
Crowne, and Kingdomes.
            But to conclude shortly, whatsoeuer be the faults of the booke, or of the Buc I most humbly submit them to your Maiesties most gracious censure, who (next to the omnipotent Lord of Lords) are vitae, & necis Arbiter,
               Vite, & neele gentibus arbit Seneca. and not onely the supreme, and highest iudge but (which is best) the best iudge. i. the most wise, the most learned, and the most clement iudge.Quicquid dominatur vim Dei habet. Artemidorus. And so therefore eftsoones prostrating my selfe, my small talent, (or rather mites) and all at your sacred feete; not seeking either praise, or thankes, nor so much as one branch or leafe of any of these your many Garlands, but with the old Poet

                  Veniam pro laude peto laudatus abundé
                        Ouid.
                     
                  
                  Si fastiditus non tibi Daphnis ero.
               
            
            And with the new inauguratorie hymne still pray to the Almighty that.
            
               Your happy dayes may not be done,
               Till the great comming of his Sonne.
               And that your health, your ioyes, your peace,
               May as your raigne, and yeres increase.
            
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE, OR Argument of this Poësy.
            
               
                  DAmaetas hauing long bin a woodman had obserued the natures, & propertyes of many trees, and apprehended there was some mistery, and some peculiar maiesticall matter in the Genest, more then he could discipher. Whereupon hee went to Silenus a man of great learning and authoritie (for he was held a Pro
                  •
               het) and exposeth to him his conceit, and prayeth earnestly his ayde. Silenus entertaineth him curteously, and is very willing, (and by the meanes of a late accident) well able to rese
                  •
               ue him: for (saith he): there was a complaint mad
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ately to our great God Apollo against certaine vnworthy fellowes, which presumptuously tooke garlands of his ancient tree the Laurell without leaue. Whereat he hauing indignation, determined to take order for that, and such like abuses. And foorthwith calling the Muses to counsell in Helicon established ordinances for the due wearing of that & of al other Ghirlands. And because the ancient Ghirlands were abused, & prophaned with common and vnworthy vse, hee made choice of a new tree (viz) the Genest, and instituted Ghirlands thereof, and gaue to them praerogatiues aboue the rest, & appropriated them to one imperial family seated in 
                  Britania, or Albion rather. Vide stanz 17. and it is taken out of Orpheus in his Argonaut: where Ma. Camden rather readeth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   then 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Albion or Alba, rather then Pinaria, and iudiciously. 
               Leuceessa: & with expresse

defence that none else should weare them. And that not all the Princes of this family should haue Garlands hereof, but to some of them better deseruing should be permitted a chappelet, and to the rest but a branch, or Plante of the Genest. But the chiefe Garland of Genest complete and adorned with diuers sacred flowers should be reserued for his fauorite Daphnis (the most puissant, and the most vertuous, and (in briefe) the most true heroycall Prince of that imperiall race) ordained long-since by the highest aeternall wisedome to reconcile the olde, and vnnaturall fewd betweene Locrine, and Albanact, to reduce all the Britannik Isles into one entyre monarchy, to restore the ancient vnity of religion, lawes, and language in this great Iland, and finally to extend the limit of his Empyre as farre, as they were in the times of Albion, of Brutus, of Artur, of Edgar, or of any other our monarkes, whose dominions were largest. Thus farre Apollo's decree.
            After this Silenus declareth more particularly, who, and what these royall Worthyes were, which should beare, or weare Chappelets, or Garlāds of the Genest tree, and lastly the Garland complete.
            Beginning with that great Henry sonne of the Empresse Matilda (the first King of this Iland surnamed Plantagenet) and so deducing a genealogy from him through his royall posterity to our present sacred Soueraign IAMES,
               He was also surnamed Courtmantel.
                his now next heire, and nephew, whom the Prophet herein styleth the true

               Polystephanus, the Peace-maker, King Arturs successor, great Aedgars heire, high Seneschall of Albion, the great Briton &c. And crowneth his head with this imperiall Polyanthine Ghirland, and his raigne with all the blessings of peace, victory, long life, a rare fayre wife, hopefull Princely issue, and a perpetuall succession of their posterity in the Empire of great Britain.
            
            And now to that obiection touched in the dedicatory, and made because I deriue not this title, and genealogy from some of the ancient monarkes of this Isle Britons, or Saxons, or at the least from King William the Conquerour, I must answere that to haue chosen any of the most ancient Kings, I must haue looked so farre backe, as I should not onely haue made this Eclog ouer-long, and tedious, but also haue lost my selfe in the cloudes of obscurity by soring too high amongst them (as they know, which know what our ancient storyes bee.) But as for William the Conquerour there be many reasons why I should not begin with him (although I goe as neere him, as his sonnes daughter) for firstly, he was a bastard, (and yet not that of the blood royall of England) hauing no title to the Crowne but violence, and his sword as he confessed,
                  Vide lib. S. Stephani Cadomensis de Gulielmo conqu
                        •
                     storre editum. an. 1603. and thereof had remorse of conscience at his death. Secondly he was neuer possessed of the one halfe of Britain, for hee had neither Scotland, nor Wales, and in Ireland he not one foote. Furthermore Girard Du-Haillan and other

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
French antiquaries according to their Salike heraldry say that his lyne ended in his sonne King Henry the first: for all they holde as a maxime, (La famille se continué es masles,
               Philosalicus. 
               et se finist aux filles.) And yet Du-Haillan (notwithstāding, or forgetting this) affirmeth in an other place, that the race of the Kings of England issued out of the house of Aniow (viz) from our great Henry,
               
                  In Summaire des ducs, et contes d' Aniov.
                and his ancesters) continueth vntill this day. From whom there be many reasons on the other side, why I should deduce the genealogy of our Kings passed, and of our present Soueraigne Lord King IAMES: for this great Henry was not onely rightfull heire,K. Henry the second, the greatest king &c and King of England, but also the greatest King (of whom there is any credible story extant) which hath been in this Isle of Britain since the time of the Romaine Emperous (who were reputed Lords of all the world) and which thus I demonstrate, and briefly. He was King of England in the right of his mother Matilda the Empresse, daughter and heire to King Henry the first, by Matilda Bona daughter of King Malcolm Canmoir,
               King Malcolm knighted this K. H. the secōd at fifteene yeeres of age, Novbrig. who writeth much in the honour of this king Malcolm. lib. 2. cap. 20. and of Margaret his wife, who was the daughter of Edward Exul the Saxon Prince the sonne of Edmond Ironside King of England Anno Dom. 1016. This Edmond was sonne and heyre to King Etheldred, who in ancient charters is written Totius Britanniae rex (quod nota) because a late Anonymus in a little booke dedicated to his Maiesty, affirmeth that neuer any Prince was king of this whole Isle vntill now: But he is deceiued for

(besides Constantius Chlorus and his sonne our countriman Constantine the great, Constans, Aurelius Ambrosius, Vter, & others (which were Lords of all great Britaine) Edgar also the father of this King Etheldred was absolute Monarke of this Isleland, and so puissant in forces both by land, and sea, as hee was surnamed the Great, and was stiled Totius Albionis basileus, & Anglici orbis basileus (as G. Malmesburiensis & Florentius Wigorniensis witnesse. Whereupon (to note also by the way) some thinke that the word Anglia was sometimes vsed for the whole Isle,
                  Britannia ab aduentu Saxonum in insulam appellatur Anglia Ioān. Salisbur, in Policratico.
                and which Ion Lidgate disertly asseuereth in King Arthurs complaint in these words, Great Britain now called England: so likewise doth Geffrey Chaucer in the Franklins tale (viz.) In England, that Clepid was Britain: And Ranulfus Cestrensis a grauer Authour peremptorily affirmeth that King Egbert after his conquests ordained,
                  Ranulfus Higeden in Polichronic.
                and commaunded that the Saxons, and Iutes should bee called Angles, and that Britain should bee called England: But I leaue this to be discussed by antiquaryes. And to returne to the ancient Saxon Kings progenitors of this Henry, and also possessors of this whole Isle (as I will shew for the better confirmation of that, which I haue said against the opinion of this Anonymus.) In diuers ancient records and charters of donations of these kings to Monasteries, and to Cathedrall Churches, and in other ancient monuments, I haue obserued these seuerall stiles,
            
               
               
                  Ex archiuis Ciscestreasis Ecclesiae by the fauour of the reuerend D. Hen. Blaxtoa Ch
                     •
                  unce
                     •
                  lor. 
               Ego Athelstanus rex Anglorum anno Dominicae incarnationis D. CCCCXXX. r
                     •
                  gni verò mihi gratis commissi VI. Indictione III. 
               Epoch
                     •
                  
                
               Epactae xviii. Concurrente iiii. Nonis mensis Aprilis iii. Lunae rotigerae vaga, tionis i. per eiusdem omnipatrantis dextram totius BRITANNIAE regium solio sublimatus &c.
            
            
               Ego Eadmundus rex Anglorum, ceterarum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   gentium in circuitu persistentium Gubernator et rector An. Dom. 945. Ego Edredus rex terrenus sub imperiali potentiaregu seculorum,
               
                  K Edred was vncle to Edgar Ingulf.
                
               aeterni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   principis, magnae Britanniae temporale gerens imperium, &c. An. Dom. 948. Ego Edgarus totius Albronis monarcha &c. An. Dom. 966. And in another, Ego Edgarus totius Albionis, finitimorum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   regum basileus. An. Dom. 974. These three last stiles I finde in the history of Ingulfus Abbot of Croyland transcribed by him from the Charters of that Monastery. And the other two before going, are copyed out of the records of the Cathedrall Church of Chicester, as also these three next following. Ego Eadwis 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , sub. rex. This Eadvvis or Edvvin was elder brother to the great Edgar.
                
               basileon totius Albionis &c. An. Dom. D.CCCC.LVI. imperii autem 1. An in another, Ego Eadwin rex gentium Albionis &c. And in the date of a charter of Bishop Brighthelmus, Anno 2. imperii Eadwin totius Albionis insulae imperantis. I finde also (in Asser Meneuensis) Aelured or Aelfred a more ancient Saxon King then these written Omnium Britān. insulae Christianorum rector. An. Dom. 872.
                  Io. Asser in histor. de Gestis Ealfredi.
               
            
            And Edward (surnamed Pius, and Confessor) was from the yeare of our Lord 1050. King of this whole

Isle (if there be any credite to be giuen to our stories) and was stiled rex Albionis, as Ion Twine auoweth out of his charters giuen to the Abby of Abingdon.
               
                  Io. Tvvinus in Albionicis.
                And that same King Etheldred before cited,I haue seene this charter in the hands of Ma. of Holland, a learned Gentleman, & a good antiquary. was stiled in the charters of Glastonbury, Aetheldred Anglicae nationis, caeterarum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   gentium triniatim intra ambitum Britān. insulae degentium &c. basileus, and another K. in old inscription, Britanniae Anax:
               Sigillo. V. and many such more, which were too long to recite. And some kings of the Norman race (which is more rare) haue been so stiled For the Lord Bishop of Bristow voucheth a coine of King Ion,
               Ion B. of Bristow in his first treatise about the vnion. wherein is stamped Ioānes rex Britonum. but that coine which his Lordship shewed to me had the armes of little Britain vpon the reuerse: but his grandchild King Edward the firsty & after him king Edward the third were greater monarkes here then he.
                  Vide Tho. VValshingham in K. Edvv. 1. & in Ed. 3. But this great Henry Plantagenets Empire extended beyond the bounds of the Britannish world; and his greatnes so farre exceeded all other kings his ancesters,
                  Io. Praesul Carnotensis in Polycratico.
                that he was stiled Maximus Britanniae regum, as I will shew by and by, and by good right: for besides this his great Britain and Ireland, he was possessed of a great part of France, and by these titles.K. Edw. 3. erected Aquitain into a Princedome for his eldest sonne Edw. He was Duke of Normandy by right of inheritance from his granfather King Henry the first Duke of Normandy &c. He was Duke of Aquitain (that is) Gascoin, and Guien (sometimes a kingdome) and Earle of Poictow by the mariage of Queene Elianor daughter & heire of William Duke
                  Ican de la Hay.
               
               
of Aquitain and Earle of Poictow (whose wife Ieanne was daughter of Dauid king of Scots) he was Earle of Aniow (seminary of kings) of Touraine, and of Maine (his natiue country) by right of enheritance from his father Geoffrey Le Bel Earle of them all.
                  Gyr. du Hailian en la sommaire des contes d' Aniovv. &c.
                He swayed all in litle Britain; which authority he acquired partly by the mariage of Constance daughter and heire of Conan Earle of Britain with his third sonne Geffrey Earle of Richmont, but chiefly by his swoord: as it appeareth by Gu: Neuburgensis, who then liued, and thus writeth.
                  Lib. 11. cap. 18. 
               Cum a potentioribus in Britannia inferiores premerentur, regis Anglorum auxilium expetentes, eius seditioni spontaneè subdiderunt &c. ipsos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   potentes viribus subegit, sic
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in breni tota Britannia potitus est. He also conquered Auuergne: and thus much for his possessions in France: and now to Ireland. He twise inuaded that kingdome, and by armes seconded with the letters of fauour of his good friend Pope Adrian (an Englishman) hee brought the discording Princes there,
                  Giraldus Cambrens. in Hiber. expugnata & G. Càmden.
                to submit theyr differents and their tytles to him, and so obtained the possession of the Isle.
            And as for those parts, & partyes in this our great Britain (viz) of Engl. Scotl. and Wales (which did not acknowledge his souerainty) hee reduced them in good time to the ancient subiection, and obedience, which they owed to the British, & Saxon kings his progenitors. The Welshmē in their stories acknowledge this, & in their loyalty & dueties (as the English) liuely

expresse it euery day. But for the other (if any doubt be made) G. Neuburgensis (veridicus autor as Polidore Vergill obserueth him) will thus satisfie him, speaking of this K. Henry,
               
                  G. Neuburg. lib. 2. cap. 38. & of Dauid K. of Scots his prisoner, being then both at Yorke. Occurrit eirex Scotorum cum vniuersis regni nobilibus, qui omnes in ecclesia beatissimi apostolorum principis, regi Angliae, tanquam principali domino hominium cum ligeantia (id est) solemni cautione standi cum eo, et pro eo contra omnes homines (rege proprio praecipiente) fecerunt. Ipse quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   rex Scotorum coram vniuersa multitudine nobilium vtrius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   regni regem Anglorum modis solemnibus dominum suum, seque hominem et fidelem eius declarauit, ei
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tria praecipua regni sui munimina (scilicet Rokesburk, Berwik, et Castellum puellarum loco obsidum tradidit &c. But Ion Bishop of Chartres maketh his Empyre yet much greater,
                  Io. bish. Carnotensis in Polycratico.
                for hee boundeth it to the Southward with Spaine, and to the Northward with the Isles of Orkney, and mought as well (if it had pleased him) with the North pole (as Giraldus Cambrensis did) and then styleth him Maximum Britanniae regum 1. the greatest of the Kings of great Britaine vt supra: And Giraldus goeth further, for he compareth him with the great Alexander, and ascribeth (as some interpret) the first discouery of the West Indies (which was made by Madok,
               D. Povvell.
                a yonger son of Owin Gwineth Prince of Northwales An. Dom. 1170.) to this King, because it was done by his auspices: as we may as well also attribute to him

the redeeming of our great Artur from the iniurious imputation of a fabulous Heros, because he caused his monument to be sought out (which was sunk deep within the ground in the Isle of Aualon) by the occasion of a Bardes song,D. Powel in the history of the Princes of Wales. which he heard in Pē
                  broke. But I will set downe Giraldus his owne words written in maner of a Panegyrick to this king, and in my conceit elegant enough for those times. Certant cum orbe terrarum victoriae vestrae a Pyrenaeis enim montibus vsque in occiduos,
               
                  Sil. Giraldus in Topographia Hiberniae cap. 47. & 48. Distinct. 3. 
               et extremos Borealis Oceani fines Alexander noster occidentalis brachium extendisti. Quantum igitur his in partibus natura terras, tantum et victorias extulisti si excursuum tuorum metae quaerantur, prius deerit orbis, quam aderit finis. Animoso enim pectori cessare possunt terrae, cessare nesciunt victoriae, non deesse poterunt triumphi, sed materia triumphandi. Qualiter titulis vestris, et triumphis Hibernicus accesserit orbis? Quanta, et quàm laudabili virtute Occani secreta, et occulta naturae deposita transpentraueris &c? Qualiter fulguranti aduentus vestri lumine attoniti occidentales reguli tanquam ad lucubrum auiculae ad vestrum statim imperium conuolauerunt? And much more, which for breuity I omit.
                  Ioan. Saresbur. in Policratico lib. 8. cap. 24. That which the Bishop of Chartres writeth of him before mentioned and promised, is thys: Rex illustris Anglorum Henricus secundus regum Britanniae maximus &c. circa Garumnam fulminat, et Tolosam falici cingens obsidione, non modò prouinciales, vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad Rhodanum, et Alpes territat sed munitionibus dirutis, populis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                
               
                  Profligatis.
                
               suba
                     •
                  lis (quasi vniuersis praesens.

immineat) timore principes cōcussit Hispanos, et Gallos. And to these I will adde onely Will. of Neuboroughs elogie for a Corollarie.G. Neuburg. lib. 11. 
               Regis supra omnes, qui vnquam hactenus in Anglia regnasse noscebantur, latius dominantis (hoc est) ab vltimis Scotiae finibus ad montesvs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Pyrenaeos nomen in cunctis regionibus celebre habebatur &c. Hunc finem habuit inclytus ille rex Henricus 
                     •
                  . inter reges terrarum nominatissimus, et nulli eorūvel amplitudine opū, vel faelicitate successuū secundus. And thus much for the testimony of the greatnes of his conquests, & of his Empire▪ as for his other greatnesses (viz) of his wisedome, of his iustice, of his magnanimity, of his bounty and other heroycall vertues I shall not need to produce any proofe, for his wise and politik administration of his great affayres, and estate, his victoryes and hygh acheeuements secretly intimate them at the full. He was also well learned, as Giraldus affirmeth,
                  Gyral. Cambr.
                and (which was his best prayse) he was very charytable, and pious, (incomparabilis Eleemosynarum largitor, et praecipuus terrae Palestinae sustentator.) And Radulph de Diceto writeth that in the time of an extreame dearth in Aniow and Maine hee releeued with bread ten thousand people dayly from Aprill till haruest.An Dom. 1176. And William of Newborough addeth that he receiued with great deuotion the character of the sacred Militia for the recouery of the holy land.
                  Vide S. Giraldum in Topograp. Hibern. Distinct. 3. cap. 48. & in Hiber. expugnala lib. 1. cap. 45. And afterward (because he was not able to goe by reason of infirmities, and for the great daungers wherein his estate should stand

in his absence which Giraldus sheweth) hee gaue toward this expedition the summe of 47. M. li. or there abouts.
                  Io. Sto. in Anna
                        •
                     
                  
                
               Iean de la Haye also writeth that hee built S. Andrews Church in Bourdeaux, and S. Peters in Poitiers, and founded a Bishops sea there, and enlarged the towne by the one halfe. Hee reedified the Abby at Waltham in Essex,
               
                  Fabian. 
                        ••
                     du Haillan es contes, & D. d' Aniov.
                and the Charterhouse of Witham in Wiltshire. He repaired and much beautified the Monastery of font Euerard (or Fronteuaux) neere Egle in Normandy: and founded the Priories of Staneley,
               He loued Hunting and hauking exceedingly. Girald.
                and of Douer. He also began the stoneworke of London bridge, which was finished by his Sonne King Ion (or caused to be finished) for it is all one to a common wealth.He first kept Lyons, & made of the armes of Normandy (viz) the two Leopards, and of the single Lyon of Aquitain one coate of armes for Engl. as it is yet borne. Nic. Vpton.
                And he instituted the circuits of the Iudges: and not to be tedious in the enumeration of such particulars) in a word he was (as Ion Carnotensis who knew him well) testifieth, rex optimus apud Britānias, Normanorum, et Aquitanorum dux faelicissimus,
               
                  Io. Carnotensis. lib. 16. cap. 18. 
               et primus tam amplitudine rerum, quam splendore VIRTVTVM. Quam strenuus quam magnificus,
               And much more, and much and in his honour writeth Giraldus in Hiberna pugnata. lib. 1. & G. Nevbrig. lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . cap. 25. Wherunto for breuity I recommend. the Reader. 
               quam prudens, et modestus quam pius ab ipsa (vt ita dicam infantia) fuerit, nec ipse liuor silere, nec dissimulare potest: cum opera recentia, et manifesta sint &c. And after those his great workes, and all his high achiuements, his victoryes, his trophees of his heroycall, and christian vertues, and a long and happy raigne, he departed at Chinon in Touraine, in the 35. yeere of his raigne, and in the 61. yeere of his age An. Do. 1189. and was with all due funerall pompe enterred,

at Fronteuaulx, and vpon his tombe had this inscription engrauen.
            
               Sufficit hic tumulus cui non suffecerat orbis,
               Res breuis ampla satis, cui fuit ampla breuis.
               Rex inuictus eram, mihi plurima regnasubegi,
               Multiplici
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   modo dux
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , comes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fui.
               Cui satis advotum fuerant haud omnia terrae
               Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
               Qui legis haec pensa discrimina mortis, et in me
               Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
               Quod potes instanter operare bonum, quia mundus
               Transit et incautos mors inopina rapit.
            
            Thus this great Henry left his great name, and his glory to the world: and his Kingdomes and his dominions to his posterity the Princes aranged, and enrouled in this following Poesy. Vnto which his Empire I dare affirme, & vpon the present allegata, et probata conclude, that neuer any Prince heyre generall of this kingdome had so many, so ancient, & so lawfull titles as Hee, to whose happy inauguration this humble verse is consecrated.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            AN ECLOG, Entituled ΔΑΦΝΙΣ ΠΟΛΥΣΤΕΦΑΝΟΣ, betwixt Damaetus a Woodman, and Silenus the Prophet of the Shepheards,
               
                  DAMAETAS.
                  SILENVS.
               
            
            
               Stanza 1.
               OF all the trees in heau'nly Siluan's guard,
               (wherwith the worthest brow's were crown'd of yore)
               There is but one, or few (O reuerend Barde)The ancient wisemen of Britain were callēd Bardi. Diodor. Sic.
               
               Amid whose vertues maze I would require
               A line of any learned wiserds lore:
               The Plante of Genest chiefly I admire,
               Whose humble highnes makes me oft surmise,
                     Humilitas scala caeli. Bernard.
                  
               
               That lowly steps be ladders to the ski's.
            
            
               
               2
               For well I wist though Genest doth not dwell
               In proudest soile, nor tops of mountaines hye,
               She shews by this, that she foreseeth well
               The perils, which doe all extreames impend.
               
                  
                     Flexit pinum ferox astris minantem, & de nube media vocat. Se
                        ••
                     caTh'aspiring pine (whose top doth threat the sky)
               Diuine Reuenge doth headlongs oft downe send,
               When this is safe vpon her humble hill,
               Not thrall to any proud Superiors will.
            
            
               3
               Againe I know her gentle property
               To yeeld, and bowe, as reason shall aduise:
               Loe here a type of true humility,
               And therefore hath by kind the soueraine pow'r
               
                  
                     Genuum doloribus modetur, hinc Genista ditta fu
                           ••
                        sius.
                  Of parts of man, which onely duty tyes
               To bowe to Kings, and to their Creatour.
               O iust respects, who can so well deserue
               For to commaund, as one that knows to serue?
            
            
               
               4
               And that the Genest doth by nature holde
               A speciall honour of aeternall green:
               And that hir boughs be charg'd with flowr's of gold:
               And many such like graces more I wot:
               But in my minde long this conceit hath been,
               That yet the greatest wonders I weet not.
               And I am wont this tree oft to compare
               To that, which is in all the world most rare.
                     Vide stanz 54.
               
            
            
               5
               Now good Silenus, as you are a man
               Endew'd with passing skill, and mystick art,
               Enforme me rightly, (for I know you can)
               What be the other mysteries of this tree:
               And by the way I pray you to impart
               Both which, and what those other flowers be,
               Whereof (they say) the 
                     Apollo praeses luminis. Gal.
                   praesident of light
               Hath made a garland for his 
                     Sup. Daplmis quod nomen in hac celoga datus S.R. Iacobo, sicut Iulin Caesari olim in Ecloga 5. Virgilii. a pastoribus.
                   fauorite.
            
            
               
               6
               
                  SILENVS.Thou hast long liu'd (Damaetas) in the woods,
               And there for Woodman hast Genista serued,
               To prune her plants, and saue her tender buds,
               As seasons did the charge to thee commend:
               And many of her vertues hast obserued,
               Which vse, or common mought apprehend,
               But for to deem the doubt thou stick'st vpon.
               Would aske some time bestow'd in Helicon.
               
            
            
               7
               When first I went those sacred wells to see,
               My will to good was harsh, benumm'd and cold:
               My head now white, was then like eben-tree
               Dy'de in the sensuall sumes of youthfull will.
               Loe now of each the contraries I hold,
               For Time, and trauaile, and those springs of skill
               
                  
                     Capitis niues: sic Horatius.
                  Of frost, and snow haue made my sculls attire,
               And warm'd my spirits with their holy fire.
            
            
               
               8
               Now of these flames I will impart to thee,
               And happily perhaps thou hast refer'd
               The resolution of this doubt to me:
               For why this case was argued long-agone,
               In Helicon, and I my selfe it heard,
               Where Phoeb (amid the Muses) on his throne,
               Establish'd by those sacred maides aduise,The Italians, French, and Spaniards write the first syllable of Garland with an i. & that is neerest to the Etyemologie of Guir & dalen 1: greene leaues in British.
               
               What Ghirlands should be ech acchiuements price.
            
            
               9
               The question grew because Apollos suite,
               Praeferd a plant against such as praesumed
               To weare a garland of his holy fruite,
               Without desert or speciall grace diuine.
               
                  Apollo was much mou'd, and chaf'd, and fumed,
               And went anone to counsaile with the Nine.
               And when he had a leafe of Laurell eat,
                     Hinc vates 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         olim olim dicti Lycophron ap. Caelium. Rodig.
                  
               
               Thus spake, as I his speeches can repeat.
            
            
               
               10
               
                  The Laurel Garland. Plin lib. 15.The Laurel-crowne was giu'n, and shall be still
               To peerelesse men, to Clarks, and Emperours,
               And such as in a mood of metrik skill,
               Could of my fauours make their vants at large.
               
                  The Palme garland. A. Gell. lib. 3.And then that long-enduring Palme of yours,
               Was due (my sisters, and my sacred charge)
               To such, as worthily to gaine the price,
               Had suffer'd watching, famine, fire, and Ice.
            
            
               11
               And he, which had with valiant hand preserued
               
                  The Oken Garland. Gel lib. 5.A citizen, receiv'd a crowne of Oke.
               
                  The Oliue Garland. Gell. & Textor.
                  But he a wreath of Oliue-leaues deserued,
               Who had with Arts, and plea's of peace beguiled
               The bitter times, which discord had forspoke,
               Or els some dangerous foe had reconciled.
               And he, who long had flam'd in true loues fire,
               
                  The Mirtile Garland. Virg. & Ouid.
                  Receiv'd a crowne of Mirtle for his hire.
            
            
               
               12
               I meane whose amorous flame is fed by grace,
               By grace of hir, who doth his deare perseuer.
               I meane not one forlorne, and in disgrace:
               He must a wreath of bitter Willow weare:The Willow garland, authorized by Homer and Virgil Homer calleth this tree 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      1. frugiperdam Odyss K. And Virgil placeth the Forlorne louer inter salices: eclog. 10.
               
               For as that tree by buds doth promise euer,
               A hope of fruite, yet fruite doth neuer beare,
               So vaine, and fruitlesse is his, hope and loue,
               Who an inconstant womans loue doth proue.
            
            
               13
               Of all the most authentik is of Grasse,The Grasse Garland. Plin. lib. 22.
               
               That crowne (before I had my Bayes) was vsed.
               And with those words his colour alter'd was,
               And fetch'd a sigh, which would haue rent a rock.
               So much his guilty conscience him accused,
               Whose rape to scape a Maide was made a stock.
                     Daphne versa in laurum Ouid. Met. 1. and heereupon Lucian saith Apollo was infortunate 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . In dial. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               In briefe remorse did so with him preuale,
               That he had much adoo to end his tale.
            
            
               
               14
               Yet what he could his passions he subdu'de
               What could he not, who was a wight diuine?
               And for that he his purpose would conclude,
               The Garland of the Grasse did serue (quoth he)
               For some such politik, or Paladine,
               
                  The Cypresse-garland. Cato apud Plin. lib. 16.Who from a seege should set a city free.
               And then the hood of Cypresse-leaues was woorne
               Of such, as had (as I haue) cause to moorne.
            
            
               15
               
                  The Veruain garland. Vergil. Plin.
                  For safe conuoy is borne the Veruain wreath
               Of foecials, and Mars his oratours.
               
                  Iuy Garl: Plin. lib. 16.To Tuiscons race the Iuy I bequeath.
               
                  The Garlands of Lillies, Roses, & Thistles. de his vide Pierium in Hieroglyph.
                  Lillis, Chardons, and sweets of Erycine,
               
               Of seuerall Empires be the signall floures,
               Symboles of beautie, power, and grace diuine:
               And now I doe employ them to adorne
               The crowne, which of my Daphnis shall be worne.
            
            
               
               16.
               The Pine is Pan's, and hee bestoweth thatThe Pine Garland. Propertius lib. aeleg. 1.
               
               Of herds, which best can skill to tune an Ote,
               Or wist to make their cartell soonest fat.
               But more from this, and from the rest I hast
               To speake more large of ONE (as you may note)The GENEST garland.
               
               The first in honour, though in order last:
               As it befalls with gold which is refin'de,
               The worst comes first, the best remaines behind.
            
            
               17.
               There is an Island 
                     Orpheus calleth Britain 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Argonantic.
                   
                  Leucëëssa calld,
               And in that Isle there growes 
                     Gentile hath diuers significations, sometime it signifieth supremo grado de perfectione per natura, percostumi, & per valor &c. I. Ruscelli. sometime it signifieth of, or belonging to the same stock or nation, as Gentilis clyteus, gentile sacrum, & Gentilhuomo in Italian, and as it is vsed here. Sometime also it betokeneth mild, or pliant, as it is vsed stanz. 3 and sometime a Hethen or Pagan, as it is vsually taken in the holy scriptures and stanza.
                   a gentile tree,
               Whose bough's bee all of carued Emerald,
               And for hir flowrs my Raies I did employ.
               For her abode she listeth not to be
               Where either heat, or cold can hir anoy.
               Whether the Bee of homagers most true
               Comes oft to yeeld his sute, and seruice due.
            
            
               
               18.
               Vpon this tree is set my chiefest care.
               Now thou faire Genest art my dearest tree.
               Thy ghirlands now of all shalbe most rare.
               And I pronounce, and make a solemne vow,
               (Sisters accord for so it must needs bee)
               None shall pręsume to were hereof one bough
               But such as standing high in vertues grace,
               Shalbe aduanc'd to honours highest place.
            
            
               19.
               But to put on my new composed crowne
               
                  The Garland of Genest, Roses, Chardons & Lilies reserued for Daphnis Apollo's fauorite. &c. viz. K. IAMES.
                  It shall not fall to any but to ONE.
               
               And such an one, as merit, and renowne
               Shall recommend vnto the supreme good.
               Eu'n such a one as shall deserue alone
               To weare a wreath of ech tree in the wood,
               Wise, valiant, iust in briefe indued with all
               Vertues Christian, and heroicall.
            
            
               
               20.
               To him his neighbour potentat's shall bend,
               The Polare princes shall his vassalls bee,
               
                  Afrik, and Iude, to him shall pręsents send,
               Aesteeming those the happiest wights alone,
               Which league contract with him or amitee,
               Fortunes dearling, Pieties champion,
               Successor and heire in all by right
               To great King Artur
                  The oracle giuen to Augustus, me puer Hebraeus, &c. recorded by Nicephorus, and that reported by Eugubius, Heutripodes lugete perit praesagus Apollo shevvs that these Hethen gods knevv Christ: quod notet B. I.
                   Iesu's faithfull knight.
            
            
               21.
               Thus said the King, the Prophet, and the God,
               (Which I must credit as my blest beleefe)
               And here he made his parting Period.
               But that thou may'st the better bear away
               This Oracle, I will declare in briefe
               What worthies haue bene graç'd vnto this day,
               By bearing branches of this happy tree,
               As diuers haue, and hearken now to mee.
            
            
               
               22.
               
                  K Hen 2. vide praeface.You see (Damaetas) that the Gods decree
               Admitts but one to weare the complet ghirland.
               But some, whose fame hath scal'd a high degree
               May beare a branch, and some a chappelet.
               Th' Empress Matilda's sonne, who conquerd Irland:
               (The greatest Britanne King, which hath beene yet)
               Must by good right now lead this royall band
               Of the triumphant worthies of this land.
            
            
               23.
               A prince form'd of the true imperiall mould,
               Hee was as valorous, as politike;
               Hee could well win, & what he wan could hould,
               And fortune follows such men in their traine.
               
                  
                     Normandie not Neustria Pitheus.
                  
                  Westria was his, he rul'd inLitle Britain.
                   
                  Armorike:
               
               And raignd in Albion, and in Aquitaine.
               
               In breef a soueraign hee did raigne, and rule
               From Pyren mountaines to the frozen
                     Terrarum vl
                           •
                        ima Thule, Seneca Island, or Thylen sell, that is Shetland secundum Gasp Peucerum ap. G. Camd num.
                   
                  Thule.
               
            
            
               
               24.
               With slipps of Broome he decked next his cap,K Rich 1. surnamed Coeur-de Lion. maried Borengaria daughter of Garcia King of Navarre. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               Whose valiant zeale, whose chiualry diuine
               Made in the pagan kingdomes such a gapp,
               As all the Christian hosts mought enter in.
               He tooke Acon, and Ioppe in Palaestine,
                  Richard demeura en Asic la ou il fist plusieurs belles choses. (After the departure of the French K. Louys) Du-Haillan. li. 1.
               
               And did besides, the realme of Cyprus win.
               He warr'd with men, and slew the Austriak Lyon,
               And made a peace with GOD, and went to Zion.
            
            
               25.
               Next rides king Ion, to whom stout Caledoun
                  
                     K. Ion, brother to Ric. 1. surnamed Sās-terre▪
                      he got Angolosme, by marrying with Isabell daughter and heyre of Almery Earle of Angolesme: and the Ile of Man by conquest.
               
               Solemly vow'd to be loyall leege-man
               To him the King, and heyrs of his Crowne.
               And by his auspices the
                     VValter Buc brought 700 men out of Braband, wan Ely and diuers Castles for this K. Ion. vide Camdenum in Ottadini, & Holinsh.
                  Brabant Knight
               From rebell Lords their ile of refuge wan.
               By him great Themses bridge so exquisite,
               (Which did before in woodden modells lurke)
               Became of Europe the most stately woorke.
            
            
               
               26.
               
                  
                     K. Hen. 3. surnamed de VVinchester maried Elianor, daughter of Raimond Erle of Prouence.
                  Then comes his sonne with other architects
               (Not to build Babels and Castles in the ayre)
               But hee a holy house for GOD proiects,
               The which he doth at Westminster performe.
               A temple high, magnificent, and faire,
               A princely pile as well for vse, as forme,
               
                  
                     K. Edvvard 1. surnamed Longshank, maried first Elianor daughter of the King of Castile, she was heir of Ponthieu, & mother of K. Edvv. 2. by his second wife Margaret daughter of the French King, he had Tho. of Brotherton, from whom by Segraue, and Moubray the Hovvards are discended.And shall remaine to all posterity,
               A glorious tropheè of his piety.
            
            
               27.
               Now add the foremost two which bore his name,
               (Who of the saint desguis'd a ring receaued)
               To th' one some giue a Hammer for surname,
               Bycause he bruis'd
                     vide Tho. VValsingham in Edvvard 1. K. Edvvard 2. surnamed of Carmarvon, maried Isabell daughter and heire of Philip le Bel K. of France.
                  
                  Gaiothel in his wroth,
               And him of Iacobs stone, and chaire bereaued.
               But Iacob soone shall repossesse them both.
               Th' other Edward the templars did expell.
               Of whom I can no more say, to say well.
            
            
               
               28.
               Behold him next who in a doome supreme
                     K. Edvvard 3. surnamed de VVind sore, maried Philip daughter of VVilliam Erle of Henalt, &c. hee tooke Calais, & wonn many victories of the French, as at Crecy & Slays, &c. Refused to be Emperour. Paralipom. ad Abb. Vrspergens.
                  
               
               
                  Pouuoir aboue an Estre did aduance,
               For he was offred Coesars diademe.
               But follow'd boons forbod, and downe anon
               Cuts with his mothers sword the flowrs of France,
               
               and plants them in his fields of Albion
               
               And puts them in his royall Lions guard,
               For so (quoth he) Dieu & mon droit award.
            
            
               29.
               Right gentile too was that conceit of his,The order of the Knights of the Garter instituted.
               
               When hee the Garters order did ordaine,
               A noble pledge of princely grace it is:
               Happy are they which therewith gird their knee.
               Thrise happy hee, and ay so may remaine
               Who doth protect both that, and them; and hee,
               Which saith not so, ill come to him and worse,
               Then Hōni soit, qui mal y pense's curse.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Edvv. de VVoodstock Pr. of Wales, and of Aquitain, maried Ioan daughter and heire of Edm. Plantagenet Erle of Kent.
                  30.
               
                  Philipp the famous Macedonian
               
               Had not a sonne of higher worth then hee,
               
                  
                     Vn tel prince estoit digne de gouerner tout le monde. Froisard.
                  For where the prince black Edward went hee wann.
               This honors comete first did faire appeare
               At Crecy field, which Hee ouerthrevv 60000. Spaniards and French in Spain betwixt Navaret & Naiara. Idem.
                  
                  Nauaret did see
               After more bright then Mauors in his sphere,
               But Poitiers cheifely, where hee tooke King Ioan,
               
               For there a 
                     Le ieune prince doublement victorieux, aiant vaincuson enemi par valeur, et par courtoisie, laissant vne venerable trophè de son humanitè & prudence, &c. Ie. de Serres.
                  double victory he wann.
            
            
               31.
               Two 
                     K. Ric. 2. his sonne surnamed de Bourdeaux, maried Anne of Luxembourg daughter of the Emperour VVenceslaus.
                   
                  Richards more succeed, the one a Prince,
               Whose goodly presence men to woonder moued,
               And was as bountifull as any since.
               
                  
                     K. Ric. 3. surnamed de Fotheringay, duke of Glocester. &c. maried Anne Nevill daughter of Rich. the great Earle of VVarvvik.
                  Fame hath been sharp to th' other, yet bicause
               All accusations of him are not proued:
               And hee built Churches, and made good law's,
               And all men held him wise, and valiant,
               Who may deny him then his Genest plante?
            
            
               
               32.
               But Henry Bolinbrook (me thinks dooth frowne,
                     K. Hen. 4. surnamed de Bolingbrook, maried Mary daughter & heyr of Humfrey Bohun Erle of Hertford. &c. He vvas Duke of Lancaster in the right of his mother Blanch daughter of Henry Duke of Lancaster, &c.
                  
               
               That Glo'ster here should next to Burdeaux come,
               Bycause he from his cousin tooke the crowne.
               Mistake not Henry, for by right for neither
               Of yee, in these triumphall car's is roome:
               But best of all ye may be match'd together.
               Yet doo I grant thou wert a princely Knight,
               And patrone of the bloody rose by right.
            
            
               33.
               But to thy sonne the Of this Dolphin vide Tho. VValsingham in An. Do. 1392. Hee conquered France for the most part.Dolphins strange repeyre
                     K. Hen. 5. surnamed de Monmouth, maried Katharine daughter to Char. the 6. the French King.
               
               (Swimming in post vp to the royall port)
               Foretold that hee was born the Lillies heire.
               This signe was soon by sequels verified:
               Dolphin hee was by right, or swords effort.
               And he in France victorious liu'd and died.
               Whom Azincourt so nobly did receaue,
               At Hee died at Bois de Vinciennes nere Paris.
                   
                  Vincienne parke of all he takes his leaue.
            
            
               
               34.
               
                  
                     K. Hen. 6. surnamed the Saint, built a college at Eaton, and the Kings college in Cambridge: maried Marg. daughter of Renè K. of Sicil, Duke of Aniovv.
                  
                  Henry his sonne surnamed of Windlesore
               
               (Who was in London and in Paris crowned)
               Most worthily a Plant of Genest bore.
               But not by scepters sole his praise began:
               His christian vertues made him most renowned,
               
                  
                     K. H. 7. sollicited the Pope to canonize K. H. 6. vvho refused.For he was deem'd a very holy man,
               And had been made a Saint, and long since shrin'd,
               But that the vice-saint maker was vnkind.
            
            
               35.
               
                  
                     Rich. duke of Yorke, heire generall of the crovvne, Regent of France, maried Cecily Nevil daughter of Rafe Erle of VVestmerland.
                  I must omitt that proud Plantagenet,
               Who in high parlament the king defi'de.
               But I may not his gallant sonne forget,
               Who twice did winne the royall gole by armes:
               And was the father of the happiest bride,
               
                  
                     K. Edvv. 4. maried Eliz. VVidevile daughter of Ant. Erle Riuers. extinguished Lancaster. Q. Elizab, 1. K. Edvv. 5.That euer Camber compassd in his armes:
               She made the losse the lighter of that sonne,
               Whose raigne then ended as it was begonne.
            
            
               
               36.
               She, and her Richmont (on'd by sacrament)
               Refus'd the golden offer of Colône,
                  
                     K. Hen. 7. Erle of Richmont, maried Elizab. Plantag. daughter & heire of K. Edvv. 4. For them Christopher Colonus offered to discouer the Indies. R. Hakluit to. 3.
               
               Foreseeing that the riches and the rent
               Would hardly counteruaile the keepers care:
               And had besid's a secret reed that one,
               (Who should hereafter set in Arturs chaire)
               Should fetch the fleece when he occasion saw,
               And hold the golden monark in his awe.
            
            
               37.
               This Richmont was a very prudent prince
                     Hen. Erle of Richm. vvanne both the field and the crowne at Bosvvorth. Margaret his mother vvas an heyre of the house of Somerset. hee extinguished the male line of Yorke.
                  
               
               And therefore was surnamed Solomon.
               
               The world hath seen great works accōplish'd since,
               Which were proiected by this Theodore.
               
               This man of GOD did happily atone
               The ciuil feud, which long had been before,
               Betwixt the Rose, which first grew in the wood
                     Vide Ouid in Metam. these Roses were the devises of Yorke & Lancaster.
                  
               
               And that which Venus colour'd in hir blood.
            
            
               
               38.
               
                  
                     Margaret their daughter was maried to Ia. 4 K. of Scotland, by whō she had K. Iames 5. who maried Mary daughter to Claud duke of Cuise, who bare to him Mary Queene of Scotland and of France, heyr apparent of England, and mother of our Souerain Lord King Iames.
                  These happy Plants haue ouerspreed this Ile
               By Henry, and more fruitfull Margaret.
               
               (But Henry's branches florish'd but a while)
               She is the roote of the immortall seed,
               Whence Iames the wise a new Plantagenet
               did spring, and was hir father who did breed
               The great Polystephane, as shall appeere
               When they are past, which come triumphing here.
            
            
               39.
               
                  
                     K. Hen. 8 maried Katarine daughter of Ferdinand King of Castle, by whom he had Q. Mary: he had Q. Elizabeth by Anne Bolein daughter of the Erle of VViltshire. Hee had K. Edvv. by Iane sister of the Duke of Somerset. Doctor Cooper B. of Lincolne in Chronicis.
                  That Henry with his broome attempted first
               To sweep out of this land the drosse of Roome;
               A worke of worth, which els no monarke durst.
               And made a Bal when hee had doon this deed
               In triumph of the flowers of the Broome.
               Yet see how duly vertue hath hir meed,
               For the Pope himselfe as (the Bishop saith)
               First stiled him Defender of the faith.
               
            
            
               
               40.
               His hopefull sonne brought happily to passe
               What was attempted by that hardy King.
                     K. Edvv. 6.
               
               For hee abollished the Romish Masse:
               Timely resolu'd to maintaine christian troth.
               And as his yeeres, so did his vertues spring,
               But enuious fates vntimely cropd them both.
               Then let this serue to make complete his praise,
                     Quem dij diligunt, moritur Iuvenis. Menander.
                  
               
               Whom Gods do loue, he dies in tender dayes.
            
            
               41.
               This is king Henries eldest daughters place,
               A dame endewd with hev'nly vertues many:
                     Q. Mary maried to Philip 2. King of Spaine.
                  
               
               
                  Devout sansdout, a MARY full of grace,
               Iust of hir word as euer any Queene:
               Hir liberall hand was neuer clos'd to any,
               whose need requir'd. This maks her plant stil green,
               For what someuer piously is geuen,
               Is with great vsury restor'd in heauen.
            
            
               
               42.
               
                  
                     Q. Elizabeth. 2. shee added Virginia to hir Empire. &c.Hir younger sister next to hir doth set,
               Who was in acts, and age the happier much?
               And therefore weares the brauer chappelet.
               A Queene, whose state so happily did stand,
               That men did say (seeing hir greatnesse such)
               This Lady leadeth fortune in hir hand:
               A virgin which did keep hir lamp still light
               And eke for rarenes was a Phaenix hight:
            
            
               43.
               For weigh hir peace established at home,
               And next hir victories acheev'd abrode
               As well in th' Indies as in christendome.
               Then hir safe garding hir confederates,
               Hir zeale to the true worshipping of GOD,
               Hir wisely moderating hir three estates,
               These say she was a glorious Amazone,
               As euer any was: but fates spare none.
            
            
               
               44.
               Add more, which ioynd strange scepters to their plant,
                     Ric. Erle of Cornvvall brother to K. Hen. 3. elected K. of Almayin, or Romanes.
                  
               
               As Cornwall did the scepter of Almain,
               
               And that of Castile royall Ion of Gant,
               
               Progenitor by sonnes, and either daughter
                     Ion of Gant. Duke of Lancaster. K. of Castile & Lion by Q Constāce his wife.
               
               Of all the kings of Britain, and of Spain:
               Without sir Bolinbrook, who for the slaughter
               Of a king inunct ashamed hid his eyesK. Hen. 4 vt supra.
                  
               
               Long-sithence with a hood of strange desguise.
            
            
               45.
               But Bedford shall his fathers place supply,
                     Ion Duke of Bedford. 3. sonne of K. Hen. 4. regēt of Frāce where he tooke the great Champion of France Ieane la pucelle: ouerthrew the vicont of Narbone at sea: wann the bataile at Vernueil, which (as Serres saith) Faisoit porter le dueil a toute la France.
                  
               
               Who though no King, yet was a great vice-roy,
               And in his place behau'd him royally.
               Th'arm'd sorceresse committed to the flame,
               
                  Narbone, Alanson, and their K. Charl. 7. was called in scorne Le petit roy de Bourges.
                   petty roy
               Vanquish'd at Vernueil witnesse well the same,
               Who while he liv'd preserv'd th'inheritance
               Of his drad leege, and kept in awe all France.
               
            
            
               
               46.
               
                  
                     Artur Plantag, Erle of Britain, sonne of Geffrey, 3. sonne of K H. 2. heir apparent proclaimed by K. R. the first. Mary daughter and heire of Iam. 5. King of Scotland, by Mary de Loraine daughter of the Duke of Guise, vt supra. 38.Some more great Genesters recount I may,
               Whose fronts should with this crowne haue circled been,
               But they were absent at their sacring day:
               As Artur, heire vnto the greatest King:
               And she, that was of France and Scotland Queene,
               Whose vertues praises all the muses sing,
               And weares in sted of chappelet of Plantes
               
                  S. Peter calleth the crowne of immortall glory 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 1. epist. ca. 5.In hev'n a diademe of Amarants.
            
            
               47.
               And diuers other sett on fortunes knee,
               Highly advanc'd for vertues rare respects
               Haue worne a branch of this imperiall tree.
               Farther they neither did presume nor m
                     〈…〉
                  t,
               For they were men, and had some light 
                     ••
                  fects:
               
                  
                     DAPHNIS.
                  But yet they pass'd as far ech other wight,
               As he (that peerelesse hee) eclipseth them,
               Who is of all the world the rarest gemm.
            
            
               
               48.
               Defects empesch'd they were not absolute,
               And fates conspir'd to keepe them in their wants:
               But GOD, and fates desert and publike brute
               Haue all pronounc'd him sole the worthy ONE
               
               To weare the ghirland made of many plants.
               Th' high Seneschall (I meane) of Albion,
                  
                     K. Iames is high Seneschall of England, Scotland, and France, by private heritages, viz. by Leicester, Ab. & Aniovv.
                  
               
               Of whom Apollo in his holy rage,
               Did as you heard such wond'rous goods pręsage.
            
            
               49.
               And this is hee, for whom by desteny
               The complet ghirland was reseru'd so long:
               Of whom to say in sooth my fantasie,
               It were in vaine for any man aliue,
               With flatering hopes to doo himselfe that wrong,
               To thinke his stile mought at his praise arrive.
               But true that is which erst thy Muse did sing,
                     Vide Epigramma Latinum in calce libelli.
                  
               
               Hee is the true Beau-clerc, and the best King.
            
            
               
               50.
               
                  
                     Sic Minerua dicta Olivisera ab Ovidio.
                  This is that Oliue-bearer of this Ile,
               Who shall by high pręordinance diuine
               That great intestine quarell reconcile,
               Which so vnnaturally so long hath been
               Betwixt Brutes sonnes Albanact, and Locrine:
               
               As Theodore did that, which was betweene
               The bloody brothers Lancaster and Yorke,
               
               And was a figure of this greater worke.
            
            
               51.
               To this his reunited Albion
               
               
                  
                     Tria iuncta in vno: It is the mott of his Maiesties devise for the Knights of the Bath.Hee shall annex the crowne of Pharamound,
               
               And fayre Hibornia's Ioyning three in one.
               
               Still Victory shall follow his ensigne.
               He shall in treasure, peace, and yeeres abound.
               Aequity, Clemency, and lore diuine
               In all causes, and of all opinions
               Shall be his iudges in his dominions.
            
            
               
               52.
               And to accomplish this his happinesse
               Heau'ns doo to him a princely spouse decree:
                     Anne Queene of great Britain, daughter of Frederick 2. King of Denmarke.
                  
               
               All those fraile saints, those gentile goddesses
               shall kneel to hir: so wise, so chast, so loyall,
               So faire, so good, so goodly she shalbe:
               And both thrise blessed in their issue royall:
               For hee, and they which from them shall discend,
                     Henry Prince of great Britain.
                  
               
               Shall raigne in Britaine, till the world haue end.
            
            
               53.
               And Britain had no sooner faith and forcePrince Henry.
                  
               
               Combin'd, but hir DOLPHIN in tender age
               Vowes to redeem from Gallile bands the corsK. Henry the 2. buried in Frontenaulx in France.
                  
               
               Of his grand-sire the great Plantagenet,
               
               And seize vpon his Southern heritage,
               And bounds, and tropheés in the Pyrens sett.
               Soft Muse: but prosper GOD, and natiue right
               This flowre of flowers, this sweet S. Georges knight.
            
            
               
               54
               What doost thou now (Damaetas) more command,
               Lo here discuss'd the mysteries of thy tree,
               Thy doubts dissolu'd, assoiled thy demand,
               And eu'n thy thoughts (I thinke) descyphred are.
               And if that rarest thing great DAPHNIS bee,
               To whō thou didst some time those plants compare,
               Then lo at length the white is striken pat,
               Which thy conceits so long haue aymed at.
            
            
               55.
               
                  DAMAETAS.O blessed Prophet hallow'd bee thy art,
               Which hath so much releeu'd my travaild mind,
               Thou hast discharg'd in faith a frendly part:
               My thoughts, and doubts are ridled every-on.
               And I confesse his name thou hast divin'd,
               To whose high worth the plants were pargon.
               
                  
                     In Stanz. 4.
                  Silenus live, and so naught resteth now,
               But to his seruice all my life to vow.
            
            
               
               56.
               Wherfore I wish I wist to bring to passe,
               To haue a Penn plucked from Angels wings:
               And then to bee as high as Atlas was,
               Who on his shoulders did support the skies.
               (O King of flours, O fairest floure of Kings)
               Thus would I write in starry Paradise,
               DAPHNIS a toy le chappeau roialest,
               De Roses, chardons, lis, & de Genest.
            
            
               57.
               Triumph yee trees, which had so high a hap
               To beare the flowers of this royall Hat:
               Florish yee flowers lul'd in Flora's lap,
               Wherof Apollo did his ghirland make,
               Ghirland in honour aequall bee to that,
               Which shines in hev'n for Ariadne's sake,
               And may his state, for terme with starrs contend,
               To whom the hev'ns this Garland recommend.
            
            
               
               L' ENVOY au Roy.
               LO now (great BRITON) by decree divine,
               This fowre-fold Diademe devol'd to thee,
               Great Aedgars heyre by fortunes, and by line.
               But greater by thy wisdome, and thy witt,
               Thy minde inuict, thy bounteé, pieteé,
               And all the vertues for a Caesar fit.
               Wherfore on thee all happines attend,
               Whom heav'ns to vs so happily did send.
               
                  Gran cose in picciol fasce stringo. F. Petrarc.
                  
               
            
            
               Dij boni quid hoc est, quòd semper ex supremo fine mundi nova deûm numina vniuerso orbi colenda descendunt?
Orator Belga in Panegirico Constantino D.
               
            
            
               
               πολυχρονιον.
               The Hymne inauguratory for his Maiestie: mentioned in the Epistle D.D.
               O God of gods, O King of Kings,
               Aeternall Father of all things,
               In heav'n and earth, and euery where,
               By whom all Kings their Scepters beare.
               Great God of Iames our blessed King,
               Who peace, and ioy, to vs did bring.
               Whom thou a cheef, a royall guide
               Didst for thy herdlesse troupes prouide.
               Now we beseech the mighty Lord,
               To vs such fauour to afford,
               That this triumphall festiuall,
               This holy-day imperiall,
               To his inauguring consecrated,
               May bee so often celebrated,
               That finally it bee not doone,
               Till the great comming of thy sonne,
               And that his health, his ioyes, his peace
               May as his yeeres, and raigne encrease.
               AMEN.
            
            
               
               Epigrammatis S. Regi Iacobo Iampridem Hantoniae regiae oblati exemplar, cuius mentio est Stanza. 49.
               Anglice Dauid aue, rex scilicet optime, vates
               Optime, quos mundi secula sera vident.
               Vir caelestis aue, nam non industria talem
               Te fecit tun, sed gratia summa DEI.
               Tu pius et fortis, tu prudens, ordine, stirpe,
               Fortuna, meritis (prime Iacobe) vale.
            
            
               Aliud de symbolo nummi noui.
               Vos (Henrice) Rosas, vnisti Regna (Iacobe:)
               Dat Deus vt fiet haec Vnio perpetua.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Faults escaped in the Printing.
            In the Epistle DD. in the marg. Vite for Vitae.
            
            
               Arbit for Arbiter. fol. B.
            In the Pręface. Britania for Britannia. fol. B. 2 in the Marg.
            
               Conquestorre, for Conquestore. fol. B. 3. in the Marg.
            
               Seditioni for se ditioni. fol. C.
            In the Eclog, Datus for datur. stanz. 5. in the Marg.
            
               Cars for Carrs. stanz. 32.
            
               Hertford for Hereford. stanz. 32. in the Marg.
            
               Abollished for abolished. stanz. 40.
            ? for: stanz. 42.
            
               and eke for rarenes. read: and for hir rarenes. stanz. 42.
            
               chardone, for chardons. stanz. 56.
         
      
   