
      
         
            
            
            AN APOLOGIE FOR RELIGION, Or AN ANSWERE TO AN VNLEARNED and ſlanderous Pamphlet intituled: Certaine Articles, or forcible Reaſons diſcouering the palpable abſurdities, and moſt notorious errors of the Proteſtants religion, pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600.
            By EDVVARD BVLKLEY Doctor of Diuinitie.
            
               Prouerb. 14. 15.
The fooliſh will beleeue euery thing: but the prudent will conſider his waies.
            
               Lamenta. 3. 40.
Let vs ſearch and trie our waies and turne againe vnto the Lord.
            
               Chryſost. in Geneſ. Hom. 5.
               Quocirca diuinae Scripturae vestigia ſequamur, neque ſeramus eos qui temerè quiduis blaterant. i. Let vs follow the ſteps of the holy Scripture, and not endure or abide them that raſhly babble euery thing.
            
               AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Arthur Iohnſon, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules Churchyard at the ſigne of the Flower de-luce and Crowne. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD Keeper of the great Seale of England, Chamberlaine of the Countie Palatine of Cheſter, and one of her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Councell, grace and peace be multiplied.
            
            
               WHen I conſider (Right Honourable) the eſtate of England in theſe our daies, I cannot better compare it, then with the eſtate of the kingdome of Iudah vnder K. Ioſias, expreſſed ſhortly yet effectually by Sophonie the Prophet, who liued and preached in that time. For as then God gaue to that people that worthy and godly King, who zealouſly 2. King. 23. rooted out Idolatrie, and planted Gods true worſhip agreeable to his law: ſo God in great mercy hath giuen vs our moſt gracious Queene Elizabeth, by whoſe godly meanes Idolatrie hath been aboliſhed, Gods true religion and ſeruice reſtored, his holy word truly and ſincerely preached, and peace and tranquilitie among vs long maintained. And as in thoſe daies vnder King Ioſias, notwithſtanding that godly and zealous reformation, there was great wickednes among the people, as the ſaid Sophonias ſheweth. For there were then which worſhipped vpon the rouffes of their houſes the hoſt of heauen: 
                  Sopho. 1. 5. and which worſhipped and ſware by the true and

onely God Iehoua, and by Malcham their Idoll: and ſuch as were turned backe from after the true God, 6. and ſought him not, nor inquired after him: and that did weare ſtrange apparell: and others that filled 8. their maſters houſes with robberie and deceite: 9. and ſuch as were frozen in their dregges, and ſaid in 12. their hearts the Lord will neither doe good nor euill. And Ieruſalem was then a filthie and ſpoyling 
                  Chap. 3. 1. 2. citie, which heard not Gods voyce, receiued not inſtruction, truſted not in the Lord, and drew not neere vnto her God, &c. Euen ſo how theſe ſinnes abound at this time in this land, I thinke there are but few, but doe ſee: and none that truly feareth God, but doth lament. To omit other ſinnes here mentioned, as then there were which worſhipped Iehoua the onely true God, and Malcham their Idoll: euen ſo there be now not a few, which to pleaſe the Prince and State pretend outwardly to like of religion eſtabliſhed, and yet inwardly in their hearts fauour Idolatrie and wicked worſhippings repugnant to the ſame. And as then many were turned backe from after God, and ſought him not, nor inquired after him: euen ſo now there are many which be reuolted from Gods holy worſhip agreeable to his word, and vtterly forſake the holy aſſemblies where Gods word is truly preached, the Sacraments are according to Chriſts inſtitution rightly miniſtred, and Gods holy name faithfully called vpon. Theſe with Lots wife looke backe vnto Sodome: and are with the Iſraelites in heart turned 
                  Geneſ. 19. backe into Egypt, deſiring rather to eate onions and 
                  Numb. 14. garlike there, then to feed vpon the heauenly Manna of Gods bleſſed word.
            
               
Of theſe thus turned backe from ſeeking after God, they be moſt dangerous, which being deceiued themſelues, endeuour by all meanes both by ſpeaking and writing to ſeduce and deceiue others. Such be the Seminarie Prieſts and Ieſuites, who although they be at this preſent time (at leaſtwiſe in outward apparance) at deadly fewd among themſelues, writing moſt bitterly one againſt another: yet they all agree in reſiſting Gods truth, ſeducing the ſimple, and in labouring moſt earneſtly to ſet vp againe their Dagon of the Maſſe fallen downe before the Arke of Chriſts Goſpell. To this end they write lewd, lying, and ſlaunderous Pamphlets, wherein they traduce the truth, and faithfull fauourers thereof, deceiue the ignorant, and confirme in error their ouer affectioned fauourers, who without triall or examination ouer raſhly receiue, and ouer lightly beleeue whatſoeuer is broached by them.
            Of theſe lying Libels there came one to my hands a yeere paſt and more, pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600. wherein is boldly affirmed, but faintly proued, that we haue no faith, nor religion: that of vs both the learned, and ignorant of the Greeke and Latine tongues be Infidels: that wee know not what wee beleeue: that we are bound in conſcience both neuer to aske forgiuenes of our ſinnes, and alſo to auoide all good workes: that wee make God the author of ſinne, and worſe then the diuell. Theſe and ſuch other ſhameles aſſertions and falſe ſlaunders when I read, it came into my heart, that Maſter Thomas Wright (with whoſe ſpirit I had been acquainted) was the venter of this ware. In which opinion I was afterward confirmed, for that

both ſome of his fauourers could not denie it, and in a written copie therof taken in a ſearch in Shropſhire and ſent vnto me, theſe two letters, T.W. were ſet in the end of it.
            This lewd Libell although in reſpect of the matter voide both of truth and learning, deformed rather to be deſpiſed, then earneſtly anſwered: yet becauſe the author of it, thinketh ſo highly of himſelf, and ſo baſely and contemptuouſly of vs, giuing out in certaine written conferences, which he hath diſperſed abroad in this land, and ſome faithfull men haue ſeene, that wee be vnlearned, and ſo giuen to worldly affaires, that we beſtow no time, or but little in ſtudie: I (although the meaneſt and vnmeeteſt of many) was moued to write this anſwere, thereby to confute theſe calumnies, to cleere the truth, to confirme the faithfull, and if by Gods gracious bleſſing it might be, to reclaime and reforme the ignorant and ſeduced. Whereof I haue the leſſe hope, for that as they imitate thoſe wicked Iſraelites, which refuſed to hearken, turned away their ſhoulder, ſtopped their 
               
                  Zach. 7. 11. 
               eares that they might not heare, and made their hearts as an Adamant ſtone, leaſt they ſhould heare the law and the words which the Lord of hoſts ſent in his ſpirit by his Prophets: So they doe fully follow the peruerſe Pagans, which moſt obſtinately refuſed to reade godlie bookes written by Chriſtians, as that ancient eloquent Chriſtian Lactantius, in theſe eloquent words declareth: Non eſt apud me dubium, Conſtantine Imperator 
               
                  Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 1. 
               Maxime, quin hoc opus nostrum, quo ſingularis ille rerum conditor, & huius immenſi operis rector aſſeritur, ſi quis attigerit ex istis ineptereligioſis (vt ſant nimia ſuperſtitione impatientes) inſectetur etiam maledictis: vt
               
               vix lecto fortaſſe principio, affligat, proijciat, execretur, ſe
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inexpiabili ſcelere contaminari atque aſtringi putet, ſi haec aut legat patienter aut audiat. One Bee or egge is not liker to another, then to theſe Pagans be our peeuiſh Papiſts, in ſhutting their eyes from reading godly and learned bookes, tending to the confutation of their errors, and the inſtruction of them in the truth. Whom yet I am to intreate with Lactantius words immediately following: Ab hoc tamen, ſi 
               Idem ibidem. 
               fieri poteſt, humanitatis iure poſtulamus, vt non prius damnet quam vniuerſa cognouerit. Nam ſi ſacrilegis & proditoribus, & veneficis potestas defendendi ſui datur, nec praedamnari quenquam incognita cauſa licet, non iniustè petere videmur, vt ſi quis erit ille, qui inciderit in haec, ſi leget, perlegat: ſi audiet ſententiam differat in extremum. This reaſonable requeſt I would that I might obtaine at our Romiſh Catholickes hands, that they would firſt reade and examine this my anſwere, before they condemne it. For what is more vniuſt, then to condemne that which a man doth not know. Howbeit, I doubt leaſt with the ſame Lactantius I muſt ſay: Sed noui hominum pertinaciam, nunquam impetrabimus. Timent enim ne à nobis reuicti, 
               Ibidem. 
               manus dare aliquando clamante ipſa veritate cogantur. Obſtrepunt igitur & intercidunt ne audiant: & oculos ſuos opprimunt, ne lumen videant quod offerimus. Euen ſo our vntruly termed Catholickes doe follow this froward peruerſitie of the Pagans, in whom that ſaying alſo of the Prophet (as it is alleaged by Saint Luke) is verified: The heart of this people is waxed 
                  Act. 28. 27. groſſe or fat, and their eares are dull of hearing, and they haue ſhut their eyes, leaſt they ſhould ſee with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and vnderſtand

with their hearts, and ſhould be conuerted, and I might heale them. The which is a fearefull iudgement of God, when men refuſing the loue of the truth that they might be ſaued, be giuen vp to a ſtrong deluſion to beleeue lies. 2. Theſſ. 2.
            
            But if theſe blinded with errour and ignorance, for whoſe ſake eſpecially I haue written this anſwere, will not vouchſafe to reade it, nor make any vſe and profit of it: yet if it may ſomewhat ſerue to edifie the faithfull, and confirme the weake, I ſhall thinke my labour not altogether loſt. The which how ſmall or ſimple ſoeuer it be, yet as I haue written it for the good of Gods Church: ſo I haue bin by your Honours curteſie incouraged to offer and preſent it vnto your Lordſhip, as a true teſtimony of my louing heart and dutiful affection towards your Honour, for your fauour ſhewed me. The God of all grace and mercie bleſſe your Lordſhip and all yours, increaſe his good graces and gifts in you, and long preſerue you to the benefit of this Church and Commonwealth, Amen. Westminſter the 7. of May 1602.
            
               Your Honours moſt humble to be commaunded,
EDVVARD BVLKLEY.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ANSWERE TO AN VNLEARNED, SLANDEROVS, AND LYING PAMPHLET, INTITVLED: Certaine articles, or forcible reaſons, diſcouering the palpable abſurdities, and most notorious errors of the Proteſtants Religion, pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600.
            
               TO the ſayings of the Prophet Eſaias, chap. 59. 10. and Elizeus 4. King. 6. 20. ſet in the firſt front of this peeuiſh Pamphlet, whereby he would inſinuate and ſignifie vs to be blind: I anſwere, that if we be blind, which giue our ſelues daily and diligently, both paſtors and people to the reading and hearing of Gods holy word, and doe endeuour to make that a light vnto our 
                  Pſal. 119. 105. feete, and a lanterne vnto our pathes: in what eſtate be they, which keepe the light of Gods word vnder the buſhell of a ſtrange tongue, and reade the ſame both little themſelues, and diſſwade and withdraw others from it? Aeneas Syluius, who was Pope called Pius Secundus, writeth thus of the Italian Prieſts in his daies, and of the good people in Bohemia: Pudeat Italiae Sacerdotes, quos ne ſemel 
               
                  Commenta. de dictis & factis Alphonſi Reg. lib. 2. 17. 
               quidem nouam legem conſtat legiſſe: apud Thaboritas vix mulierculam inuenias quae de Nouo Testamento & veteri reſpondere neſciat. i. The prieſts of Italie may be aſhamed, who are knowne not once to haue read the new Teſtament, ſeeing with the Thaborites one can hardly finde a ſilly woman which cannot anſwere out of the olde and new Teſtament.

               Iohn Gerſon Chauncellor of the Vniuerſitie of Paris, who liued Anno 1415. and was a great dealer in the Councell of Conſtance, writeth thus: Nam queme Sacerdotum 
               
                  Tom. 1. Serm. coram Alexand. Papa in die Aſcenſionis.
                
               numero mihi dabis non ignarum legis Christi? Whom among the multitude of Prieſts canſt thou ſhew me, which is not ignorant of Chriſts Law? Nicolaus Clemangis a Doctor of Paris, who liued in the ſame time that Gerſon 
               
                  Nicol Clemang. de corrupto Eccleſiae ſtatu. fol. 5. b.
                did, complaineth in like manner of the groſſe ignorance of the popiſh Clergie in theſe words: Non tamen à ſtudijs aut ſchola, ſed ab aratro etiam & ſeruilibus artibus ad Parochias regendas, caeteraque beneficia paſſim proficiſcebantur, qui paulo plus Latinae linguae quam Arabicae intelligerent, &c. i. Yet they commonly came to rule pariſhes and other benefices, not from ſchooles and Vniuerſities, but from the plowe and ſeruile artes; yea, and ſuch as could not reade, and (which is ſhamefull to be ſpoken) could 
                  〈…〉
                diſcern A from B: And againe: Nam quotus quiſque hodie est 
               
                  Ibidem fol. 10. b
                
               ad pontificale culmen euectus, qui ſacras vel perfunctoriè literas legerit, audierit, didicerit, imo qui Sacrum codicem niſi tegamento tenui vnquam attigerit, cum tamen iureiurando illas in ſua inſtitutione ſe n
                     •
                  ſſe confirment: i. How many are there now aduanced to be Biſhops which haue but lightly read the holy Scriptures, heard, or learned them: yea, who hath touched the holy Bible, except it be the couering of it? Againe: De literis verò & doctrina quid loqui attinet, cum omnes ferè preſbyteros ſine aliquo captu aut rerum aut vocabulorum 
               
                  Ibidem f
                        •
                     l. 13. 
               morosè ſyllabatimque vix legere videamus: i. But what ſhould I ſpeake of learning, for that we ſee in a manner, all Prieſts can hardly ſpell and reade, being without vnderſtanding of the matter or words. I might alleage the like complaints of Eraſmus and others, but to omit them: if we who with the Councell of Toledo condemne ignorance as the mother of all errors; and ſay with Epiphanius: 
               
                  Diſt. 38. ex conc. Tole. Contra Ma
                        •
                     ich
                        ••
                     s Haeriſ. 66. Hier. in Eſaiam diſt. 
                  
                     •
                  8. ſi i
                        •••
                     a. Prou. 2. 4. 
               Nihil peius imperitia multos excaecauit ignorantia: i. There is nothing worſe than ignorance, which hath blinded many: and with S. Hieròme, to be ignorant of the Scriptures, is to be ignorant of Chriſt: and doe with Salomon exhort all men to ſeeke for knowledge as for ſiluer, and for vnderſtanding

as for treaſures: if we (I ſay) be blind, in what eſtate are they which hold ignorance to be the mother of deuotion, as Doctor Cole at Weſtminſter ſaid, and who to In the conference at Weſtminſter in the beginning of her Maieſties raigne. this day haue not publiſhed the whole Bible in the Engliſh tongue, for the inſtructing & inlightning of Gods people, although they writ eighteene yeares paſt, that they had long before that time tranſlated it, and yet to this day they haue wanted meanes to publiſh it. They haue had meanes See the beginning of the Pr
                     •
                  face of the New Teſtamēt ſet out by them. 1582. ſince that time to print and publiſh D. Stapletons great booke, de Principijs doctrinalibus, and many ſuch others on the like ſort, but they can or will find no meanes to publiſh the bleſſed Bible and booke of God: for it ſerueth not ſo well for the defence of their doctrine and doings, as the others doe. But to conclude this matter, I alſo doe both pray with the Prophet Dauid, and ſay; Open our eyes, that we may ſee the wonders of thy law; and with Saint Paule, The 
                  Pſal. 119. 2. Timoth. 2. 7. Lord giue vs vnderſtanding in all things, that the eyes of our vnderſtanding being lightned, we may know what the hope is of Gods calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints, &c. and alſo exhort this man and his fellowes to take heede they be not of the number of them, of whom our Sauiour Chriſt ſaid, If ye were blind, 
                  Iohn. 9. 41. ye ſhould haue no ſinne: but now ye ſay, we ſee: therefore your ſinne remaineth.
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The copie of a Letter, written by a Catholike to a worſhipfull Proteſtant Gentleman his ſpeciall friend, concerning certaine reaſons, why the Proteſtants Religion is falſe and abſurd.
               
                  
                     LOued and relouing friend, I haue receiued your courteous letter, wherein you greatly wonder, that I wondred ſo much in our last diſcourſe; that any man in England endued with a good iudgement, conioyned with a religious conſcience, could either accept, or affect the Protestants
                  
                  new coyned Goſpell. You requeſt me to ſet downe briefely ſuch reaſons as induced me thereunto: the which ſuite I could not deny: for both religion and affection vrged me to ſatisfie ſo iuſt a deſire. For I muſt confeſſe, I loue you as a man, and as an honeſt ciuill Gentleman, and moſt gladly I would haue occaſion to loue you as a Catholike Gentleman: for it is great pitie that ſuch a multitude of deteſtable errors, and heynous hereſies ſhould lodge in ſo rarely qualified a ſoule. I haue penned them after an vnaccuſtomed manner following the faſhion of ſchooles, in moſt of them after a ſyllogiſticall method: to the intent that if you ſhould ſhew them vnto your Miniſters, which ſwarme about you, they might not haue ſuch free ſcope and libertie, to range abroad with their idle diſcourſes (as they vſe to take) veiling their confuſed conceits with a multitude of affected phraſes: thereby more eaſely to deceiue the ſimple, and loathe the learned. Wherefore I beſeech you if any ſuch itching ſpirit ſhall attempt an anſwere, to intreate him to performe it briefly, orderly, and ſeriouſly. This I requeſt, for that I perceiue that Proteſtants cannot anſwere with breuitie, becauſe their Religion lacketh both certaintie and perſpicuitie: And extreame hard or impoſſible it is to replie without perplexitie, where there is no truth nor veritie. And therefore I requeſt you as you loue me, to will them to conſider well, before they anſwere ill: and not to replie with raſhnes, leaſt they retract with deliberation, to their vtter ſhame and confuſion. And that you may perceiue how my wonder rather deſerued approbation then admiration, and for that order is a fauorite of memorie: I thought good to reduce all my reaſons into two heads; wit and will, knowledge and affection, faith and good life: becauſe the nature of hereſie hath euer been ſuch as did not only inueagle the wit with errors, but alſo ſeduce the will with occaſions of inordmate affections. I ſay the that no excellent goodwit, linked with a religious conſcience, can accept nor affect the Proteſtants new coyned Goſpell: for good wits and iudgements, aſſiſted with Gods grace, may eaſily conceiue the truth, yea by the force of their very naturall faculties, they may iudge credibly of the truth once propoſed; and without great difficultie diſcorne the abſurdities of an vntrue religion. Vertuous and well inclined affections which are the baſe of quiet, ſecure, and
                  
                  religious conſciences, abhor and deteſt ſuch principles as either diſhonor God, abaſe mans nature, occaſion ſinne, fauor iniquitie, or any ſort diminiſh deuotion, or pietie: And therefore all the inſequent articles ſhall ſtand vpon theſe two foundations, to wit, that the Proteſtants religion debarreth the wit from right vnderſtanding the true faith, and the will from following of any vertue or godlineſſe.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               YOu wonder that any man in England endued with a good iudgement, conioyned with a religious conſcience, can either accept or affect the Proteſtants new coined goſpell. But why do you not ſhew what is the new coined goſpell, which the Proteſtants preach and profeſſe. The Goſpell is the good and ioyfull meſſage of our ſaluation, through Gods mercies purchaſed vnto vs by Ieſus Chriſt. This Goſpell God preached to Adam, that Ieſus Chriſt the ſeed of the woman ſhould breake the ſerpents 
                     Geneſ. 3. 16. head. This he renued to Abraham ſaying, in thy ſeed ſhall all the nations of the world be bleſſed. This Goſpell was 
                     Geneſ. 22. 18. preached by all the Prophets, who beare witnes vnto 
                     Act. 10. 43. Chriſt, that through his name all that beléeue in him, ſhall receiue forgiuenes of ſinnes. Now if you can prooue that we preach or maintaine any other goſpell then this, then you may well call it a new coined goſpell: if otherwiſe, take heed you do not belch out blaſphemie, in calling this old and true goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, a new coined goſpell. And let the Chriſtian reader, which tendereth his owne ſaluation well conſider who they be that coine a new, falſe, and counterfeit goſpell. Do not they which teach vs to aſcend into heauen by the bloud of Thomas Becket, coine a In the popiſh Primer printed 1557. new and falſe goſpell? Tuper Thomae ſanguinem &c. which they engliſhed in Queene Maries dayes thus: By the bloud of Thomas, which he for thee did ſpend, make vs Chriſt to come, whither Thomas did aſcend. Againe, Ieſu bone per Thomae merit unt nostra nobis dimitte debita: O good Ieſus for the merits of Thomas (Becket) forgiue vs our

ſinnes. Do not they, which teach vs to ſeeke to be deliuered from the fire of hell by the merits and prayers of Saint Nicholas, mainetaine a new coined goſpell? Thus they prayed: Quaeſimus vt eius meritis & precibas à gehennae incendijs 
                  In the ſame Primer. 
                  liberemur: Graunt we beſeech thee, that by his merits and prayers we may be deliuered from the fire of hell. Do not they which ſay and beleeue of an Agnus dei, that is to ſay, a peece of waxe and balme conſecrated by the Pope, Tollit & omne malignum, peccatum frangit, vt 
                  
                     Lib. 1. Caeremo. titul. 7. 
                  Christi ſanguis & angit, It taketh away all euill, it breaketh and ſtrangleth ſinne as doth the bloud of Chriſt: do not they (I ſay) coine a new, falſe, and blaſphemous Goſpell? Yes ſurely, for to attribute remiſſion of ſinnes, or any part of ſaluation to the merits of any other, but only of Ieſus Chriſt crucified, is to coine a new and falſe goſpell: for it is not that goſpell of God, which he promiſed afore by his Prophets in the holy ſcriptures, which is concerning his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, our Lord &c. To conclude this point, I ſay woe, woe vnto them that accept or affect any new coined goſpell. And whereas you wonder that men indued with iudgement and a religious conſcience, could affect or accept the goſpell that we preach, which you falſely call a new coined goſpell: we may well wonder, that any man that hath any ſparke of knowledge or conſcience ſhould beleeue theſe foreſaid falſe goſpels. We may alſo wonder that men indued with reaſonable ſoules and ſenſes, being the handy worke of God, ſhould bow downe and worſhip a ſtone and ſtock, which hath neither ſoule nor life; hath eyes and ſeeth not; eares and heareth not &c. and is the workemanſhip of mans hands, eſpecially being ſo plainely and expreſly forbidden in Gods commaundements, 
                     Pſal. 115. & 135. & infinite places of the ſcriptures. We may wonder that any man ſhould be ſo mad, as to worſhip, and thinke that which he doth eate, to be his God and maker: which is ſo abſurd, that euen Tully not without reaſon could ſay, ſedecquem tam amentem eſſe putas, qui illud quo veſcitur deum 
                  
                     Cicero de Natura deorum lib. 2. 
                  credat eſſe? Doeſt thou thinke any man ſo mad as to beleeue that to be his God, which he doth eate? yet into this

madnes, by a ſpiritual phrenſie, be theſe men fallen. We alſo may wonder, that they ſhould beleeue ſuch falſe fables, and lying miracles, as abound in poperie: as for example, (to caſt the dung of their abominations vpon their faces) That Images did ſpeake, did ſweate did roll their eyes, did bleede: that the head of a dog being cut off from the body by theeues, which vpon Saint Katherines day came to rob Inter ſermones diſcipuli Serm. de S. Katherinae. a Prieſt, who was a deuout worſhipper of her, did ſtill barke? That the virgin Mary did for many yeares in a Nunnery keepe the keyes, and ſupply the place of one Beatrix, whileſt ſhe went away and played the whore. Theſe and many ſuch abſurd fables were preached, publiſhed, printed, and beleeued, as may appeare by Sermones 
                  In promptu. diſcipuli. 
                  diſcipuli, Antoninus the Archbiſhop of Florence ſtories, Mariale, Summa praedicantia, the feſtiuall Vitas patrum, and that monſtrous booke the Legend, written by Iacobus 
                  Supplementuns Chronicorunt Bergomenſ. 
                  de Varagine, Archbiſhop of Genua: Which yet was in ſo great reputation with them, that it was publiſhed in print in the Engliſh tongue, when the holy Bible was ſuppreſſed, 
                     lib. 13. fol. 205. and had this title ſet before it, The golden Legend: for as gold excelleth all other mettals, ſo this booke excelleth all other bookes: to the which title that worthy and right worſhipfull Knight Sir Andrew Corbet of bleſſed memory, did adde theſe words, In lying, and ſo of a falſe and blaſphemous title, made it a moſt true title. Yea I haue a booke in Engliſh in Folio, tranſlated out of French, and printed in London in King Henry the 8. dayes Anno 1521. intituled, The flower of the Commaundements, fully fraighted with ſuch ſottiſh and worſe then old wiues fables, which yet in thoſe dayes were preached and beleeued. And we may wonder that men of any wiſedome; knowledge, or iudgement, ſhould be deluded and mocked with ſuch falſe, fained reliques, as were and are in Popery, as with Saint Peters finger at Walſingham, as big as if it had been of Eraſmus in Colloquio. peregri. ergo. ſome Giant: and alſo the virgin Maries milke there, which ſeemeth by Eraſmus to haue been the white of an egge and 
                     Blondus de Rema instaurata lib. 3. propefinem.
                   chalke mingled together, and a veſſell of the ſame at Rome as writeth Blondus: the bloud of Hales, the which was

proued and declared at Paules Croſſe by the Biſhop of Rochester in King Henry the 8. dayes, to haue been clarified 
                     Holingſhead in Henry 8. p. 946. Caluinus admonitione de reliquijs.
                   honey coloured with ſaffron. In Geneua there was worſhipped for the arme of Saint Anthonie, that which afterward was proued to be the piſle of a Stagge, for a peece of S. Peters ſcull, that which was found to be a pumiſh ſtone. But this will not be beleeued of this writer and of his fellowes, becauſe Caluin did write it. But why Caluin ſhould write and publiſh euen in the French tongue in Geneua, ſuch a thing of Geneua, vnleſſe it were true, which the Inhabitants thereof might know to be falſe, I ſee no reaſon: it could purchaſe no credit to him or to his doctrine. But why might not that as well be true, as the things before alleaged, or as that which Gregorius Turonenſis who liued 
                     Gregor. Turonenſ. lib. 9. ca. 6. ſundry hundreth yeares paſt, writeth that there was found in a boxe of reliques, of a certaine Sainct, rootes of trees, the teeth of a Mole, the bones of Mice, and the clawes of Beares, which were worſhipt for holy reliques. But of theſe iuglings I will write no more at this preſent, God may giue occaſion hereafter more largely to intreate of them. At theſe things we may wonder, but yet we do not ouermuch meruaile and wonder at them, for that the ſpirit of God by Saint Paule hath foreſhewed vs, that the time would come, when men ſhould turne away their eares frō 
                  2. Timoth. 4. 4. the truth, and be giuen to fables: and that the comming of Antichriſt ſhould be by the effectuall working of Satan, 2. Theſſal. 2. 9. with all power and ſignes, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenes of vnrighteouſnes, among thē that periſh, becauſe they receiued not the loue of the truth that they might be ſaued, therefore God ſhould ſend them a ſtrong deluſion to beleeue lyes, that all they might be damned which beleeued not the truth, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſnes. Whereas you requeſt that he that ſhall anſwere this your pamphlet, will do it briefely, orderly, and ſeriouſly, I will indeuor to do the two laſt as God ſhall inable me. But concerning breuitie, I will vſe my libertie, and peraduenture more largely lay downe your abſurdities, then you would be willing I ſhould do. But whereas you

ſay, that you make this requeſt, for that you perceiue that the Proteſtants cannot anſwere with breuitie, becauſe their religion lacketh both certaintie and perſpicuitie: I ſay that with one breath you do vtter two vntruthes, or to ſpeake plaine Engliſh, lyes. The firſt that we cannot anſwere with breuitie, which how vntrue it is, let it be tried firſt by the briefe and pithie anſweres of that great learned man Doctor Fulke: who anſwering many of their bookes, which yet to this day ſtand vndefended, how briefely and pithily he anſwered the ſame, let any man that hath but a graine of indifferent iudgement, conſider and iudge. And particularly I referre them to his anſwere to Riſhtons challenge, and to Allens booke of Purgatorie, both in one volume: yea many times in his writings he called them from long and impertinent diſcourſes, to ſhort ſyllogiſmes, whereunto he could neuer bring them. How cloſely that pretious Iewel and excellent ornament of this Church of England did hold himſelfe to the matter, and how vnlike he was to Doctor Harding in his long diſcourſes and digreſſions, who in his booke intituled, A detection of lyes, &c. diſcourſed two hundred and ſixe whole ſides of paper, onely in preambles and prefaces, before he once ſtept into his matter, as Maiſter Iewel truly told him; let the vpright reader indifferently iudge. The like I may ſay of that worthie Preface to the defence of the Apologie, edition 2. man of famous memorie, Doctor Whitakers, who how briefely, ſoundly, and learnedly he hath anſwered Campion, Saunders, Duree, Stapleton, William Reynolds, and Bellarmine, any man that hath an incorrupt eye may ſee and diſcerne. And if T. W. be the author of this pamphlet (as I nothing doubt but he is) he may remember that one which had conference with him, did write a briefe epiſtle vnto him, and did therein ſet downe ſhort ſyllogiſmes concerning the controuerſies of prayer to Saints, and the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, and required to haue the like ſhort ſyllogiſmes ſet downe of him for the defence of his aſſertions, and could not receiue one, but a long tedious diſcourſe concerning prayer to Saints, which was confuted, and neuer defended. But whether anſwers be briefe or long,

it maketh no matter, ſo that they be learned, ſound and true, to the effectuall confuting of the errour, and ſatisfying of the reader. Now as touching certaintie which you ſay, but do not ſhew, that our religon lacketh: I anſwere and auonch that out Religion is farre more certaine; conſonant, and agreeable to it ſelfe, then the doctrine of the Church of Rome is: the which if I do not effectually proue hereafter in place more conuenient, I will not require any man (to vſe your owne words) to accept, or affect it. But with what forehead can this man charge our doctrine with want of perſpicuitie, ſeeing he cannot be ignorant how obſcure, darke, and intricate the popiſh religion and doctrine is; as may appeere by their maniſold, both turious queſtions, and intricate diſtinctions, which be their chiefe ſhifts, to elude the plaine truth. And if any would ſee how darke the doctrine and writings of Papiſts are, let him looke into the Schoolemen, Tho Aquine, Io. Scotus, Alexander de Hales, Gabriel Biel, and many ſuch other, amongſt whom he may finde as much certaintie, vnitie, and perſpicuitie of doctrine, as he may in holl. But how we ſtudy for perſpicuitie, and ſeeke to make all matters plaine, both in our preachings, and in our writings, auoyding all curious queſtions, and intricate and needles diſtinctions; we appeale to the conſciences of all that reade, and heare vs. As touching your method concerning errours in doctrine, and inordinate affections in maners, if you can prooue that our wits be inueigled with them, and our liues ſtained with theſe, more then we can prooue euen your holy Fathers the Popes, forſooth Peters ſucceſſors, and Chriſtes vicars haue been, you ſhall winne the victorie, You ſeeme to attribute too much to our very naturall faculties, to the iudging and diſcerning of truth propoſed, not conſidering the corruption of our naturall faculties by ſinne, how both the minde is blinded, and the will peruerted. Our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, The light ſhineth in darknes, and the darkenes 
                     Iohn 1. 5. comprehendeth it not: Saint Paul ſaith, that animalis 
                  1. Cor. 2. 14. 
                  homo, the naturall man perceiueth not the things of the ſpirit of God, for they are fooliſhnes vnto him: neither can

he know them: becauſe they are ſpiritually diſcorned. But of this I forbeare to ſpeake any more, and alſo will leaue the other wait words in your letter, and do come vnto your articles of faith.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The firſt article concerning knowledge and faith. The Protestants haue no faith nor neligion.
               
               
                  
                     THe Protestants haue no faith, no hope, no charitic no repentance, no justification, no Church, no altar, no ſacrefice, no Priest, no Religion, no Christ: the reaſon is; for if they haue then the world was without them; for a thouſand yeeres (as they themſelves muſt needs confeſſe: vid elicet all the time their Church was eclipſed) and 1500. as we will proue by all records of antiquitie, as Histories, Councels, monuments of ancient Fathers: Whereby it plainely appeaneth, that the ſynagogue of the Iewes was more constant in continuance, and more ample for place, then the Church of Chriſt: For they haue had their ſ
                        •
                     nagogue viſible in di
                        •
                     ers countries, e
                        •
                     en ſince Christ's death and paſſion euen vntill his day; which is the very path to lead man into Atheiſme, as though Christ were not as yet come into the world, 
                  
                     Iſa. 60. 11. 
                  whoſe admirable promiſes, are not accompliſheds 
                  
                     Matth. 16. 18. 
                  whoſe aſſistance hath failed in preſeruing his Church, vnto the worlds end 
                  
                     cap. 28. 20. 
                  whoſe preſence 
                        〈◊〉
                      abſent many hundred years, before the finall conſummation: and conſequently they open the gap to all Machiuillians; who ſay that our Sauiour was one of the deceiuere of the world, promiſing ſo much concerning his Church and performing ſo little.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  LOoking in this firſt article to haue found a ſyllogiſme, which this worthie writer vſeth in ſome articles following, but heere for want of a good medium (as it may ſeeme) to frame one by, hath omitted, I found a falſe aſſertion, and a fooliſh probation. The aſſertion,

that we haue no faith. Haue we no faith? The Deuils haue ſome faith: Saint Iames ſaith, The Deuils beleeue and tremble, and haue we no faith? we are much beholden vnto you for your charitable opinion of vs. You are by 
                     Iam. 2. 19. the doctrine of Saint Paule, not to thinke ſo euill, but to 1. Cor. 13. 7. hope the beſt of them that profeſſe Ieſus Chriſt, and his holy Goſpell. But to this your falſe and ſlaunderous aſſertion, I will oppoſe a true affirmation and confeſſion. We beleeue all that God hath deliuered to vs by Moſes, the Faith. Prophets, and Apoſtles, in the old and new Teſtament: yea we beleeue the contents of the Creeds of the Apoſtles, Nicene, and Athanaſius: and yet haue we no faith? We hope Hope. to paſſe hereafter from death vnto life, and to be partakers of that kingdome of glory, which God hath promiſed, and Ieſus Chriſt hath purchaſed for all thoſe that truly beleeue in him. We truſt that we haue charitie, and loue both towards God and man, although we confeſſe not in ſuch Charitie. full and perfect meaſure as we ought to haue: we with Saint Iohn ſay, He that loueth not his brother abideth in 1. Iohn 3. 14. death. We acknowledge repentance to be one of thoſe chiefe heads wherein the ſumme of Chriſtianitie is compriſed. Repentance. Saint Marke ſetting forth the ſumme and ſubſtance of Chriſtes doctrine, comprehendeth it in theſe two, Repent and beleeue the Goſpell: ſo did Saint Paule, witneſſing 
                     Marke 1. 16. Acts 20. 21. both to the Iewes, and to the Grecians the repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. We beleeue to be iuſtified not by our owne works of righteouſnes (which we vnprofitable ſeruants, and prodigall children haue done) nor by the merits of any Saints in Iuſtification. heauen or in earth, but by the mercies of God, purchaſed 
                     Luke 17. 10. & 15. 21. vnto vs by the bleſſed and bloudy merits of Ieſus Chriſt, and applied vnto our ſoules by the hand of faith, by the 
                     Iohn 3. 36. Rom. 3. 25. & 4. 5. which Chriſt doth dwell in our harts, and is made ours. We beleeue that we are true members of that holy Catholike 
                     Epheſ 2. 8. Church, which is Chriſtes myſticall body, and 
                     Epheſ. 3. 17. Church. whereof he is the head: which is his ſpouſe, and he the bridegroome: which is his flock, and he the ſhepheard: which is the heauenly Hieruſalem the Mother of vs all: 
                     Galath. 4. 26.
                  
finally, which is the number of Gods elect and choſen people, that ſhall reſt with Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, in the Kingdome of Heauen. And we know that we haue perticular 
                     Matth. 8. 11. and viſible Churches, wherein Gods word is more truly preached, the Sacraments ſeales of the word, are more purely miniſtred, and Gods name more faithfully inuocated and called vpon, then in any or all the Romiſh Synagogues. Indeede we haue no Idolatrous altars, to offer either carnall or externall ſacrifices vpon, as though Altas. Chriſts ſweete ſmelling ſacrifice were not yet offered: but we haue Menſam Domini the Lords Table, whereupon we miniſter the Supper of Chriſt, which is a holy Sacrament 1. Cor. 10. 21. of Chriſts body and bloud giuen for vs, a memoriall of his death and paſſion, and a pledge of our redemption and ſaluation purchaſed thereby. We haue that ſweete ſmelling and ſufficient ſacrifice, which Ieſus Chriſt by his Sacrifice. Heber. 9. 14. eternall ſpirit offered without fault vnto God, to purge our conſciences from dead workes to ſerue the liuing God. As for the ſacrifice of the maſſe, as being iniurious to the ſaid ſacrifice of Ieſus Chriſt, which he once, for all, and for euer offered vpon the Altar of the Croſſe, we deny, and defie. We haue no thauen nor greaſed prieſts to offer the ſaid falſe and forged ſacrifice of the Maſſe: but we haue Prieſts. prieſts, paſtours, or miniſters, howſoeuer we terme them, according to the ordinance of Chriſt, to preach his holy Goſpell, and to adminiſter his ſacraments to his Church. We haue and vſe that religion which hath the teſtimonie Religion. Rom. 3. of the law & prophets, and wherein the true worſhip and ſeruice of God, according to his will reuealed in his holy word is contained: your 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and ſuperſtition we flee and forſake. Finally, we haue that Chriſt, which came into this world to ſaue ſinners, and which is that Lambe Chriſt. 1. Tim. 1. 15. Ioh. 1. 29. of God, that taketh away the ſinne of the world, whom we acknowledge more ſoundly to be our onely high prophet, 
                     Matth. 17. 5. to inſtruct vs in the will of his father, whoſe onely voyce we muſt heare; our onely high prieſt, with the ſacrifice of his body and bloud once offered to redeeme vs, and reconcile vs vnto God; our onely mediator and interceſſorto

ſit for euer at the right hand of God to make interceſſion for vs; and our onely high king, to deliuer vs out of the hands of our enemies, to giue lawes vnto our conſciences, and to rule vs with the ſcepter of his holy word, then the Pope, and all his adherents doe. This our true confeſſion whereunto God and our conſciences be witneſſes, we oppoſe to your falſe and ſlaunderous obtrectation and accuſation, ſaying with Saint Paul, We paſſe very 1. Cor. 4. 3. little to be iudged of you, or of mans iudgement: and with him alſo exhort you not to iudge before the time, vntill the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkenes, and make the counſels of the harts manifeſt, and then ſhall euery man haue praiſe of God. Further I doe exhort you that take vpon you ſo ſeuerely to cenſure and iudge others, carefully to take heede to your ſelues, that you haue not a falſe faith grounded not vpon Gods promiſes, contained in his word; but vpon mans deuiſes and traditions, which as Epiphanius ſaith, as worſe then no Epipha. in Ancorato. faith. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : and that you be not voyde of true hope, by teaching the doctrine of doubting (whereof I ſhall ſpeake hereafter) and by fearing to be after death throwne into the firie torments of purgatorie: and that you want not true charitie, in iudging ſo falſely and maliciouſly, and perſecuting vs ſo cruelly, as you vſe to doe, when time and power ſerueth you: and that you haue no true repentance, nor remorſe of conſcience for ſinne, in perſiſting ſo, obſtinately in damnable doctrine, and abominable idolatrie: and that by leaning to your owne righteouſnes, and the merites of other men, which were ſinners themſelues, you loſe not that true iuſtification which is the righteouſnes of God, by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt vnto all and vpon all that beleeue, which is onely able to ſtand and diſcharge vs, before the iudgement ſeate 
                     Rom. 3. 22. of Ieſus Chriſt, and is the onely ſtrong ſtaffe to leane vpon, to leap ouer the ditch of damnation, and beware (I ſay) that you leaning vpon the weake reede of your owne merites and others, fall not into the middeſt thereof, from which there is noriſing: take heede you be not of the malignant

Church, which heareth not the voyce of Chriſt, and wherein that man of ſinne, and ſonne of perdition ſitteth and raigneth: and that you haue not ſuch Idolatrous altars, as Ieneboam had, againſt which the man of God cried, and vpon which the like iudgement of God fell, 1. King. 13. 2. as hath done vpon yours now: And that you haue not a falſe forged ſacrifice, which appeaſeth not, but daily prouoketh Gods wrath againſt you, and that you be not without prieſts to teach the law of God truely, but haue ſwarmes of ſuch prieſts, as ſay not where is the Lord, and 
                     Ierem. 2. 8. know not God, but propheſie in Baal, which haue gone 
                     Malach. 2. 8. out of the way, and haue cauſed many to fall by the law, &c. Beware that you be not without religion, remembring the ſaying of Lactantius: Quare non eſt dubium, quin 
                  
                     Lactant. de origi. erroris lib. 2. cap. 19. 
                  veligio nulla, ſit, vbicunque ſimulachrum eſt: that is, wherefore there is no doubt, but that there is no religion, whereſoeuer an Image is. Finally, I ſay againe and againe, beware that you forſake not the true Chriſt, and worſhip Antichriſt, ſitting in the weſterne Babylon built vpon ſeuen 
                     Auguſt. de ciuitate dei lib. 18. cap. 2. hilles, which in the dayes of Saint Iohn raigned ouer the Kings of the earth: wherefore be not ſo raſh in iudging 
                     Apoc. 17. 9. 18. ſo hardly and vncharitably of others, but examine and iudge your ſelues, that you be not iudged of the Lord. But I now come to your pithie probation of this your vncharitable 1. Cor. 11. 31. and ſhameles aſſertion. The reaſon you ſay is: For if they haue, then the world was without them for a thouſand yeares (as they themſelues muſt needes confeſſe, videl. all the time their Church was eclipſed) and for 1500. as we will proue by the teſtimonie of all records of antiquitie, &c. Whereunto I anſwere, that if we take the world in that ſenſe, which the ſcripture ſometimes doth, for the multitude and ſocietie of them, whereof the Diuell is prince: which hateth Chriſt and his true diſciples, which 
                     Ioh. 14. 30. is ſet vpon wickednes: for the which our Sauiour Chriſt 2. Cor. 4. 4. refuſed to pray ſaying, I pray not for the world: and 
                     Ioh. 15. 18 19. where of Iudas (not Iſcariot) did ſay, what is the cauſe, that 1. Ioh. 5. 19. thou wilt ſhew thy ſelfe to vs, and not vnto the world? In 
                     Ioh 17. 9. this ſenſe I may grant that the world hath not had theſe 
                     Ioh. 14. 22.
                  
gifts of Gods grace theſe thouſand yeares, and put another thouſand and more vnto them. But if we take the world more generally for this great globe, and all the inhabitants thereof, then proue by the teſtimonie of all antiquitie that the doctrine which we teach and profeſſe hath not been theſe 1500. yeares in the world, and we will yeeld, and you ſhall winne the victorie. But it is vſuall with you and your fellowes to make great and braue bragges to amaze the ſimple and ignorant; and to bring ſmall and poore proofes (as you doe here none at all) to perſwade the wiſe and learned: great braggers are no great doers. In deede we confeſſe that the Church is well compared by Saint Auguſtine to the Moone. For as the 
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 10. Moone receiueth her light from the Sunne: ſo doth the true Church receiue her light from Ieſus Chriſt the ſunne of righteouſnes. And as the Moone is ſometimes in the 
                     Malach. 4. 2. full, and ſhineth in full brightnes, and ſometimes is in the waine, and ſometimes is eclipſed, and doth little appeare: euen ſo the Church is ſometimes in the full, and ſhineth in full brightnes and glorie as in the Apoſtles times, and diuers hundreth yeares after it did: ſometimes it is in the waine and eclipſed, as for many hundred yeares laſt paſt it hath been, in which that Apoſtaſie from the faith is come, which Saint Paul by the ſpirit of God foreſhewed, and the euent hath proued by Mahometiſme in the Eaſt, 2. Theſ. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 4. 1. and Papiſme in the Weſt. During which time although the Church hath been driuen into the wildernes, and the 
                     Apoca. 12. light of true doctrine (which is the ſoule of the Church) hath been eclipſed, yet they haue neuer vtterly periſhed. For in all ages God in mercie hath reſerued a remnant according to the election of grace, by whom the light of his 
                     Rom. 11. 5. truth hath been preſerued, and in whom thoſe admirable promiſes of his mercie haue been performed. Theſe haue been, not proude Popes treading vpon Emperours neckes, depoſing them from their Crownes and Kingdomes, rayſing bloudie battels, and pouling and ſpoyling Chriſtian countries with greeuous and horrible exactions and deuiſes, as might be ſhewed: not carnall Cardinals Princes

peeres, hauing 200. and 300. benefices apeece, as Gerſon 
                  Gerſon tom. x. de defect. Virorum eccleſiaſt. Nicol. Clama. de corrupto ſtatu eccleſiae. and Clamangis Pariſian Doctors before named doe affirme, not popiſh blinde prelates, Abbats, Monkes, prieſts, &c. wallowing in all worldly wealth, and for the moſt part in great filthines of life, as hereafter I will ſhew: but ſuch as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of, that haue been tried by 
                     Heber. 11. 36. mockings and ſcourginges, yea by bondes & priſonment, which were ſtoned, hewen aſunder, tempted, ſlaine with the ſworde, wandred vp and downe in ſheepe-skinnes, and in goates skinnes, deſtituted, afflicted and tormented, whom the world was not worthie of, which wandred in wilderneſſes and mountaines, and dennes, and caues of the earth. Such were thoſe good people (in the time of the foreſaid apoſtacie) the Waldenſes and Pauperes de Lugduno diſperſed in diuers countries, as namely Calabria, Sauoye, Prouence in Fraunce, of whom many both long agoe in ſundrie places and diuers times were burned, as it is written in the old booke called Faſciculus Temporum: and alſo 
                     Aetate 6. fol. 84 of late yeares were moſt cruelly and vnmercifully perſe cuted in Merindoll, the valley of Angrone, Luſerne, and See Acts and monuments tom. 2. Saint Martin: Such were they that were called Begardi, of whom to the number of 114. were burnt at Paris, as the foreſaid booke Faſciculus Tempo. ſheweth. Such were Ibidem faſcicul. temporum. they that were called Albingenſes inhabiting eſpecially about Tholoſſa in Fraunce, of whom by the procurement of that falſe Frier, and ſuperſtitious Hypocrite Dominicus Vincent. Bella. Specu. Hiſtor. an hundreth thouſand were deſtroyed, as writeth Bernardus Lutzenburgus, and an 180. were together burned, 
                     lib. 29. cap. 103 Anton. hiſt.
                   as both Antoninus the Arch-biſhop of Florence writeth, and Bellarmine himſelfe confeſſeth. Such were they of 
                     part. 3. titul. 19. cap. 1. §. 4. whom Albertus Crantius writeth, which in Sueuia publikly 
                     Crant. in Metropo lib. 8. cap. 18 & lib. 10. cap 9. preached, that the Pope, Biſhops and prelaces were heretikes and Simoniakes; that the begging Friers did peruert the Church with their falſe preachings, for the which they were perſecuted and ſome burned. Such were they in Bohemia and Morauia in great number, with whom Aeneas Syluius (who was Pope called Pius the ſecond) hauing had conference, writeth thus of one of them.

                  Finitis ſermonibus iſtis aſſurrexit vnus de primoribus Thaboritarum, & animo ſatis inflato, quid tu nobis, inquit, apoſtolicam 
                  
                     Aeneas Syluins epiſt. 130. pag. 677. 
                  ſedem tot verbis amplificas? Nos Papam & Cardinales anaritiae ſeruos nouimus, impatientes, inflatos, tumidos, ventri ac libidini deditos, miniſtros ſcelerum, diaboli ſacerdotes, & Antichriſti praecurſores, quorum deus venter eſt, pecunia caelum. That is, when theſe ſpeeches were ended, there did riſe vp one of the chiefe of the Thaborites, and with an hautie minde ſaid, What doſt thou amplifie to vs in ſo many wordes the Apoſtolicall ſeate? we know that the Pope and the Cardinals be ſlaues to couetouſnes, imputient, proud, arrogant, giuen to the bellie, and filthie luſt; the miniſters of wickednes, the prieſts of the diuell, and the forerunners of Antichriſt, whoſe God is their bellie, and whoſe heauen is money. Such alſo was Arnoldus Brixianus, perſecuted by that proud Engliſh Pope Adrian the fourth, anno 1155. Iohn Rochetailada burnt at Auinion by Pope 
                     Froſard fol. 54. 
                  Clement the ſixt 1345. Michael Ceſenas burnt 1322. Iohn Wickliffe, who died 1387. and after his death his body was burnt. Two Franciſcan Friers burnt at Auinion by Pope 
                     Polychron. lib. 6. 
                  Innocent the ſixt 1354. Two others burnt at London 1357. William Swinderby burnt 1401. William White burnt 1428. 
                     Polidor Virg. lib. 19. 
                  Peter Clarke, and Peter Paine 1433. perſecuted and forced to flee into Bohemia. Thomas Rhedonenſis burnt at Rome 1430. Mattheus Palmerius burnt at Florence, as witneſſeth 
                     Anton. part. 3. titul. 22. cap. 10. 
                  Sabellicus. Dulcinus of Nouaria and Margaret his wife burnt about the yeare of our Lord 1304. Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prage burnt at Conſtance 1415. 1416. Hieromus 
                  
                     Sabel. Enne. 10. lib. 4. 
                  Sauonarola burnt at Florence 1499. Theſe and many ſuch other that might be produced with their faithfull fauourers and followers, were the true Church of God, in whom his mercifull promiſes were performed. Theſe are they that haue mourned in Zion, that haue lamented and cryed for all the abominations that haue 
                     Iſa. 61. 3. been don in Ieruſalem, or rather in Rome, that were killed 
                     Ezech 9. 5. for the word of God, and for the teſtimonie which they 
                     Apoc. 6. 9. 19. maintained, and which came out of great tribulation, and haue waſhed their robes in the bloud of the Lamb. But 
                     Apoca 7. 14.
                  
theſe now haue beautie for aſhes, the oyle of ioy for mourning, 
                     Iſa. 61. 3. the garment of gladnes for the ſpirit of heauines, and are trees of righteouſnes, the planting of the Lord, in whom he is glorified, they be now vnder the altar, and 
                     Apoc. 6. 9. are in the preſence of the throne of God, and ſerue him day and night in his temple, and he that ſitteth on the throne doth dwell among them, neither doth the ſunne light on them, neither any heate. But this man will ſay, 7. 15. that theſe were condemned and puniſhed by the Church for heretikes. I confeſſe they were ſo, euen as the Prophets of God, Chriſt our Sauiour, and his holy Apoſtles were before them condemned by the prelates and prieſts of the Church of Iſrael, which caried the countenance of the Church of God, as much and more rightly then the Pope and his prelates now doe. Neither were theſe ſo few in number, but that by confeſſion of ſome popiſh writers, the Romiſh falſe faith was ſometimes in danger to haue been ſubuerted by them. Wernerus a Charterhouſe Monke of Colen in his foreſaid booke called Faſciculus temporum 
                  
                     Faſcicu. Temps. aetat. 6. fol. 78. writeth thus: Fuerunt nihilominus poſtea quidam ſubtiliſſimi haeretici, qui iſtam haereſim Waldenſium defendere conabantur, & plura regna & populos deceperunt: that is, notwithſtanding there were afterwards ſome moſt ſubtill heretikes, which went about to defend this hereſie of the Waldenſes, and deceiued (or rather truely inſtructed) many kingdomes and nations. And againe, hauing made mention 1233. of certaine popiſh doctors in thoſe dayes, as Hugo Cardinalis, &c. he hath theſe words: Quos diuina bonitas 
                  
                     Fol. 80. 
                  miſit pro fidei defenſione, alioquin tota pene fides perijſſet propter haereticorum multiplicitatem, & ſubtilitatem ſimul & potentiam: that is, whom God ſent for the defence of the faith, for otherwaies it had like wholy to haue periſhed by reaſon of the multitude, ſubtiltie and power of heretikes. It appeareth by the teſtimonie of this popiſh Monke, that in thoſe dayes there were verie many of them whom he falſely calleth heretikes. And whereas theſe deteſted the enormities and abominations of the Church of Rome, and maintained the ſame ſubſtantiall and fundamentall

points of doctrine that we doe, (as it appeareth by the articles obiected vnto them that they did) how doth this man ſay that our religion was not theſe 1500. yeares in the world? It was in the world, but hated of the world, which hated Chriſt: yet was it conſtantly confeſſed 
                     Ioh. 15. 18. 19. euen to death of them whom God the Father hath giuen to Chriſt out of the world. Hereby it may ſufficiently appeare, 
                     Ioh. 17. 6. 9. that the Synagogue of the Iewes hath not bin more conſtant in continuance, nor more ample in place, then the true Church of Chriſt hath been. In deede it may be, that the Synagogues of the Iewes haue continued in ſome certaine places more conſtantly, then the true Churches of Ieſus Chriſt haue done: Yet hereupon it doth not follow, that either Gods admirable promiſes haue not bin performed, or that the true Church hath periſhed. It is not the Synagogue of the Iewes, but the true Church of God, that is clothed with Chriſt the ſun of righteouſnes, treadeth vnder 
                     Apoca. 12. 1. her feete earthly things, which be mutable as ye moone, and is adorned with the Doctrine of Chriſts twelue Apoſtles, which is forced to flee into the wildernes. Chryſoſtome 
                  
                     Chryſoſtom in pſal. 114. ſaith well: Eccleſia eſt tabernaculū à deo fixum non ab homine: ab vno loco in alium fugit, ſed non à pietate ad impietatem fugit. that is. The Church is the tabernacle which God hath pight and not man, ſhe fleeth from one place to another, but ſhe neuer fleeth from godlines to impietie and wickednes. As Barrabas found here more fauour with the prelates and prieſts of Iudah and Ieruſalem, then Ieſus Chriſt the ſon of God did: So the Popes and Iewes Synagogues haue found more fauour, and more quietly reſted in this wicked world, then the true Church of Ieſus Chriſt hath done. As euen in Rome the Iewes, profeſſed and open enemies of our Sauiour Chriſt, haue had and yet haue their Synagogues, and liue (paying their tributes) in as great quietnes and ſafetie, as the Curtizans & Whores of Rome do, which pay yearely 
                     Cornel. Agrip. de Vanitate Scient. cap. 64. to the Pope twentie thouſand duckates. It is written in the pontificall, that at the coronation of the Pope, and in his proceſſion to ye Church of Laterane, the Iewes vſe to meete him, and making curteſie do offer the law to him, to whom

he giueth a gentle anſwere. But whereas the foreſaid Arnoldus Brixianus a great learned man reproued the errors and enormities of the Church of Rome, Adrian the foure our 
                     Platina in Adriano. 4. proud countriman (who rebuked the Emperor for holding his wrong ſtirrop) would not go vp to the Church of Laterane to be conſecrate, vntill he were driuen but of Rome. 
                     Platina in Honorio. 2. There was alſo one Arnulphus in Rome a godly mā, whom many of the inhabitants thereof acknowledged for a true diſciple of Chriſt, that was there murthered by the prieſts for inueighing againſt their wickedneſſe. Alſo in a towne 
                     Platina in Paulo. 2. neere Rome called Pole, the lord thereof with many others 
                     Sabellicus Ennead. 10. lib. 7. were counted heretikes, for ſaying that none of them which followed Peter were ye true vicars of Chriſt, but ſuch as followed the pouerty of Chriſt. Theſe Pope Paulus the ſecond perſecuted and contumeliouſly intreated, as Platina and Sabellicus doe write. Hereby we ſee that it is a thing more allowable in Rome, to denie Chriſt as the Iewes doe, then to meddle with the Popes triple crowne, or to reproue his pride, and enormities.
               This our doctrine of performing Gods admirable promiſes not in proud Popes, and wicked worldlings, but in the faithfull which feare God, tremble at his word, and are for the moſt part hated and perſecuted in the world, doth neither ſhew the path to Atheiſme, nor open the gap to Machiuilian deuiſes, which by the teſtimonie of ſome papiſts themſelues are no where ſooner learned then in that ſchoole, wherein T. W. the author of this ſlanderous libell, hath bin (as I ſuppoſe) too much and too long trained. I meane the ſchoole of Ieſuites, of whom William Watſon a popiſh ſecular prieſt in his booke of Quodlibets lately publiſhed doth thus write; Many Atheal paradoxes be taught in 
                  
                     Quedlib. 1. art. 9. pag. 21. Ibidem.
                   
                  the Ieſuites conclaue, or cloſe conuenticles. Aga. Queſtionles the Ieſuits want neither art nor euill will, nor yet malitious meanes to effect it, as hauing vſed from the beginning more Machauilian deuiſes, and Atheal practiſes in ſecret conference by their inferior agents with ſchiſmatikes, yea and with our common aduerſaries, then with catholikes. Againe: It muſt needes follow, 
                     Quodlib 4. art. 4. pag. 112. that there is not a Ieſuite in all England this day, but

hath a bitter ſmack of father Parſons impiety, irreligioſity, treachery, treaſon, & Machiuilian Atheiſme. Again neither Machiuel, nor any that euer yet was in Europe came neere 
                     Quodli. 9. art. 7 pag. 314. vnto the Ieſuites for Atheal deuiſes to preuent the ſtopples of their ſtratagems, and to further their proceedings. Againe: But I call them Ieſuiticall (that is, the faction of In the appendix to the Quodli. pag. 346. the Ieſuites) by abbreuiation to auoyde circumlocution, in one word expreſſing them to be a factious, ſeditious, ambitious, auaritious, treacherous, traiterous, Machiuilian, Atheall conſort, that abuſing the rules of their ſocietie, &c. By the iudgement of this popiſh prieſt, let the good reader conſider who they be, that ſhew the path to Atheiſme, and open the gap to Machiuilian deuiſes.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The learned Proteſtants are Infidels. 2. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer buildeth his faith vpon his owne priuate and ſingular expoſition of Scripture, is an Infidel. But all Protestants in England build their faith vpon their owne priuate expoſition of Scripture: Ergo, all the Proteſtants of England are Infidels. The Maior cannot be denied: becauſe faith must be infallible, and impoſſible to be either erronious or changeable: but faith which is builded vpon priuat expoſition of Scripture, is ſubiect to error and change, and conſequently vpon better aduice and conſideration may be altered.
               
               
                  The minor I proue: for either they build their faith vpon their owne priuat opinion, in expounding of Scriptures, the expoſition of the Church, the Fathers, or Councels: but not vpon theſe three: Ergo, vpon their owne priuate expoſition.
               
               
                  Some Protestants allow the Fathers, and their expoſitions, ſo farre forth as they agree with Gods word, and no farther: but this is nothing elſe but to delude the world; for what meane they when they ſay they will allow them ſo far forth as they agree with
                  
                  the Scriptures? Meane they perhaps, that if the Fathers bring Scriptures to proue any poynt of Religion now in controuerſie, to allow that poynt as true? If ſo, why then reiect they S. Auguſtine Aug. lib. de cura. agen. pro mortui. 
                  and other Fathers, who bring Scripture to proue prayer for the dead? yea and all controuerſies almost in Religion, the Fathers proue by Scriptures when they diſpute vpon them. Or perhaps they meane to admit the Fathers, when they alleage Scripture, but ſuch as euery Protestant ſhall allow of, ſo it be conformable to their fancies, and fit their new coined Goſpell: and in this ſenſe who ſeeth not, that euery paltry companion will make himſelfe, not only expoſitor of Christs word, but alſo will prefer his expoſition before all ancient Fathers, when they daunce not after his pipe, and conſent not with his hereſies.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  HEre we haue a ſyllogiſme, to the Maior or firſt propoſition whereof, I anſwere, that they which vniuerſally in all matters and doctrines of ſaluation doe follow priuate and falſe expoſitions of the Scripture be Infidels: but in ſome places of Scripture a man may follow a priuate and falſe expoſition of the Scripture, and beleeue the ſame to be true, and yet be no Infidel. Hilarie followed a priuat and falſe expoſition of the place, Come behind me Sathan: and Ambroſe of Peters deniall of 
                     Hilarius. in Matth. can. 16. Ambroſ. in Luc. lib. 10. Chriſt, and Hierome in like manner of Peters diſſembling with the Iewes, Galat. 2. yea, and all the Fathers haue in ſundrie places of Scripture followed priuat, and vntrue expoſitions, and haue beleeued the ſame to be true, and yet they were no Infidels. Saint Augustine ſaith well: Quiſquis igitur Scripturas diuinas, &c. Whoſoeuer therefore 
                     August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 36. doth thinke himſelfe to vnderſtand the holy Scriptures or any part of them; ſo that by that his vnderſtanding, he doth not edifie and build this double loue of God and of his neighbour, doth not yet vnderſtand them. But whoſoeuer doth draw ſuch a ſenſe or expoſition from them, as may be profitable to the edifying of this loue, and yet doth

not deliuer that which he whom he readeth ſhall be proued in that place to hauement, is not dangerouſly or wickedly deceiued, neither doth he at all lye. And againe, Sed quiſquis in Scripturis aliud ſentit quam ille qui ſcripſit, illis 
                  Ibidem. 
                  non mentientibus fallitur: ſed tamen vt dicere coeperam, &c. But whoſoeuer in the Scriptures doth conceiue any other ſenſe, then he that did write it did meane, he is deceiued although the Scriptures doe not lye: yet as I began to ſay, if he be deceiued by that ſenſe which doth edifie loue and charitie, which is the end of the commaundement, is ſo deceiued, as if a man miſſing and leauing his way, yet goeth by the field thither, whither the way doth leade him. Hereby you may perceiue that euery one which followeth a priuate or falſe expoſition of ſome place of the Scripture is not an Infidel.
               But to leaue this, and to come to your Minor or ſecond propoſition, I anouch the ſame to be falſe, and doe deny that we build our faith vpon priuat or falſe expoſitions of the Scripture. We ſay with S. Peter, that no propheſie of 2. Pet. 1. 20. the Scripture is of any priuat interpretation. But we are to take that ſenſe which the holy Ghoſt intendeth and meaneth. And we ſay, that many things be moſt plaine and euident in the holy Scriptures, ſo that the ſimplieſt may vnderſtand them, and get knowledge and comfort by them. So Chryſostome ſaith: An ista aliquam expoſitionem deſiderant? 
                  
                     Chryſost. ad Rom. Hom. 19. 
                  annon clara ſunt, etiam vehementer ſtupidis: i. Doe theſe neede any expoſition? are they not cleere and manifeſt, euen to thoſe that be very dull. So Saint Augustine 
                  
                     August. in Euang. Ioannis tract. 50. ſaith, Quadam in Scripturis tam manifesta ſunt vt potius auditorem quam expoſitorem deſiderent: i. There be ſome things in the Scriptures ſo manifeſt, that they require rather a hearer, then an expounder. So ſaith Iustinus Martyr: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
                     Iustinus Martyr dialo. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . pag. 68. edit. Robert. Stephan.
                   Marke and giue heede to thoſe things which I ſhall recite, out of the holy Scriptures, which neede not to be expounded, but onely to be heard. And whereas we confeſſe that there be ſome things hard in the Scriptures, wee ſay that the ſame are to be

vnderſtanded and expounded by conferring them with other places of the Scriptures. And that no forraine or priuate expoſition is to bee brought to them, but that which is gathered out of the Scriptures themſelues. So Chryſoſtom ſaith: Scriptura ſeipſam exponit, & lectoremerrare 
                  
                     Chryſo. in Gen. homil. 12. 
                  non ſinit: that is, the Scripture expoundeth it ſelfe, and ſuffereth not the reader to erre. Againe, Semper enim quando quid obſcurum loquitur ſeipſum iterum interpretatur. 
                  
                     In 2. Cor. homil. 9. Whenſoeuer Paul doth ſpeake any thing obſcurely, he doth alwayes expound himſelfe. So ſaith Saint Auguſtine, 
                  
                     Auguſt. de doct. Chriſti. lib. 2. cap. 6. 
                  Magnifice igitur & ſalubriter, &c. that is, The holy Ghoſt hath ſo excellently and holeſomely tempered the holy Scriptures, that with plaine places, he doth put away hunger, and with obſcure places take away lothſomneſſe. For there is nothing gathered from thoſe hard places, which is not to be found moſt plainely vttered in others. So Saint Baſil ſaith: Quae ambigua ſunt & tectè dicta eſſe in quibuſdam 
                  
                     Baſil Quaeſt. comp. explic. quaeſt. 267. 
                  diuinae ſcripturae locis videntur, ea ab alijs locis manifeſtis declarantur: that is, What things be doubtfull, or ſeeme to be couertly ſpoken in ſome places of the holy Scripture, the ſame are expounded by other plaine places. Againe: Ecce nunc audi ipſam ſeipſam declarantem ſcripturam. Behold 
                     Idem. Hexam. homil. 4. now, heare the Scripture expounding it ſelfe. So alſo ſaith Irenaeus, Oſtenſiones quae ſunt in ſcripturis non poſſunt 
                  
                     Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 12. 
                  oſtendi niſi ex ſcripturis: that is, The expoſitions which be in the Scriptures cannot be ſhewed but out of the Scriptures: So Theodoritus ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
                     Theodor diae. log. 1. Thou needeſt no ſtrange expoſition. For the Euangeliſt expoundeth himſelfe. So Hilarius 
                  
                     Hilarius de trinitate lib. 9. ſaith: Dictorum intelligentia aut ex praepoſitis aut ex conſequentibus expectetur: that is, The vnderſtanding of the ſayings is to be looked for either of thoſe things which goe before, or thoſe that follow after. So Clemens ſaith: Ex ipſis ſcripturis ſenſum capere veritatis oportet. From the 
                     Diſtinct. 37. cap. Relatum.
                   Scriptures themſelues we muſt take the ſenſe and expoſition of truth. Finally, ſo Pope Pius the ſecond: Ab ipſa ſcripture recipiendus eſt ſenſus veritatis: that is, The vnderſtanding 
                     Aeneas Siluius epiſt. 130. of the truth is to be receiued from the Scripture

it ſelfe. Now how carefully and diligently we endeuour to doe this, that is to expound the holy Scriptures truely and ſincerely, by the Scriptures themſelues, God knoweth, our writings and ſermons doe ſhew, and the conſciences of thoſe that reade and heare them can witnes with vs. And this is alſo an argument hereof, that you cannot bring forth any places of the Scriptures which we falſely expound, or ſeeke violently and wickedly to wreſt from the true and ſimple ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt, contained in the holy Scriptures. The which this cauiller ſhould haue done, and thereby declare how we builde our faith vpon priuate and falſe expoſitions. But let vs ſee and examine his proofe of his Minor, which is, that becauſe we builde not our faith vpon the expoſition of the Church, the Fathers, or Councels; therefore we builde vpon our owne priuate expoſitions. I anſwere, that although we reuerence the iudgement of the true Church of God, the holy Fathers and Councels, yet by this that I haue before alledged it plainely appeareth, that we are to fetch the ſenſe and expoſition of the Scriptures, not from them, but from the Scriptures themſelues. And whereas you by the Church doe meane the Romiſh Church, I will ſhew hereafter that ſhe hath corrupted and falſely expounded the Scriptures. As touching the Doctors, we are not bound vnto their expoſitions, which ſometimes be not ſound, and ſometimes differ among themſelues: Yea Cardinal Caietanus plainely 
                     Card. Caietanus in praefatione in lib. 5. Moſis.
                   auoucheth this, and doubteth not to bring ſometimes ſenſes and expoſitions to the Scriptures which be not in all the Doctors. His words be theſe: Nullus itaque deteſtetur nouum ſacrae ſcripturae ſenſum; ex hoc quod diſſonat à priſcis doctoribus. Sed ſcrutetur perſpicacius textum ac contextum ſcripturae, & ſiquadrare inuenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligauit expoſitionem ſcripturarum ſacrarum priſtorum doctorum ſenſibus, &c. that is, Let no man hereupon deteſt or diſlike a new expoſition of the holy Scripture, becauſe it diſſenteth from the ould Doctors. But let him more ſharpely ſearch the text and Coherence of the Scriptures, and if he finde it to agree therewith, let him praiſe God, who hath

not bound the expoſition of the holy Scriptures to the ſenſes and expoſitions of the ancient Doctors. Yea Biſhop Fiſher a great patrone of the Popes doubteth not to affirme, 10. Roffenſ. Aſſert. Lutheran. artic. 18. fol. 206. that many things in the Goſpel and other Scriptures be now more exactly diſcuſſed, and more plainely vnderſtoode, then they were of old time of the Fathers, and that there be yet many obſcure and hard places, which will be much better vnderſtoode of the poſteritie: whereby it appeareth that his Iudgement was, that the expoſition of the Scriptures is not to be tyed vnto the Fathers, and then much leſſe to the Councels, which doe not expound in order the bookes of the Scriptures (as the Fathers did) but onely examined ſome places, and diſcuſſed ſome Doctrines which were in controuerſie. Moreouer, whereas Saint Auguſtine in his foure bookes de doctrina chriſtiana entreateth largely of the expoſition of the Scriptures, and giueth many good and learned leſſons concerning the ſame, and namely ſeuen rules of Ticonius the Donatiſt which he commendeth, and calleth them keyes to open the Scripture, neither he nor Ticonius doe make mention of theſe rules, which the author of this pamphlet doth here ſet downe, nor referre vs vnto them. Therefore theſe be new coined rules of your owne, voyde of the teſtimonie of antiquitie. But that the Chriſtian reader may ſee, who they be that builde their faith vpon priuate and falſe expoſitions of the Scripture, let vs come to the examination of ſome particular places of the Scripture, and ſee who they be that follow priuate and falſe expoſitions. The wordes of our Sauiour Chriſt: drinke ye all of 
                  
                     Matth. 26. 27. 
                  it, they expound that Chriſt ſpake them onely to his Apoſtles, which (as they terme them) were prieſts: and therefore this bindeth prieſts to drinke of the Cup, but not the lay people. So ſaith Iohn Fiſher the Biſhop of Rocheſter: Bibite ex eo omnes. Quae verba proculdubio ſolis erant dicta 
                  10. Roffenſ. Aſſert. Luther. confut. arti. 16. 
                  ſacerdotibus, quibus & poteſtas tum fuerat collata conficiendi ſacramenti, nimirum hijs verbis, hoc facite in meam commemorationem: that is, Drinke all of this, which words without all doubt were ſpoken onely to prieſts, to whom power

alſo was giuen to make the Sacrament, that is, by theſe words, doe this in remenbrance of me. The ſame in effect 
                     Hoſius de Com. ſub viraque ſpecie. & Confeſſ. Petric. cap. 40. & contr. Brentium. lib. 3. wrote Cardinall Hoſius, Doctor Harding, Andradius, Aeneas Siluius, and others. This expoſition although peraduenture it wil not be counted priuate, for that it is maintained by ſo many great men, yet it is a very falſe & abſurd expoſition, and eaſily to be diſcerned by any ſimple man. For if Doct. Hard. in his anſwere to M. Iewel arti. 3 Andrad. ortho. explicat. lib. 7. pag. 606. theſe words, Drinke ye all of it, were ſpoken onely to prieſts; then likewiſe theſe, Take ye, eate ye, were ſpoken onely to prieſts. And ſo by your wiſe expoſition, as none but prieſts, by theſe words are bound to drinke of the Cup: ſo none but prieſts are bound to take and eate the bread, 
                     Aeneas Syluius epiſt. 130. pag. 672. as it was the manner and cuſtome of the common people in Liuonia not to receiue this Sacrament at all, as Gerſon writeth. But if our Sauiour Chriſt did ſpeake the one to all, both prieſts and people, why not theother? If the one 
                     Io. Gerſon tom. 1. declar. dofect. viro. cecleſiaſt.
                   doe binde all, why not the other? Moreouer Saint Paul deliuering to the Corinthians the Supper of our Sauiour Chriſt, according to the inſtitution which he had receiued of Chriſt, deliuered not onely the breade but alſo the Cup to the whole Church of Corinth, which I ſuppoſe you will not ſay were all prieſts. This Cup is the new Teſtament in my bloud. As often as ye ſhall eate this breade, and drinke this 
                  1. Cor. 11. 25. 26 27. 
                  Cup, ye ſhew the Lords death till he come. Wherefore whoſoeuer ſhall eate this bread, and drinke the Cup of the Lord vnworthily ſhall be guiltie of the bodie and bloud of the Lord. Paſchaſius expoundeth theſe words thus: Bibite ex hoc omnes, hoc eſt, tam miniſtri quam reliqui credentes: that is, Drinke ye all of this, that is to ſay, both miniſters and the reſt that beleeue. The gloſſe as it is alledged by Caſſander thus. Bibite ex hoc omnes ſcilicet ſine perſonarum acceptione: that is, Drinke ye 
                  Caſſan. de vtraque ſpecie. 
                  all of this, that is, all without reſpect of perſons. So doth Chryſoſtom: Omnibus vnum corpus proponitur & poculum vnum. One body and one Cuppe is propounded to all. 
                     Chryſeſt. in 2. So ſaith Theophilactus: Tremendus calix pari cunctis conditione 
                  
                     Cor. hom. 18. 
                  
                     Theoph. in 1. 
                  traditus eſt. The fearefull Cup is in like ſort deliuered 
                     Cor. 11. vnto all. Yea this abſurd expoſition of theirs is contrarie to the practiſe of the Primitiue Church, and to all

antiquitie, as might be ſhewed, and of ſome Papiſts is confeſſed.
               But to proceede and to ſhew how they handle other places, I will ioyne two places together, becauſe they doe often alleage them together to proue the Popes ſupremacie ouer the whole Church of God diſperſed ouer the whole world. The one Hoſea. 1. 11. Then ſhall the Children of Iudah, and the Children of Iſrael be gathered together, and appoynt themſelues one head. The other place is Iohn 10. 16. There ſhall be one fold, and one ſhepheard. Theſe places be alleaged by Pope Pius the ſecond, epiſt. 288. by Iohannes de 
                  
                     Ioan. de Pariſ. de potest regia. & Papali. cap. 3 D. Hard. confut. Apolog. cap. 3. diuiſ. 2. 
                  Pariſijs, by D. Harding, &c. expounding the ſame not of Chriſt, but of the Pope, to be this one head, and one ſhepheard. The which what a priuat and falſe expoſition it is, I neede not greatly to ſhew, it is ſo plaine and apparant. The firſt place of Hoſea, Saint Hierome expoundeth thus: Haec 
                  
                     Hieron. in Oſeam. cap. 1. 
                  omnia fient, quia magnus est dies ſeminis Dei, qui interpretatur Christus: i. All theſe things ſhall come to paſſe, becauſe it is the great day of the ſeede of God, which is expounded (not the Pope) but Chriſt: ſo alſo doth Frier Lira. Congregabuntur, filij Iudae, id eſt, Apostoli, &c. There ſhall aſſemble 
                     Nicol. Lira in Oſeam. cap. 1. together the Children of Iuda, that is to ſay the Apoſtles: and the Children of Iſrael, that is to ſay, the heathen conuerted: together, that is to ſay, in one Church: and ſhall appoynt vnto themſelues one head, that is to ſay, one Chriſt: So doth S. Augustine de ciuitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 28. Whoſe words for ſhortnes ſake I omit. The other place is ſo plaine, that a Cobler by hearing or reading of it, may perceiue that our Sauiour Chriſt ſpake it of himſelfe, and not of the Pope. He ſaith, I am the good ſhepheard and knowe 
                  
                     Ioh. the 10. 14. 
                  mine, and am knowne of mine: I lay downe my life for my ſheepe. Other ſheepe I haue alſo, which are not of this fold: them alſo must I bring: and they ſhall heare my voyce: and there ſhall be one ſheepefolde, and one ſhepheard. Therefore doth my father loue me, becauſe I lay downe my life that I might take it againe. Who is ſo blind as ſeeth not theſe words to be ſpoken of our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, and not of the Pope. Yet that doughtie or rather doltiſh Doctor, Iohannes de Pariſijs is

not aſhamed to ſay, that it is not to be vnderſtoode of Chriſt, but of ſome other Miniſter, which ſhould rule in his place. His words be theſe: Congregabuntur filij Iuda, & filij 
                  
                     Ʋbi ſupra. 
                  Iſrael, vt ponant ſibi caput vnum: & Ioan. 10. fiet vnum ouile, & vnus pastor. Quod quidem de Christo intelligi non potest: ſed de alio aliquo ministro quipraeſit loco eius. i. The Children of Iuda and the Children of Iſrael ſhall be gathered together, and ſhall appoynt themſelues one head: and Ioh. 10. There ſhall be one fold, and one ſhepheard, which cannot be vnderſtoode of Chriſt, but of ſome other miniſter that muſt rule in his place. Behold the abſurditie of this ſaying and expoſition, and let this cauiller, who in his queſtions and challenge ſo diſdainefully deſpiſeth our learning, conſider what a blind, ignorant, and vnlearned Doctor and writer this was, that ſo abſurdly expoundeth this place, and contrarily to the plaine words denieth them to be vnderſtoode of our Sauiour Chriſt, and blaſphemouſly attributeth yt vnto the Pope, which is only proper and peculiar to Ieſus Chriſt. Frier Lira was of better iudgement, who 
                     Nic. Lira in Ioan. cap. 10. writeth thus: Fiet vnus pastor, id est, Christus: i. There ſhall be one paſtor, that is to ſay, Chriſt. I will ſhew another place or two in like manner, expounded for the proofe of the ſame matter. In the booke of the ceremonies of the Church of Rome, the which I wiſh were in Engliſh, that our Engliſh Catholikes might ſee the goodly ceremonies and orders of that Church, it is thus written: Papa in nocte natiuitatis domini benedicit enſem, quem postea donat alicui principi in ſignum infinitae potentiae pontifici collatae, iuxta illud, 
                  
                     Lib. 1. Carem. 
                           ••
                        ul. 7. 
                  data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo & in terra. Item dominabitur à mari vſque ad mare, & à flùmine vſque ad terminos orbis terrarum: i. The Pope in the night of the feaſt of Chriſts Natiuitie, bleſſeth a ſword, for a ſigne of the infinit power giuen to him; which hee afterward beſtoweth vpon ſome Prince, according to that ſaying: All power is giuen to me both in heauen and in earth: alſo, He ſhall rule from the ſea vnto the ſea, and from the ſtood vnto the ends of the world. Are not theſe ſayings thinke you finely expounded of the Pope, whereof the one our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe ſpake,

and the other the Prophet Dauid propheſied of Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe? And the former of theſe places, Stephen the Archbiſhop of Patraca applied vnto Pope Leo the 10. 
                     In Concil. Lateran ſub Leo. 10. pag. 671. in the Councell of Lateran, in the audience of the Pope himſelfe, who thankefully accepted it, and ſuffered it to be publiſhed, and printed; and ſo to this day was neuer by any Papiſt diſliked. By theſe places any man may diſcerne and iudge, whether this Romiſh prelate be not that man of ſinne, and ſonne of perdition, an aduerſarie, that exalteth 2. Theſſ. 2. 3. 4. himſelfe againſt, or aboue all, that is called God, or that is worſhipped, ſitting as God in the temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God (of whom S. Paul before prophecied) in taking theſe things vnto himſelfe, which Gods ſpirit ſpake properly, and peculiarly of Ieſus Chriſt? The place of Saint Peter 1. chap. 4. Loue or charitie couereth the multitude of ſinnes: they expound in this ſenſe, that charitie maketh ſatisfaction for our ſinnes, and couereth and hideth our ſinnes before God. Iohn Fiſher the Biſhop of Rocheſter writeth hereof thus: Tertius modus est per vehementis 
                  
                     Aſſert. Luther. Confut. cap: 17. 
                  charitatis affectum. Nam vehemens vtique charitatis affectus peccatorum etiam expurgat reliquias, quum dicat diuus Petrus: Charitas operit multitudinem peccatorum: i. The third meanes (to purge away ſinne) is by the affection of vehement charitie: for ſurely the vehement affection of charitie, doth alſo purge out the remnants of ſinnes, for S. Peter ſaith, Charitie hideth the multitude of ſinner. That this is a priuate and falſe expoſition, a ſimple and meane man may ſee, eſpecially if he looke vpon the place, in the Prouerbs, chap. 10. 12. from the which Saint Peter doth alleage it, and is commonly quoted in the margent. Hatred ſtirreth vp contention: but loue or charitie couereth all treſpaſſes. Where Salomon ſheweth, that as enuy and hatred moueth men to contention, and to blow abroad the faults of their brethren to their infamie: ſo loue and charitie ſhould moue vs to couer and hide their faults and infirmities, and rather ſeeke to amend them, then to defame them: and therefore theſe words are not ment of ſatisfying for our ſinnes, or couering them before God; but of the

couering of them before men. And ſo doth D. Bayne, Biſhop of Lichfield in Queene Maries daies, expound them. What In Prouerb. 10. ſhould I ſhew how priuatly or rather falſly they expound the places of Gen. 14. 18. touching Melcheſedeck bringing forth bread and wine, and that of Malachie 1. 11. of the incenſe and pure offering, which in euery place ſhall be offered to God, by which they ſeeke to maintaine their Maſſe, and the falſe forged ſacrifice thereof. I would haue paſſed theſe places ouer in ſilence, but that D. Harding doth ſo hardly handle vs, and ſo grieuouſly charge vs for them, in theſe words. The Scripture it ſelfe ministring euident proofe for the oblation of Christ, to his father by the Prieſts of the new Testament, in the institution of this holy Sacrament, in the figure of Melchiſedeck, and in the propheſie of Malachie the Prophet, the authorities of the Fathers needed not to be alleaged, were not the ſame Scriptures by the ouertwhart and falſe interpretations of our aduerſaries, wrested, and turned to a contrarie ſenſe, to the hereticall ſeducing of the vnlearned. Theſe be Maſter D. Hardings modeſt words. Let it therefore be In his anſwere artic. 17. examined and tried who they be that thus ouertwhart theſe places, and turne them to a contrarie ſenſe. As touching the firſt place out of Geneſis, they expound it that Melchiſedeck offered bread and wine, for he was the Prieſt of the moſt high God, and that was a type and figure of the ſacrifice of the new Teſtament, wherein Chriſt is offered vnto his father, vnder the forme of bread and wine. Pighius Controuerſ. 5. Hoſius Confeſſ. Petriconienſi. cap. 41. Who ſaith that this is the opinion of all the holy Doctors of the Church, that this bread and wine was offered for a ſacrifice to God, and not for a refection to Abraham. But this both expoſition and aſſertion is falſe: for both Tertullian contra Iudaeos, and alſo Epiphanius, Haereſ. 55. expound it 
                     Epiph. Haereſ. 55 of his bringing forth of bread and wine to Abraham. Epiphanius ſaith: Abraham fuit 88. aut 90. plus minos tunc Melchiſedec ipſi obuiam venit & propoſuit ipſi panem & vinum: i. Abraham was about 88. or 90. yeeres old when Melcheſedeck met him, and brought forth bread and wine vnto him. So doth Ioſephus expound it: Melchiſedec milites 
                  
                     Ioſeph. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 11.
                  
                  Abrahami hoſpitaliter habuit, nihil illis ad victum deeſſe paſſus; ſimul ipſum adhibuit menſae: Melchiſedech vſed hoſpitalitie to Abrahams Souldiers and ſuffered them to want no victualles, and did take Abraham to his Table. That this is the true ſenſe it appeareth by the Hebrew word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which doth neuer ſignifie to offer and ſacrifice, but to bring forth: and the force of truth forceth ſome of their owne ſide to confeſſe this to be true. Cardinal Caietanus vpon this place writeth thus: Nihil cribitur hic de ſacrificio 
                  
                     Caitt. in Gen. cap. 14. 
                  ſeu oblatione: ſed de prolatione ſeu extractione, quam Ioſephus dicit factam ad refectionem victorum. Quod autem in vulgata editione ſubditur vt cauſa oblationis, erat enim ſacerdos dei altiſſimi: in Hebraeo non habetur vt cauſa, ſed vt ſeparata clauſula: that is, There is nothing here ſaid of ſacrifice or oblation, but of bringing forth, which Ieſephus ſaith was done to the refection of them which had gotten the victorie. And that which in the vulgar edition is put after as a cauſe, for he was the prieſt of the moſt high God; in the Hebrew is not ſet as a cauſe, but as a clauſe ſeparated from it. Andradius alſo the Ieſuit doth herein forſake his friends, and acknowledgeth this to be the true expoſition, his words be theſe: De offerendi autem vocabulo non eſt Kemnici 
                  
                     Andrad. defenſ. fidei Tridert. lib. 4. 
                  quod digladeremur, cum & in correctioribus latinis exemplaribus, & ſanctis patribus qui locum hunc Euchariſtiae accommoundat extet proferens; atque ego cum illis ſentiam qui laſſos Abrahae milites, & diuturna pugnafractos Melchiſedecom pane vinoque refeciſſe aiunt: that is, We neede not Kemnicus to ſtriue about the word of offering, ſeeing that both in the beſt corrected Latine coppies, and alſo in the holy Fathers which apply this place to the Euchariſt, it is, proferens brought forth, and I in iudgement agree with them, which ſay that Melchiſedech refreſhed Abrahams ſouldiers wearied and fainted with long fight. Their expoſition of the other place of Malachie is as abſurd, in applying it to the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, which is neither a pure ſacrifice, nor is offered in all places. And the Fathers Tertullian, Hierome, and others expound it of the ſpiritual ſacrifices of the faithfull which they offer in all places to God. Tertullian
                  
in three places doth ſo expound it, whereof I will ſet downe but one: Et in omni loco ſacrificium nomini meo offeretur, 
                  
                     Lib. aduerſ. lud
                           •
                        o
                           •
                         lib. 3. aduerſ. Marcionem, & lib. 4. 
                  & ſacrificium mundum, ſcilicet ſimplex oratio de conſcientia pura: that is, and in euery place a ſacrifice ſhal be offered to my name, and a pure oblation, to wit, ſimple prayer from a pure conſcience. S. Ierome expoundeth it thus: Dicit orationes ſanctorum domino offerendas eſſe, non in vna orbis prouincia 
                  
                     Hieron. in Malach. cap. 1. 
                  Iudaeae, ſed in omni loco à. He ſaith that the prayers of the Saints ſhall be offered to God not in Iudea, one only prouince of the world, but in euery place. But I wil forbeare to write any more, of the peruerſe expoſition of this place, and wil refer the reader to that moſt learned conference, of that excellent ornament of this Church of England Maſter Doctor Reynoldes, with Iohn Harte, where he ſhall finde 
                     Cap. 8. pag. 454. 546. 562. this place fully diſcuſſed, and Cardinall Allens reaſons, which he braggingly calleth valida & planè bona; that is, ſtrong and very good, fully confuted: Which booke I meruaile that neither this challenger, nor any other of our Ieſuites could as yet finde leaſure to confute. I might alledge many moe places moſt falſely expounded by theſe Romaniſtes, but I will forbeare them, and will ſhew you one place out of the 26. of Ieremie, trimly applyed by Bonauenture a Seraphicall Doctor, a Biſhop, a Cardinall of Rome, and a Saint canonized by Pope Sixtus the fourth, 
                     De vanitat. Scient. cap. 64. Bonauent. part. 2. who did as holy an act in Saincting of him, as he did in building nobile admodum Lupanar, a noble ſtewes in Rome, as Agrippa a papiſt writeth. Bonauentures words be theſe: Septimo eleuatur Corpus Chriſti ad oſtendendam bonitatem 
                  
                     operum in expoſi. miſſae. fol. 100. G.
                   
                  Chriſti. Quae enim maior bonitas quàm quod Chriſtus dignatur captiuus eſſe in altari, vnde ipſe dicit in perſona Hieremiae prophetae. Ecce ego in mambus veſtris ſum, quod bonum & rectum eſt in oculis veſtris facite mihi. Nota quod dum aliquis dux propter ſuos captiuus tenetur non dimittitur niſidet magnam pecuniam. Sic nec nos Chriſtum captiuum dimittere debemus niſi remiſſionem peccatorum nobis tribuat, & regnum coeleſte ab eo accipiamus. Eleuat ergo ſacerdos Corpus Chriſti in altari. q. d. Ecce quem totus mundus capere non poteſt, captiuus noſter eſt. Ergo eum non dimittamus niſi
                  
                  quod petimus prius obtineamus: that is, Seuenthly the body of Chriſt is lifted vp to ſhew the goodneſſe of Chriſt: for what greater goodneſſe is there, then that Chriſt vouchſafeth to be priſoner vpon the Aultar: whereupon he ſaith in the perſon of Hieremie the Prophet, Behold, I am in your hands; that which is good and right in your eyes, doe yee vnt me. Note that when any captaine is kept priſoner for his people, he is held priſoner, and not let goe, vnleſſe he giue a great ſumme of money. So alſo we ought not to let Chriſt our priſoner goe, vnleſſe he giue vnto vs forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and that we receiue of him the kingdome of Heauen. Therefore the prieſt doth lift vp the body of Chriſt vpon the Aultar; as though he ſhould ſay: behold, hee whom the whole world is not able to containe, is our priſoner, therefore let vs not let him goe, vnleſſe we doe firſt obtaine of him that which we require. This place I thought good the more largely to lay downe, that the reader may ſee what diuine doctrine theſe Romiſh Saints haue deliuered, and how finely they haue applied the Scriptures. By this doctrine Chriſt is priſoner in the Maſſe, and he muſt not be let goe vntill he haue paied his ranſome. And this is ſubſtantially proued out of Ieremie chap. 26. where Ieremie hauing preached the word of God, and denounced his fearefull plagues againſt Iuda and Ieruſalem, the prieſts and people tooke him and went about to kill him, to whom Ieremie ſpake ſaying: The Lord 
                  
                     Ierem. 26. 11. 
                  hath ſent me to prophecie againſt this Houſe, and againſt this Citie all the things that yee haue heard, therefore now amend your wayes and your workes, and heare the voyce of the Lord your God, that the Lord may repent him of the plague, that he hath pronounced againſt you. As for me, behold I am in your hands: doe with me as you thinke good and right. But know yee for certaintie that if yee put me to death, yee ſhall bring innocent bloud vpon your ſelues, and vpon this Citie, and vpon the inhabitants thereof: For of a truth the Lord hath ſent me vnto you, to ſpeake all theſe words in your cares. Is not this place finely expounded, and applyed, and doth it not ſubſtantially proue that Chriſt is in the prieſts hands at Maſſe, when

he holdeth him ouer his head, and belike goeth about to kill him as they did Hieremie? In deede by their doctrine they teare him with their teeth, and deuoure him. Thus we ſee, how theſe Romiſh diuines and Saints haue handled and expounded the word of God, of whom that may be well ſaid and verified, which Polidore Virgil fauorer of the Romiſh religion writeth of the popiſh lawyers and canoniſts. videl. Non ſecus iſti iuriſconſulti aliquoties detorquent 
                  
                     Polido. Virg. de inuent. rerum lib. 4. cap. 9. 
                  ſacras ſcripturas quo volunt, ac ſutores ſordidas ſolent dentibus extendere pelles: that is, See how theſe lawyers (we may ſay diuines yea and Saints) doe ſometimes no otherwayes wreſt the holy Scriptures, then coblers vſe to ſtretch out with their teeth their filthie leather or skinnes. And that alſo which Theophylactus ſaith: Ita exponere ſcripturas, manifeſtè delirare eſt: that is, So to expound the Scriptures is to dote or be madde. I might ſhew infinit other places which they haue moſt falſely expounded and applyed, yea and alſo which they haue corrupted, mangled, and altered (which I mind hereafter ſomwhat to doe) but this ſhall ſuffice at this preſent to let the reader ſee, who they be which follow priuate and falſe expoſitions of the Scriptures, and conſequently be infidels. And if the author of this pamphlet, or his companions, can charge vs with the like, then they may truely ſay that we haue followed priuate expoſitions, and be Infidels. But it is the vſuall manner of theſe men to make many vehement accuſations, and to bring few ſound proofes.
               Where you ſay that we reiect Saint Auguſtine, and other Fathers, who bring Scripture to proue prayer for the dead, I anſwere, that we refuſe not the alledging of Scriptures by any, but vpon good and ſound reaſon, which we will be readie to iuſtifie and maintaine. If you thinke either Auguſtine in that booke de cura pro mortuis which you quote (which is more full of doubtes, then of ſound proofes out of the Scripture) or other Fathers haue any plaine places of Scripture to prooue prayer for the dead, you may produce them, vrge them, and make ſyllogiſmes of them, and we will anſwere them. But you ſpeake many

things generally, and proue few particularly and pithily: For vs to proue and examine by the Scriptures, the expoſitions of the Fathers, is no fault. For if the ſpirit of God commend that good people of Berea for examining Pauls preaching by the Scriptures, we cannot be worthily blamed for examining the writings and expoſitions of the 
                     Act. 17. 11. Fathers by the Scriptures, as long as it cannot be proued, that we doe otherwayes, then accept the good, and reiect the euill. So Saint Auguſtine ſpeaking of the writings of godly Fathers ſaith: Hoc genus literarum ab autoritate canonis diſtinguendum eſt, &c. This kinde of writing is to be diſtinguiſhed from the authoritie of the canon of the 
                     Auguſt. epiſt. 48. Scriptures. For they be not ſo read as though a teſtimonie were ſo alleaged out of them, that we may not thinke or iudge otherwiſe, if they haue any where otherwayes thought then the truth required. For we are of the number of them which doe not diſdaine to accept to our ſelues that which was ſaid of the Apoſtle. If you be otherwiſe minded God ſhall reueale the ſame vnto you. The like he writeth in his 111. epiſtle to Fortunatianus, and in his 112. epiſt. and in his ſecond booke againſt Creſconius, cap. 31. & 32. which I forbeare to alledge. To conclude, if you can produce any expoſitions of the ancient Fathers (whom we reuerence, and whoſe workes we reade as diligently as you doe) which we reiect, if we doe not ſhew good reaſon for the ſame, let vs beare the blame, and ſhame of it. Neuertheleſſe we doe not allow euery paltrie companion (as you terme them) either to be an expoſitor of Chriſts word, or to preferre his expoſition there of before all ancient fathers. Neither doe I know any man ſo to doe: but we allow all men to reade and heare Gods holy word, and as they may be much edified and comforted by the things that be plaine, ſo if they vnderſtand not ſome places, we exhort them to doe as the noble man the 
                     Act. 8. Queene Candaces Treaſurer did, to ſeek to a faithful Philip, 
                  
                     Hierom. in epitaphio Fabiolae. Auguſt. de moribus eccleſ. Catho. cap. 1. that is, a godly and learned man, & by him to ſeeke to haue them opened and expounded: ſo did Fabiola & other godly women to Saint Hierome. So Auguſtine ſaith: Scripturarum
                  
                  expoſitio ab ijs petenda eſt qui earum doctores ſe eſſe profitentur: that is, The expoſition of the Scriptures is to be ſought of them, which profeſſe themſelues to be doctors and teachers of them. Yet with Saint Paul we ſay, that as we are not to deſpiſe propheſying, that is, the expounding 1. Theſſ. 5, 20. 21. 22. of Gods word, ſo we are not raſhly to receiue whatſoeuer is deliuered to vs, but we are to proue all, and to hold that which is good, and to abſtaine from all apparance of euill, for the eare trieth the words, as the mouth taſteth meate. 
                     Iob. 33. 3. Baſil Quaeſt. compend. explica. Quaeſt. 279. So alſo Saint Baſil ſaith: Quod in edulijs eſt ſenſus qualitatis vniuſcuiuſque edulij, hoc in verbis ſanctae ſcripturae eſt intellectus. Gula enim, inquit, cibos guſtat, mens verba dijudicat: that is, That which in meates is the taſt of the qualitie of euery meate, the ſame is the vnderſtanding or minde in the words of the holy Scripture. For the throate, ſaith he, taſteth the meates, and the minde iudgeth the words.
               Now I will retort your argument vpon you in this manner, Whoſoeuer buildeth his faith vpon priuate and falſe expoſitions of the Scripture is an infidel. The Papiſts build their faith vpon priuate, and falſe expoſitions of the Scripture, as I haue ſhewed before, and can proue in many places moe: ergo the Papiſts be infidels. And thus much to your ſecond article of faith.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. All Proteſtants who are ignorant of the Greeke and Latine tongues are Infidels. 3. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer relieth his faith vpon the miniſters credit and fidelitie, hath no faith at all.
               
               
                  But all thoſe in England, who are ignorant of the Greeke and Hebrew tongues, rely their faith vpon the miniſters credit. Ergo.
               
               
                  All thoſe in England who are ignorant of the Greeke and Hebrew tongues, haue no faith at all.
               
               
                  
                  The Maior is manifeſt: becauſe they themſelues confeſſe that euery man may erre, and doth erre; neither haue they any warrant why the miniſters doe not erre, ſince they conſtantly doe defend, that whole generall councels, yea and the vniuerſall Catholike Church may erre and hath erred.
               
               
                  The Minor I proue: for all ſuch Proteſtants ground their faith vpon the Bible, tranſlated into Engliſh, the which tranſlation they know not whether it be true or falſe, whether the miniſter Tindall for example erred or no, either vpon ignorance as Broughton one of the greateſt linguiſts among the preciſians affirmeth in an epiſtle dedicated to the Lords of the Counſell, or vpon malice to induce the people to proteſtancie, or to cauſe them to leaue the Catholike Religion: as Gregorie Martin in his diſcouerie moſt pregnantly prooueth. Theſe errors I ſay they know not, and conſequently cannot diſcerne a true tranſlation from a falſe, and therefore muſt needes rely their faith vpon the ſillie miniſters faithles fidelitie: which conuinceth that they haue no faith at all.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  I Deny the Minor or ſecond propoſition of this Syllogiſme, and ſay that we rely not our faith vpon the Miniſters credit and fidelitie, but vpon the word of God tranſlated, the which we know to be true and holy, not ſo much for that it is by publike authoritie, and generall aſſent of men allowed, as for that it containeth moſt holy doctrine agreeable to true faith, and godly life, whereby any that readeth or heareth it, may behold the Maieſtie of Gods ſpirit appearing in it. As for example, I beleeue theſe ſayings to be true: that Ieſus Chriſt came into this world to ſaue ſinners: that he is the Lambe of God, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world: that 1. Tim. 1. the grace of God which offereth ſaluation to all men hath 
                     Ioh. 1. appeared, and teacheth vs, that we deny vngodlineſſe and 
                     Tit. 2. 11. worldly luſt, and liue ſoberly, righteouſly, and godly in this preſent world, &c. not for that this, or that man hath

tranſlated them, but becauſe the ſpirit of God doth beare witnes vnto my hart, that moſt holy, pure, and diuine doctrine is contained in them. And therefore to ſay that thoſe which vnderſtand not the Hebrew, and Greeke tongues, becauſe they vſe the word of God tranſlated to them into other languages, doe rely their faith vpon the Miniſters credit and fidelitie, and haue no faith, is moſt fooliſh and abſurd. And let the Chriſtian reader marke and conſider how this ſottiſh reaſon tendeth to the diſcrediting not only of vs, but alſo of the moſt part of all godly and faithfull Chriſtians in all ages; yea and to the moſt of the godly Doctors and Fathers of the Church, who were almoſt all ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, and ſome of the Greeke alſo. The holy Scriptures were tranſlated into many tongues, in the which the people of God did reade and heare them. As Theodoritus writeth: Hebraici verò libri, non modò in Graecum idioma conuerſi ſunt, ſed in Romanam quoque linguam, Aegyptiacam, Perſicam, Indicam, Armenicamque, 
                  
                     Theodor. de curatione Graecarum affectionum lib. 5. 
                  & Scythicam, adeoque Sauromaticam, ſemelque vt dicam, in linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem nationes vtantur, that is, The Hebrew bookes be tranſlated not onely into the Greeke tongue, but alſo into the Romaine, Aegyptian, Perſian, Indian, Armenian, and Scythian, and alſo the Sclauonian tongues, & to ſay at a word, into all languages which the nations vſe vnto this day. Did the ancient faithfull Chriſtians which read and heard the holy Scriptures in theſe ſundrie languages, rely their faith vpon men that did tranſlate them, or vpon the diuine doctrine, and precious promiſes of God contained in them? And let this cauiller ſhew ſufficient reaſon, why we are not either to be acquited with them: or they condemned with vs. They could no more iudge of the truth of the tranſlations, then our people can: yet they did to their great comfort, and godly inſtruction and edification reade and heare the holy Scriptures, grounding their faith not vpon the tranſlators, who might be, and ſometimes were euill men; but vpon the ſound, holy and heauenly doctrine therein contained. Saint Hierome exhorted ladies, and gentlewomen

not onely to reade the Scriptures themſelues, but alſo to Hieron. ad Gaudentium de Pacatule Infantulae educat. & ad Letam de inſtitut filiae. bring vp their young daughters when they were but ſeuen yeares ould in that holy exerciſe. They were not able to iudge of the tranſlations otherwayes, then to diſcerne and perceiue that the doctrine by them deliuered was pure and holy, agreeable to true faith, and godly life. And euen ſo they that be godly in theſe dayes, although they, hauing not the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greeke tongues, cannot iudge ſo exactly of tranſlations, and of the truth of them, as thoſe that vnderſtand them can; yet they may diſcerne whether the tranſlations deliuer ſound and holy doctrine conſonant to true faith, good manners, and the generall heads and principles of Chriſtianitie or not. I neede not heere aske vpon what or whom your 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Catholikes doe rely their faith, when they reade either the ould vulgar Latine tranſlation, or the Remiſh Engliſh: ſeeing they can no more, nor better iudge of theſe tranſlations whether they be true or falſe then we. I doe not (I ſay) aske whereon they rely their faith, for it ſeemeth that they build not their faith ſo much vpon the written word of God in the Scriptures, as vnwritten 
                     Extrauagant. Ioh. 22. cum inter in gloſſa. & diſt. 96. ſatis euidenter.
                   traditions of men, cuſtomes of fathers, decrees of councels, and eſpecially vpon the will and pleaſure of their great God (as his owne friends call him) the Pope of Rome: Whoſe will is the rule of their faith and life. If he giue a diſpenſation for a man to mary his owne ſiſter as Pope Martin the fift did, it is lawfull: if he giue a diſpenſation 
                     Antoninus Sum. part. 3. titu. 1. cap. 11. 55. quod papa. & ſumma Angelica, in Papa. fol. 232. for one to many his ſiſters daughter (which is as vnlawfull as the other) as a late Pope gaue to the late King Philip of Spaine, it is lawfull. But yet if any of theſe counted Catholikes will pretend to build their faith vpon the Scriptures, and being ignorant of the Hebrew and Greeke tongues, readeth either the vulgar Latine or Engliſh Remiſh tranſlation of the new Teſtament, I would aske how he doth know whether theſe tranſlations be true or falſe, or whether he will ſay that his faith dependeth vpon the credit and fidelitie of the tranſlator or no? But I know what they will anſwere, that the Latine vulgar tranſlation

is allowed by the Church, that is to ſay, by the councell 
                     Counc. Trident. Seſſi. 4. decretum. 2. of Trident which repreſenteth the Church, which hath decreed the ſame to be taken for authenticall in readings, diſputations, ſermons, or expoſitions, and that no man be bold or preſume vpon any pretence to reiect or refuſe it: whereunto firſt I ſay, that as this decree doth allow the Latine, ſo it doth not approue the Engliſh. Now how ſhall an Engliſh Catholike, that vnderſtandeth not the Latine know whether the ſame be truely tranſlated out of the Latine or no, or ſhall his faith here rely vpon the credit and fidelitie of the tranſlator? I would know what difference there is betweene ſuch a one reading or hearing that tranſlation, and one of vs reading or hearing ours: And why the faith of the one doth more depend vpon the credit and fidelitie of the tranſlator, then the other. Surely this difference there is, that our tranſlations be true, and agreeable to the originall of the Greeke, wherein the holy Ghoſt indited, and the Apoſtles did write the new Teſtament: and their ſaid Remiſh tranſlation is falſe differing from the ſame, in contradictions, additions, and detractions in very many places, as I haue ſhewed in a diſcourſe thereof added to the confutation of the ten fooliſh reaſons, which the Remiſh vſe in the preface of the Teſtament by them ſet forth, which moued them in tranſlating to leaue the originall fountaine of the Greeke, and to follow the corrupt ſtreame of the Latine, which hath been extant in print theſe twelue yeares, and yet to this day neuer anſwered. Now as touching the decree of the councell of Trident for the Latine, made by about fourtie blind Biſhops or Buſſards, I ſay, it is a ſhameful decree, and a fit one for ſuch a councel, and ſuch a one as cannot be ſhewed in any of all the councels, that haue bin before in the Church of Chriſt, to authorize a tranſlation ſo much differing & diſſenting from the Hebrew and Greeke as it doth, to be authenticall, that is, to haue authoritie of it ſelfe, and not to be refuſed in any readings, preachings, &c. The which tranſlation is ſo corrupt and full of faults, that Iſodorus Clarius a Spaniſh Monke profeſſeth that he found

eight thouſand faults in it: the which preface of his as they haue ſince ſuppreſſed, ſo it is written that the Spaniſh inquiſitors 
                     Amand. Polanus in didaſcalia pag. 49. plagued him for it. But to admit that this Latine tranſlation is authenticall as the Tridentine councell hath decreed: I would aske one of theſe Catholikes vpon what edition thereof they will rely their faith, whether that which of late yeares was ſet out at Rome by Pope Sixtus the fift, or another two or three yeares after, by this preſent Pope Clemens the eight. The which editions doe greatly differ in alterations, additions, detractions, contradictions, as Maſter Thomas Iames hath verie diligently, and largely ſhewed. The former Pope Sixtus the fift had as he profeſſeth ſuch care to haue the Bible vncorruptly ſet fourth and printed, that he corrected the faults with his owne hand, and charged that none ſhould afterwards be printed but according to that copie, Ne minima quidem particula mutata, addita vel detracta, as he in his preface ſaith, that is, not the leaſt particle changed, added or detracted: yet this Pope Clemens the eight hath, as I haue ſaid, made many great alterations, additions, and detractions in the ſame. Hereof I will alledge an example or two for a taſt, Ioſue 11. 19. Sixtus edition hath. Non fuit ciuitas quae ſe non traderet filijs Iſrael praeter 
                        〈◊〉
                      .i. There was not a Citie which did not yeeld it ſelfe to the children of Iſrael beſide the Hiuite. Clemens thus: Non fuit ciuitas quae ſe traderet filijs, &c. There was not a Citie which did yeeld it ſelfe to the children of Iſrael, &c. the one negatiuely, the other affirmatiuely. Lib. 1. Eſdrae. cap. 3. Sixtus ſaith, Surſum autem adportam equorum adiſicauerunt: that is, they built vpward to the gate of the horſes. Clemens aporta equotum, from the gate of the horſes. Lib. Sapienlia, cap. 2. 11. Sixtus hath iuſtitiae iuſtice. Clemens hath iniuſtit
                        •
                     ae, that is, iniuſtice. 1. Sam. (or as they count. Reg. 4. 7.) Clemens hath taken all theſe words out of Sixtus exact edition Viu
                        •
                      dominus, quia niſi dominus perouſſerit eum, aut dies eius vene
                        •
                     ic vt moriatur, aut deſcendens in praelium perierit, propitius mihi ſit dominus, vt non mittam manum meam in Chriſtum domini: that is, as the Lord liueth, that except the Lord ſi
                     •
                  ite him,

or his dayes come that he dye, or going downe to the battle he periſh, the Lord be ſo mercifull to me, that I will not lay mine hand vpon the Lords annointed. The like detractions you may reade. 2. Samuel. or 2. Reg. 6. 12. & ibid. 21. & cap. 8. 8. & ibid. verſ. 13. and many other places, as the reader may ſee in the ſaid editions, and in Maſter Iames collections, vpon which of theſe ſo greatly differing will the Catholike rely his feith? And here let him conſider whether the Pope may erre, or not, for that one of theſe Popes erred, eſpecially Pope Sixtus, notwithſtanding all his great care, and diligence in correcting the Bible with his owne hand, it cannot be denied. Such great varietie, diuerſitie, and faithles infidelitie I am ſure that the author of this worthie pamphlet and all his companions cannot ſhew in our tranſlators, which he ſeeketh ſo much to diſcredite. As for Gregorie Martines pregnant proofes in his diſcouerie, they belong agoe effectually, and learnedly confuted by D. Fulke; & to this day ſtand vndefended. And therefore vntil you haue anſwered the ſame, you may be aſhamed to brag of his pregnant proofs, which were ſo weak, and cauils ſo greate & many, that he rather diſcouered his owne folly; then diſcredited our tranſlators, What Maſter Broughton writeth concerning our tranſlation I doe not know, neither do I greatly care: yet this I ſay, although that our tranſlations were made in the feare of God; to profit Gods Church and people, according to the meaſure of the grace of God beſtowed vpon the laborers in that holy worke, & be voyd of wilful corruptions either for doctrine or manners: yet I do not thinke them to be voyd of imperfections, in reſpect of proprietie of words, and phraſes, wherein they may be ſome what reformed, and amended. And hard it is to haue a tranſlation ſo exact and perfit, but that ſome ſuch imperfectnes may be in it, which yet be not repugnant either to holy doctrine or good life. And for aſmuch as this man of malice would faine if he could diſcredit our tranſlations, and cauſe the Reader to doubt of the truth of them, I will ſhew not onely the good Chriſtian, but alſo the Romiſh Catholike that hath vnderſtanding

of the Latine tongue, how he may diſcerne and know the truth and faithfulneſſe of our tranſlations, and ſo not to rely vpon the credit of our Miniſters. There is a Latine tranſlation of the old Teſtament made from the Hebrew very well and learnedly by Sanctos Pagninus an Italian, and a dominicke Frier, a man excellently learned in the Hebrew tongue (for I will giue him and his worke their due and deſerued praiſe, and commendation, and not doe as this libiller, and his fellowes vſe to doe, who of enuie and malice, wherewith their harts be infected and poſſeſſed, cannot giue a good word to any thing we doe, though it be neuer ſo good and godly.) This tranſlation he did dedicate to Pope Clemens the ſeuenth: Let the Reader compare our tranſlations eſpecially of the latter editions with the ſaid tranſlation, and ſee whether in any ſubſtantiall matter of faith and life, he can finde any corruptions and any great and notorious diſſenſions from the ſame. And the like I may ſay of Eraſmus tranſlation of the new Teſtament dedicated to Pope Leo the tenth, and allowed by him. Let I ſay the Reader compare our tranſlations with theſe, and although he may finde ſome difference in words and phraſes, yet in matters of ſubſtance which concerne either the doctrine of faith, or precepts of good life, I am ſure he ſhall finde a goodly and godly harmonie, and agreement to his comfort and contentation. And laſtly I wil offer to this challenger (who offereth challenge of diſputation with vs) and to al his partakers, that for one fault of moment or weight, that they ſhal finde in our tranſlations, eſpecially, as I ſaid of the latter editions, wherein they differ from the originall fountaines of the Hebrew and Greeke; I will vndertake to finde fixe, yea ten greater and fouler in that vulgar Latine tranſlation, which the councell of Trident hath moſt abſurdly confirmed and made authentical: And therefore let neither the godly Chriſtian Reader, nor the ſeduced Catholike, be diſſwaded from reading of our tranſlations, nor doubt of the truth of them. But this hath been in all ages the drift of the Diuell to ſecke to diſcredite and diffame thoſe

godly men that haue labored in Gods vineyard, and haue indeuored to tranſlate his holy word to the comfort and ſaluation of his elect and choſen people. How Saint Hierome of old and Eraſmus of late were vſed, I haue elſewhere ſhewed. So this cauiller dealeth now, with that bleſſed man of God, and conſtant Martyr of Ieſus Chriſt Maſter Tindall, who as he did patiently and conſtantly beare and abide their furious crueltie, and confirmed the truth of God which he had taught, with the ſhedding of his bloud in flaming fire, ſo he needeth not my defence. Who was a man of ſuch mortification and godly life, that I haue knowne ſome of great credite, and authoritie that knew him, and liued with him at Antwerpe, that would ſay of him, that if a man could be like God, it was Tindall. I doubt not but he was indued with much more godlines then a hundreth of your Popes, whom their owne friends and fauorers call for their horrible wickednes, Monſtra & Portenta, Monſters of mankinde. But he that iuſtifieth 
                     Platinae in Benedicto 4. & Chriſtophoro 1. & Ioan. 13. prou. 17. 15. Pſal. 116. Rom. 3. the wicked, and he that condemneth the innocent euen they both are abomination to God. That all men may erre we doe confeſſe, Omnis homo Mendax: that is, all men be liers: and generall councels which conſiſt of men may erre, and haue erred we doe not doubt. But of this it ſhall be impertinent to ſpeake at this preſent. I will onely now retort your argument vpon you: Whoſoeuer relyeth his faith vpon man, hath no faith: but all Engliſh papiſts that vnderſtand not the Hebrew, Greeke and Latine, and reade the Remiſh tranſlation, rely their faith vpon man, videl. the tranſlator of that Teſtament: ergo all ſuch Engliſh papiſts haue no faith. The like may be ſaid of them that reade the Latine, which rely their faith vpon the councell of Trent who were men. Againe, whoſoeuer relyeth his faith vpon man, hath no faith: all papiſts rely their faith vpon the Pope, who I trow is a man ergo all papiſts haue no faith. And this ſhall ſuffice for anſwere to your third article.
            
            
               
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants know not what they beleeue. 4. Article.
               
               
                  
                     THe Proteſtants know not what they beleeue, nor why they beleeue: that they know not why they beleeue, I haue ſhewed before. For that the ground of their beleefe is not the authoritie of Scripture, of councels, of Doctors, nor of the Church, but their owne fancie. And that they know not what they beleeue is manifeſt, becauſe they haue no rule, whereby to know what is matter of faith, and what is not. Some will limit their beleefe to their creede, ſaying, that nothing ought to be beleeued, which is not in the Apoſtles creed. But then I would demaund of them, whether that we ought to beleeue that the Scripture is the word of God? that baptiſme is a Sacrament? that in the Euchariſt is the bodie of Chriſt by faith? to what article ſhould theſe be reduced, ſeeing they are not contained in the creed? or how ſhall we know infallibly, how theſe be matters of faith: ſince they are not contained in the creed? others deny ſome articles of their creed alſo: for the Proteſtants deny three articles of our creed, and the puritans fiue: The firſt is the Catholike Church. Credo eccleſiam ſanctam Catholicam: I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, the which in very deede they doe not beleeue: becauſe Catholike is vniuerſall, 
                  
                     Matth. 26. Iſa. 60. 
                  and ſo the Church of Chriſt which we are bound to beleeue, muſt be vninerſall for all time comprehending allages, and vniuerſall for place, comprehending all nations: but that Church which the Proteſtants beleeue, was interrupted all the ages betwixt the Apoſtles and Luther, which was 1400. yeares, or in very deede was neuer ſeene before Luthers dayes, therefore that Church they beleeue, cannot be Catholike. Neither is it vniuerſall in place, being contained within the narrow bounds of England, which is accompted but as a corner of the world, for the Lutherans in Germanie, the Hugonites in
                  
                  Fraunce, and the Guines in Flaunders deteſt their religion as much as the Catholikes; neither will they ioyne iſſue with them in diuers eſſentiall points. And therefore the Proteſtants Church which they beleeue, can no more be called Catholike or vniuerſall, then England the vniuerſall world: or Kent the Kingdome of England: or a pruned bough a wheate tree, or a dead finger a man, or a rotten tooth, the whole head. The ſecond article is the communion of Saints, the which they many wayes deny. Firſt by not beleeuing that Chriſt hath inſtituted ſeuen Sacraments, wherein the Saints of his Church communicate: and ſpecially the true and real preſence of our Sauiour Chriſt in the Euchariſt, by which all the faithfull receiuers participating of one 
                  1. Cor 10. 17. 
                  and the ſelfe ſame bodie, are made one bodie, as all the parts of a mans bodie, are made one liuing thing by participating one ſoule. Secondly they denie the communion of the Church militant and triumphant by exclaming againſt inuocation of 
                  
                     Gen. 48. v. 16. 
                  Saints, by which holy exerciſe the bleſſed Saints in heauen, and 
                  
                     Apoca. 1. v 4. 
                  we in yearth communicate; we by prayer glorifying them, and they by meditation, obtayning our requeſt. Thirdly, they deny the communion of the Church militant, and the ſoules in purgatorie, bereauing them of that Chriſtian charitie, which charitable compaſſion and mercifull pitie requireth, and by naturall affection the members of one bodie helpe one another. The third article is remiſſion of ſinnes, for they acknowledge no ſuch effect in the Sacrament of Baptiſme: but onely count it as an externall ſigne, or ſeale of a prereceiued grace or fauour of God, by his eternall predeſtination, againſt the expreſſe word of God: which therefore calleth this Sacrament the lauer of regeneration, for that in it the ſoule dead by ſinne is newly regenerate 
                  
                     Ad Tit. 3. 
                  by grace. Moreouer they allow not the Sacrament of penance, wherein all actuall ſinnes committed after Baptiſme are cancelled: 
                  
                     Ioh. 20. 
                  and that which exceedeth all in abſurditie, is to deny that our ſinnes are all perfectly forgiuen, but onely not imputed, and as it were veiled or couered with the paſſion of Chriſt: all the botches, and biles the filth and abomination of ſinne ſtill remaining, and as it were exhaling a moſt peſtiferous ſent in the ſight of God. For let them ſhift themſelues as they liſt, and ſcarfe their 
                        •
                     ores according to their fancies, yet no veile, nor mantell
                  
                  can couer their deformitie of ſinne, from the pearcing eyes of Gods perfit vnderſtanding, from which nothing can be concealed. Fourthly, the puritanes in effect deny that Chriſt is the 
                  
                     Ioh. 8. verſ. 24. 
                  ſonne of God: for they peremptorilie affirme that Chriſt is God 
                  
                     Ioh. 16. ver. 13. 
                  of himſelfe, and not God of God: So that he receiued not his diuinitie from his father. The which poſition flatly taketh away the nature of a ſonne, for the nature of a ſonne is to receiue his ſubſtance of his Father, and it implyeth contradiction: that the ſonne receiueth his perſon of his Father and not his ſubſtance and eſſence, for the ſubſtance of God is eſſentiall to euery perſon in trinitie. Fiftly, finally they deny the deſcenſion of Chriſt into hell, and deſperately defend that he ſuffered the paines of Hell vpon the Croſſe, whereby they blaſpheme moſt horribly that ſacred humanitie: as if Chriſt had deſpaired of 
                  
                     Iſa. 66. verſ. 24. 
                  his ſaluation, as if God had hated him and he had hated God, 
                  
                     Mark 9. 48. 
                  as if he had been afflicted, and tormented with anguiſh of minde 
                  
                     Math. 25. 41. 
                  for his offences: for which he was depriued of the ſight of God, and eternally to be depriued: all which horrible puniſhments are included in the paines of Hell, and whoſoeuer aſcribeth them to Chriſt, blaſphemeth more horribly then Arius who denied him to be God, for leſſe abſurditie it were to deny him to be God, then to make God the enemie of God.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  IN this fourth article the ſyllogiſme promiſed is not performed. But in ſteede thereof, here is an accuſation that we know not what we beleeue, nor why we beleeue. Your proofe before I haue examined, and what we beleeue I haue declared, whereof the rule is not our owne fancie as you ſay, and ſhew not, as the rule of your faith and life is the Popes folly, as hath been in part ſhewed. You ſay we haue no rule, whereby to know what is the matter of faith. We haue the word of God contained in the canonicall Scriptures of the old and new Teſtament, and is that no rule? I pray you what doth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ſignifie but a rule? and why be the Scriptures

called canonicall, but becauſe they be the rule of our faith and life? Thomas Aquinas ſaith: Doctrina enim Apoſtolorum & prophetarum dicitur canonica, quia eſt regula intellectus 
                  
                     Thom. Aquinas in 1. Tim. 6. 
                  noſtri: that is, The Doctrine of the Apoſtles and Prophets is called canonicall becauſe they be the rule of our vnderſtanding. Dauid when he ſaid; Thy word is a light 
                  
                     Pſal. 119. 105. 
                  vnto my feete; and a lanterne vnto my pathes: what did he but make that ſame, the rule, direction, and guide of his faith and life? when Moſes ſaid: Now therefore hearken O 
                  
                     Deut. 4. 1. 
                  Iſrael vnto the ordinances and to the lawes which I teach you to doe, that ye may liue and goe in, and poſſeſſe the land, which 
                  2 
                  the Lord God of your Fathers giueth you: ye ſhall put nothing to the word, which I commaund you; neither ſhall take ought therefrom, that ye may keepe the commaundements of the Lord your God which I commaund you: what did he but make Gods word declared to him, and written by him, the rule of their faith and life? When God ſaid to Ioſua: Let not this 
                  
                     Ioſu. 1. 8. 
                  booke of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou maiſt obſerue and doe according to all that is written therein: for then ſhalt thou make thy way proſperous; and then ſhalt thou haue good ſucceſſe: What did he but make his written word the rule of his faith, and whole life? When Abraham ſaid to the rich man condemned in Hell: They haue Moſes and the Prophets let them heare them, what did he but ſhew that the writings of Moſes & the Prophets 
                     Luk. 16. 29. were the onely rule which his brethren ſhould follow to auoyd damnation, and conſequently to attaine eternall ſaluation? Chryſoſtom ſaith: Ne igitur multorum opiniones habeamus, ſed resipſas inquiramus. Quomodo autem non abſurdum 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. in 2. Col. hom. 13. 
                  propter pecunias alijs non credere, ſed & ipſas numerare & ſupputare; pro rebus autem amplioribus aliorum ſententiam ſequi ſimpliciter, praeſertim cùm habeamus omnem exactiſſimā trutinam & gnomonem ac regulam diuinarum inquam legum aſſertionem. Ideo obſecro & oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis quidnam huic vel illi videatur: deque hijs à ſcripturis haec omnia inquirite &c. i. Let vs not ſeeke the opinions of many men, but let vs ſearch the things themſelues: for how is it not abſurd not to beleeue men concerning mony but that we wil count it; &

for matters of greater waight to follow ſimply the minde and opinion of others, eſpecially ſeeing we haue the moſt exact ballance, ſquare & rule, the doctrine of Gods lawes? Therfore I requeſt and beſeech you all to leaue and forſake what ſeemeth good to this or that man, & of theſe matters ſearch ye al theſe things, by the Scriptures. The ſame Chryſoſtom 
                  
                     Idem in Geneſ. homil. 58. hath theſe words: Vides in quantum abſurditatē incidunt qui diuinae ſcripturae canonem ſequi nolunt, ſed ſuis cogitationibus permittunt omnia. i. Thou ſeeſt into how great abſurditie they doe fall which follow not the rule of the diuine Scriptures, but permit all things to their owne fancies and deuiſes. And againe: Satis ſufficere credimus quicquid ſecundum 
                  Idem hom. de Adam & Heua. 
                  praedictas regulas. Apoſtolica ſcripta nos docuerunt, vt prorſus non opinemur catholicum quod apparuerit praefixis ſententijs contrarium: that is, we beleeue that that is ſufficient enough whatſoeuer according to the foreſaid rules, Then is not the doctrine of the Church of Rome Catholike. Beda 8. queſt. 1. Nec ſufficere.
                   the writings of the Apoſtles haue taught vs, ſo that we doe not at all iudge that to be Catholike which ſhall appeare to be contrarie to the foreſaid rules. Beda hath an excellent ſaying hereof, which is recorded in Gratians decrees. Nobis ſacris literis vnica eſt credendi pariter & viuendiregula praeſcripta: that is, The onely rule both of faith, and alſo of life is preſcribed vnto vs in the holy Scriptures. This rule we haue, and will you ſay this is no rule? If you haue a better rule let vs know it. And whereas you would haue the councels, doctors, and Church the rule of our faith and life, bring ſuch like plaine places out of the Scriptures and doctors, for the proofe of it, and then we will yeeld vnto you. As touching the Apoſtles creede, we acknowledge it to be abriefe abridgment of the eſpeciall and principall points of Chriſtian faith and doctrine, yet there be ſome truthes, which are not particularly expreſſed in the ſame. But whereas you ſay, or rather falſely ſlaunder, that the Proteſtants denie three articles of our creede, and the Puritanes fiue, I ſay that you affirme much, and proue little. But firſt you might well enough haue forborne this diſtinction of proteſtants & puritanes; for although ſome haue differed in ſome outward matters

concerning ceremonies & externall orders in the Church; yet theſe all greatly agree and conſent in all points of the doctrine of faith, and Articles of Chriſtian Religion: Neither doe I know any that ſo well deſerue this name of Puritanes as you, who glorie that you after baptiſme be pure from all ſinne; and for actuall ſinnes after committed, can make ſo full ſatisfaction to God for them, that he can requeſt no more of you, as hereafter I will ſhew: and therefore it be you that may well be called Puritanes, of whom that ſaying of Salomon may be well verified; There is a generation that are pure in their owne conceit, and yet are not 
                  
                     Prou. 30. 
                  waſhed from their filthines.
               
               But let vs come to the examination of your proofe of this your abſurd and ſlaunderous aſſertion. The firſt you ſay is the Catholike Church, Credo: Eccleſiam ſanctam Catholicam: Doe wee denie this Article? Why doe wee then not onely print it and rehearſe it in our Creede, but alſo expound it in our preachings and Catechiſing? I haue ſaid before that which may ſeeme ſufficient concerning this matter, and article: yet the better to ſatisfie the Chriſtian Reader, and to ſtop the mouth of this malicious accuſer, I ſay againe that by the holy Catholike Church mentioned in the Creede, is meant the companie of all Gods elect and faithfull people, whom he calleth, iuſtifieth, and ſanctifieth to be veſſels of his mercie, and heires of his kingdome of glorie, which is the bodie of Chriſt, and he the head; the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and he the bridegrome; the houſe of Chriſt, and he the foundation; the flocke of Chriſt, and he the ſhepheard. And this Church wee confeſſe to be Catholike, that is to ſay vniuerſall, both in reſpect of time, for that it conſiſteth of al them that are written in the booke of life, which haue been from the beginning of the world, and ſhall be to the end therof: and alſo of place, for yt it is not now contained in any one countrie, but as S. Peter ſaith: In euery nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteouſnes, is accepted with him, and is a true 
                     Act. 10. 35. mēber of this Catholike Church. That this is the holy Catholike Church which we confeſſe & beleeue, whereof the

prophane wicked hypocrites, and reprobates be no part; beſides that which I haue ſaid before, I will further proue it by the holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers. Saint Paul ſaith, Let vs follow the truth in loue, and in all things grow vp 
                  
                     Epheſ. 4 15. 
                  vnto him which is the head, that is Chriſt, by whom all the bodie being coupled and knit together by euery ioynt, for the furniture thereof (according to the effectuall power, which is in the meaſure of euery part) receiueth increaſe of the bodie, vnto the edifying of it ſelfe in loue. Againe, Chriſt loued the Church 
                  
                     Chap. 5. 25. 
                  and gaue himſelfe for it, that he might ſanctifie it, and clenſe it by the waſhing of water through the word, that he might make it to himſelfe a glorious Church, not hauing ſpot or wrinkle, or any ſuch thing: but that it ſhould be holy and without blame. Theſe things belong only to the elect people of God, who ſhall raigne with him in his eternall kingdome of glorie. For they only be the bodie of Chriſt knit together in him, ſanctified here, to be without ſpot or blemiſh hereafter. The Apoſtle to the Hebrues ſaith: Whoſe houſe we are, if we hold faſt that confidence, and that reioycing of hope vnto the 
                  
                     Heb. 3. 6. 
                  end. Where hee ſheweth that they belong to the houſe of God, which is the Church of the liuing God, the pillar and 1. Timoth. 3. 15. ſtay of truth, which vnto the end hold faſt their confident faith, and hope of Gods glorie, wherof they reioyce, which belongeth onely to the faithfull and choſen children of God. This is that Church whereof he ſpeaketh after: But ye are come vnto the mount Sion, and to the citie of the liuing God; the celeſtiall Ieruſalem, and to the companie of innumerable 
                  
                     Heb. 12. 22. 
                  Angels, and to the aſſemblie and congregation of the firſt borne, which are written in heauen, and to God the Iudge of all, and to the ſpirits of iuſt and perfect men. To whom can theſe things pertaine, but only to the Ieruſalem which is aboue 
                     Galat. 4. the mother of vs all, which is the holy Catholike Church that we beleeue.
               Hereunto I will adde a few ſayings of the Fathers to them which I haue before alleaged. Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Corpus huius capitis Eccleſia eſt, non quae hoc loco eſt, ſed quae 
                  
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 81. 
                  hoc loco & per totum orbem terrarum: nec illa quae hoc tempore, ſed ab ipſo Abel vſque ad eos qui naſcituri ſunt vſque in finem,
                  
                  & credituri in Chriſtū, totus populus ſanctorum ad vnam ciuitatem pertinentium, quae ciuitas corpus eſt Chriſti, cui caputeſt Chriſtus: that is, The bodie of this head is the Church, not which is in this place onely, but that which is in this place, and through the whole world: neither that Church which is at this time, but that of them, which from Abel ſhall be borne vnto the end, and ſhall beleeue in Chriſt, euen the whole companie of Saints pertaining to one citie, which citie is the bodie of Chriſt, whereof Chriſt is the head. And in another place: Ille caput eſt, nos membra ſumus: tota eccleſia quae vbique diffuſa eſt, corpus ipſius eſt, cuius 
                  
                     Idem in Pſal. 62. 
                  eſt ipſe caput. Non ſolum autem fideles qui modo ſunt; ſed & qui fuerunt ante nos, & qui poſt nos futuri ſunt vſque in finem ſeculi, omnes ad corpus eius pertinent, cuius corporis ipſe caput eſt, qui aſcendit in coelum: He is the head, wee are his members: the whole Church which is diſperſed euery where is his bodie, whereof he is the head. And not onely the faithfull which be now, but alſo they which haue been before vs, and which ſhall be after vs vnto the end of the world, all pertaine to his bodie: of which bodie, hee which hath aſcended into heauen is the head. Againe, Caelestis Hieruſalem 
                  
                     Idem de Catech. tud. cap. 20. 
                  ciues ſunt omnes ſanctificati homines qui fuet unt, & qui ſunt, & qui futuri ſunt: that is, All ſanctified men, which haue been, which are, and which ſhall be citizens of the heauenly Ieruſalem. Cyprian ſaith: Eccleſia nunquam à Chriſto diſcedit, & ijſunt eccleſia, qui in domo Dei permanent: 
                  
                     Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 3. that is, The Church neuer departeth from Chriſt, and they be the Church which continue in the houſe of God: Againe, Adulterari non poteſt ſponſa Chriſti: incorrupta eſt & 
                  Idem de vnitate eccleſiae. 
                  pudica: vnam domum nouit, vnius cubiculi ſanctitatem casto pudore cuſtodit. Haec nos Deo ſeruat, haec filios regno quos generauit aſſignat: that is, The ſpouſe cannot be defiled: ſhe is vncorrupt and chaſt, ſhe knoweth one houſe, and keepeth with chaſt ſhamefaſtnes the holines of one chamber, ſhe keepeth vs to God, ſhe aſſigneth the children whom ſhe hath borne vnto his kingdome. Saint Hierome ſaith: Ipſa eccleſia quae eſt Sanctorum omnium congregatio pro aeterna ſibi 
                  
                     Hieron. in Iob cap. 28. 
                  in Domino ſtabilitate, columna & fundamentum dicitur veritatis:
                  
The Church which is the congregation of all Saints by reaſon of her eternall ſtedfaſtnes in God, is called the pillar and ground of truth. Chryſostome ſaith: Eccleſia eſt 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. in Pſal. Hom. 114. 
                  tabernaculū à Deo fixum, non ab homine: ab vno loco in aliū fugit, ſednon à pietate ad impietatē fugit: that is, The Church is the tabernacle which God hath pight, and not man, ſhe flieth from one place to another, but ſhe neuer flieth from godlines to impietie and wickednes. Ambroſe: Apostolus omnem eccleſiam dicens, ſummatim totum comprebendit quod 
                  
                     Ambroſ. in Epheſ. cap. 1. 
                  in coelo eſt & interra: that is, The Apoſtle meaning all the Church, briefly comprehendeth the whole which is both in heauen and in earth. Bernard ſaith: Electi Dei ſunt eccleſia Dei: The elect of God be the Church of God. So ſaith 
                     Bern. in Cant. ſerm. 78. 
                  Clemens Alexandrinus, as I haue before alleaged: Non nunc 
                  
                     Clem. Alexand. Sirom. lib. 7. pag. 35. 
                  locum, ſed electorum congregationem appello eccleſiam: I call not now the place the Church, but the congregation of the elect. Yea Frier Lyra ſaith: Ex quo patet quod eccleſia non conſiſtat in hominibus ratione poteſtatis vel dignitatis eccleſiaſticae 
                  
                     Lyra in Mat. 16. 
                  vel ſecularis, quia multi principes & ſummi pontifices & alij inferiores inuenti ſunt apoſtataſſe à fide: propter quod eccleſia conſistit in illis perſonis in quibus eſt notitia vera & confeſſio fides & veritatis: that is, Whereby it appeareth that the Church conſiſteth not in men, in reſpect of their eccleſiaſticall or ſecular power or dignitie: for many Princes and Popes, and others of lower degree haue bin found Popes Apoſtates. to haue bin Apoſtates, and to haue fallen away from the faith. Wherefore the Church conſiſteth in thoſe perſons in whom is true knowledge, and the confeſſion of faith and truth. This is that holy Catholike Church, which we in the Creede confeſſe, and beleeue, euen the whole number of them whom God hath elected and choſen to eternall life, whom God hath, had in all ages, and of all nations: of which Church euery true and faithfull man and woman, muſt beleeue himſelfe to be a true and liuely member, whereof he may be aſſured, if he finde and feele that God hath lightened his minde with the knowledge of his truth, hath wrought in his heart an vnfained faith to truſt in his mercies, and to beleeue that his ſinnes be forgiuen

him for Chriſts names ſake: and that God hath ſanctified his ſoule and bodie to hate ſinne, and to haue a care and conſcience to ſerue him in true holines and righteouſnes all the daies of his life. This being our confeſſion and beliefe, with what conſcience and truth can this man ſay, that the Church which the Proteſtants beleeue hath been interrupted all the ages betwixt the Apoſtles and Luther, and in very deede was neuer ſeene before Luthers daies: or that wee imagine the ſame to be comprehended within the narrow bounds of England? I can ſay nomore, but that a falſe witnes ſhall not be vnpuniſhed, and he that ſpeaketh 
                     Prouerb. 19. 5. lyes ſhall not eſcape. But now let vs ſee what this man and his fellowes hold, beleeue, and call the Catholike Church, forſooth the companie of all them that receiue and profeſſe the religion and doctrine of the Church of Rome, and ſubmit themſelues to be ruled and gouerned by the Biſhop and Pope of Rome. They that doe not this, be Heretikes, Schiſmatikes, out of Noahs Arke, and out of the Catholike Church. And hereupon it followeth, that the Chriſtians in Graecia, Muſcouia, Armenia, Aethiopia, &c. where Chriſtianitie hath continued vnto this day, and among whom no doubt but ſome haue been of Gods elect and choſen people, yet be they no Catholikes, nor of the Catholike Church, nor in the ſtate of ſalnation: And why? becauſe they neither haue been nor be ſubiect to the Pope of Rome. For ſo it is with many words ſolemnely defined and determined by that holy and vertuous Pope Boniface the 8. Subeſſe Romano pontifici, omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, & dofinimus, & pronuntiamus, omnino eſſe de neceſſitate 
                  Extra. de maior. & obedien. vnā ſanctam. 
                  ſalutis: that is, We declare; ſay, define and pronounce, that it is altogether of neceſſitie of ſaluation to be ſubiect to the Pope of Rome. Where the Gloſſe helpeth out the matter with theſe words: Quie quid ſaluatur eſt ſub ſummo pontifice: Whatſoeuer is ſaued is vnder the Pope. Gloſſ. ibidem. And on the other ſide, All they that profeſſe the religion of Rome, and ſubmit thomſelues to the Biſhop thereof be Catholikes, and the Catholike Church how prophane, wicked or vngodly ſoeuer they be.
               
                  
Pope Iohn the 8. the whore, Iohn the 12. or as ſome reckon him, the 13. who was an adulterer, and of two Cardinals, did cut out the tongue of the one, & the hand of the other, and at dice-play would call vpon the diuell, and made the pallace of Laterane a ſtewes of ſtrumpets, as Luithprandus Ticinenſis writeth Syluester the ſecond a coniurer, who gaue himſelfe to the Diuell to be made Pope, 
                     Luitherand. lib. 6. cap. 7. Gregorie the 7. a coniurer and monſter, Boniface the 7. who robbed Saint Peters Church, and put out the eyes of 
                     Platina in Sylueſt. 2. 
                  Iohn a Cardinal, Boniface the 8. who entred into his popedome like a foxe, raigned like a wolfe, and died like a dog, Alexander the ſixt, & Iulius the ſecond, and all they whom Idem. 
                  Platina calleth monſtra & portenta, monſters and wonders Platina. for their wickedneſſe, were not only Catholikes, but alſo heads of this Catholike Church. And he that married (as I ſaid before) his owne ſiſter, and Ferdinando a king Naples, who maried his Aunt, & king Philip of Spaine that maried his Neece, becauſe they did theſe things by ye diſpēſations Phil. Comineus. and allowing of holy Popes of Rome, were Catholikes, and good ſonnes of the Catholike Church. Now whether of theſe doctrines concerning this article of our faith, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, be the ſounder & truer, let the Chriſtian reader vprightly iudge. I doubt not but 
                     Matth. 11. wiſdome ſhall be iuſtified of her children.
               And whereas you would make men beleeue, that the Church whereof we are, is contained within the narrow bounds of England, and that the Lutherans in Germanie, the Hugonotes in France, and the Guines in Flanders (as you terme them) will not ioyne iſſue with vs in diuers eſſentiall points of religion, you doe to the offending of God, & deceiuing of your ignorant reader, vtter two notorious vntruths. For we (as I haue ſaid before) confeſſe our ſelues to be members of that holy Catholike Church, which hath beene in all ages, and is diſperſed ouer the world, and we haue communion and fellowſhip with all them in all nations, that feare God and obey his truth, eſpecially in the fundamentall doctrines of religion and ſaluation. But how do you truely confeſſe the Church to

be Catholike, that is, vniuerſall, comprehending all nations, in reſtraining it to the religion and ſubiection of the Pope of Rome, and ſo conſequently to a ſmall part of Europe; vnleſſe you will now of late adde the Weſt Indians, where the Spaniards haue committed moe horrible murthers, then they haue madagood proſelytes. And what an abſurd ſpeech is this, that you call the Church of Rome the Catholike Church, as if a man ſhould call the Church of Corinth or Epheſus the Catholike Church, which if they were holy, are but members of the Catholike Church. This is therefore that which you vntruly attribute to vs, to call England the vniuerſall world: or Kent the kingdome of England, &c. But the Church of Rome now committing fornication with ſtocks and ſtones, is ſo farre from being the Catholike Church, that it is no true member thereof, as M. Doctor Raynolds hath learnedly proued. And that In his Theſes. theſe whom you contemptuouſly call Lutherans, Hugonotes, and Guines, do diſſent from vs in eſſentiall points of religion, you may eaſily affirme, but ſhal neuer be able to proue. Some indeed in Germanie, whom you call Lutherans, do diſſent from vs in one point concerning the Sacrament of Chriſts bodie and bloud: howbeit you cannot be ignorant, but that manie Churches and countries in Germanie ioyne with vs in that matter. And let the reader reade and examine the confeſſions of faith ſet out by the Churches in France, and in the lowe countries, & they ſhall ſee both how great their agreement in doctrine is with vs, and alſo what a ſhameleſſe ſlaunder this is, which this authour hath according to his accuſtomed maner auouched, but not proued. And moreouer I will offer this iſſue to this man, who thinketh ſo highly of himſelfe, that whereas he ſhall proue that there is diſſenſion among vs in one eſſentiall point of religion and doctrine; I will proue that there is in three at the leaſt among them. And this much for this article.
               The ſecond article of the communion of Saints you ſay we many waies denie. Firſt, by not beleeuing that Chriſt hath inſtitnted ſeuen Sacraments, wherein the Saints of

his Church communicate. But why do not you bring ſome plaine proofe yt our Sauiour Chriſt inſtituted theſe ſeuen Sacraments? ſeeing you ſay that the denying of the is the deniall of this article of our faith. Saint Paul going about to terrifie the Chriſtians of Corinth from going to idolatrous feaſts, by the example of Gods fearefull iudgements and plagues poured vpon the Iſraelites for the like ſinnes: to preuent an obiection which the Chriſtians of Corinth might haue made, that the Iſraelits were not the Children of God ſo much as they, and had not ſuch Sacraments of Baptiſme and of Chriſts ſupper, as they had; and therefore God would not deale ſo hardly with them as he did with the Iſraelites: to take away, I ſay this obiection, he ſheweth that they were Gods people, as well as the Chriſtians of Corinth were, and had the ſame ſacraments in ſubſtance that we haue. For the fathers were vnder that cloud, and al paſſed through the ſea, and were all baptized by Moſes in that cloud, and in that ſea, and did all eate the ſame ſpirituall 1. Cor. 10. 1. meat, and did all drink the ſame ſpirituall drinke: for they dranke of the ſpiritual rocke that followed them: & the rocke was Chriſt. Where Saint Paul making mention of the Sacraments, which are tokens of Gods grace, and markes of his people, nameth but theſe two, Baptiſme and Chriſts ſupper. Saint Augustine alſo writing of the Sacraments whereby Chriſt hath tied his people together, maketh mention but of the ſame two, in theſe words: Primum itaque tenere volo quodeſt huius disputationis caput, dominum noſtrum Ieſum Christum, ſicut ipſe in Euangelio loquitur, Leui 
                  
                     Auguſt. ad lanuar. Epiſt. 108. 
                  iugo ſuo nos ſubdidiſſe, & ſarcinae leui, vnde ſacramentis numero pauciſſimis, obſeruatione facillimis, ſignificatione praestantiſſimis ſocietatem noui populi colligauit, ſicut est baptiſmus Trinitatis nomine conſacratus, communicatio corporis & ſanguinis ipſius, & ſi quid aliud is ſcripturis canonicis commendatur, &c 1. Firſt therefore, I would haue thee hold that which is the head of this diſputation, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath, as he ſpeaketh in the Goſpell, put vs vnder his eaſie yoke and light burthen, whereupon he hath bound together the ſocietie and communion of his people by Sacraments in

nūber feweſt, in obſeruation eaſieſt, in ſignificatiō moſt excellent, as is baptiſme conſecrated in ye name of the Trinity the cōmunion of his body & bloud, & if there be any thing els commēded in the canonical ſcriptures. The like he writeth in his 3. booke de doctr. Christiana cap. 9. by the which it appeareth, that he thought theſe two Sacraments to be ſufficient for faithful Chriſtians to communicate in: And if he had acknowledged any mo, it is maruell, yt writing of purpoſe of thē, he did not name them: Yet S. Augustine did not deny this article of the cōmunion of Saints. Beſſarion, a Cardinal of Rome, & a learned man, diſſenteth frō you, & ſaith: Beſſar. de Sacram. Euchariſtia. 
                  Haec duo ſola ſacramēta in Euāgelio manifestè tradita legimus: i. We read that theſe only 2. ſacraments are plainly deliuered to vs in the Goſpell: yet did he not deny this article of faith. Your own doctor Alexander de Hales flatly affirmeth that neither Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles did inſtitute & ordain the Sacramēt of Cōfirmation, but yt it was afterward ordained 
                     Alexand. de Halis par. quaeſt. 24. men. 1. in the Councel called Meldenſe: yet he denied not this Article. And therfore you ouerſhot your ſelf in ſaying, that they which beleeue not yt Chriſt did inſtitute 7. ſacramēts, deny this article of faith, The cōmunion of Saints. But to proceed with you concerning ye true & real preſence of Chriſt in the Euchariſt, we denie the ſame, not to the faith of the godly & worthy receiuer, but to the mouth & teeth of ye car nal eater. We beleeue and ſay that Chriſts bodie & bloud, in as much as they were offred vpon the croſſe for our redēption, are the ſpirituall food of our ſoules, without which we can neither liue vnto God here, nor liue with God here after: & that ye ſame is offred to vs partly in the promiſes of the Goſpel, & partly in ye ſacramēts of Baptiſme & Chriſts ſupper: and is in both apprehended of vs by faith, without which neither the word nor Sacraments can profit vs. But here I muſt put you in mind, that you corruptly alleage a place of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10. 17. foiſting in this word, Bodie for Bread, S. Paules words bethus: We that are manie are one bread, and one bodie, becauſe we are partakers of one bread.
               
               This ſhifting of the words of the holy Ghoſt is too vſuall with your companions. Bunderius a Louaine Frier alleaging

the words of Saint Paul in the next chapter, verſe 27. Quicunque manducauerit panem hunc, &c. He that eateth 
                  
                     Compend. concept. titul. 21. act.
                   
                  this bread, &c. putteth out the word panem, and foiſteth in the word carnem, fleſh, alleaging it thus, Qui manducat carnem, & bibit calicem Domini indignè, &c. He that eateth the fleſh, & drinketh the cup of the Lord vnworthily, &c. D. Harding in his Confutation of the Apology intreating 
                     Confut. Apolo. cap. 16. diuiſ. 1. of Purgatorie, alleaging the words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. 1. to proue ſatisfaction for ſinnes, by that fained fire, putteth out Sanctification, and in place therof putteth Satisfaction, alleaging it thus: making perfect ſatisfaction in the feare of God. Cardinall Hoſius changeth the words of Saint Paul, alleaging them thus: Neque ferre poſſunt vt per verbum Dei 
                  
                     Confeſ. Petri. 10 cap. 13. 
                  ſigno crucis vlla creatura ſanctificetur, that is, They cannot abide that anie creature ſhould be ſanctified by the word of God and ſigne of the croſſe. He putteth out prayer, and putteth in the ſigne of the Croſſe as a more holie thing. The foreſaid Bunderius doth moſt ſhamefully alleage a place of the Apoſtle in this ſort: Nam ſi cinis vitulae conſperſus 
                  
                     Ibid. titul. 30. arti. 5. 
                  populum ſanctificauit atque mundauit: quantò magis aqua ſale consperſa diuinis precibus ſacrata populum ſanctificat atque mundat: that is, If the aſhes of an heifer ſprinkled haue ſanctified and cleanſed the people, how much more ſhall water ſprinkled with ſalt, being hallowed with diuine prayers, ſanctifie and cleanſe the people, &c. The words of the Apoſtle be theſe: If the bloud of bulles & goats, and the aſhes of an heifer, ſprinkling them that are vncleane, ſanctifieth as touching the purifying of the fleſh, how much more ſhall the bloud of Christ, which through the eternall ſpirit offered himſelfe without fault to God, purge your conſcience from dead works, to ſerue the liuing God. Is not this horrible handling of Gods word, & blaſphemous attributing that to their ſalt water, which is proper & peculiar to the bloud of Chriſt? I could ſhew in like maner, how they haue clipped the coine of Gods word, in leauing out words of purpoſe, which ſerue not their turne, but I wil omit them: only this I ſay, yt if they which counterfeit & clip the kings coin deſerue hāging, what do they deſerue, yt counterfeit & clip

the word of the eternal God king of al Kings? but corrupt doctrine cānot be maintained without corruptiō of Gods word. But to returne to S. Pauls place: he there diſſwadeth the Chriſtians of Corinth from going to Idolatrous feaſts, by a reaſon taken from the Supper of our Sauiour Chriſt, ſhewing that as the faithfull by eating that bread which there is broken, & drinking that Cup, are made partakers of Chriſt Ieſus: ſo they that did eate thoſe feaſts ordained to the honoring of Idols, were partakers of Idolatrie there committed, or rather of the Diuell that was there ſerued. And as the faithfull by being partakers of that bread haue communion together, and be made one body, to wit, the myſticall body of Chriſt: ſo they that receiue thoſe Idol bankets, haue communion together, and ſhew themſelues to be of one body, videl. of the Diuell. Now as there needed no tranſubſtantiation for the one, no more there doth for the other. Alſo this bread which S. Paul calleth the communiō of the body of Chriſt is broken; yet I truſt they wil not ſay, that Chriſts body is broken, although Pope Nicholas cauſed that excellent man Berengarius ſo to confeſſe. But 
                     De conſecra diſtinst. 2. Ego Berenga.
                   of the groſſe and abſurd doctrine of tranſubſtantiation I will ſpeake no more at this preſent. You ſay moreouer that we deny the communion of the Church militant, and triumphant, by exclaming againſt inuocation of Saints, by which holy exerciſe thoſe bleſſed Saints in heauen, and we in earth communicate, we by prayer glorifying them, and they by meditation (I thinke it ſhould be mediation) obtayning our requeſts. Hereunto I anſwere, firſt that this inuocation of Saints is vnlawfull, and cannot bee proued by the holy Scriptures. And this offer I doe make you, that if you can bring one plaine place out of all the holy Scriptures, wherein it was euer commaunded, or of any faithfull man or woman vſed, I will yeeld vnto you not onely in this, but alſo in all matters of Religion. You quote in your margent Geneſ. 48. 16. and Apoca. 1. 4. which make aſmuch for prouing inuocation of Saints, as Tityre tu patule doth. The words of the place of Geneſis be theſe: The Angell which hath deliuered me from all euill bleſſe the
                  
                  children, and let my name be called or named vpon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Iſaac, that they may grow as fiſh into a multitude in the midſt of the earth. Out of this place the Papiſts take two arguments to proue prayer to Angels and to Saints. The firſt out of theſe words, The Angell which hath deliuered me, &c. the other out of thoſe, let my name be called vpon them, &c. But yet let the reader note this, that of the Papiſts ſome doe finde the one ſaying, and ſome the other ſo weake, that ſome alledge the one, and ſome the other, and I haue not read any one, that doth vſe them both. T. W. in a diſcourſe of this matter alledged the former words of the Angell: and Ecchius the latter. To the which I wil briefly anſwere: By the Angel is ment Ieſus Chriſt the Angell of the couenant, as Malachie calleth him, and the Angell of the great counſell of God. So doth Aloiſius Lipomanus that great Catholike Biſhop of Verona both out of Cyrillus, and of himſelfe expound it in theſe words: Cyrillus, Iacob pueris benedicens deum & patrem & 
                  
                     Cyrillus. Aloiſ. Lipoma catenae in Geneſ. 48. 
                  nutrientemſe, & Angelum liberantem nominat, illum nempe Angelum, qui Angelus magni conſilij ab Eſaia dicitur, quia omnis benedictio, omnis gratia non aliter quàm à deo per Ieſum Chriſtum in homines deſcendit. Conſiderandum quòd dictio hagoel vel redimens vel qui redimit propriè reddi poteſt, quo loquendi modo clariſſimè filius dei mundi generalis redemptor denotatur. Et ſi diligenter aduerteris, tacitè propheta domini ſanctiſſimam inuocat trinitatem, patrem ſcilicet, & ſpiritum S. ſub nomine dei bis repetiti, vnigenitum verò dei filium ſub nomine Angell: Angelum verò intelligit redemptorem, verbum diuinum, ſaluatorem noſtrum, vel auxilij diſpenſationis diuinae miniſtrum, ipſe, inquam, ille benedicat pueris iſtis: That is, Cyrill. Iacob bleſſing thy children doth name God both the father which did nouriſh him, and the Angell which did deliuer him, to wit, that Angell, whom Eſay calleth the Angell of great counſell, becauſe all bleſſing and all grace deſcendeth no other wayes from God vpon men, but by Ieſus Chriſt. We muſt conſider that the word Hagoel may be tranſlated either redeeming or he that redeemeth, by which phraſe of ſpeech the ſonne of God the generall

redeemer of the world, is moſt manifeſtly ſignified: and if thou diligently marke, thou maiſt perceiue, that the prophet in ſecret ſort calleth vpon the moſt holy Trinitie, to wit, the father and the holy Ghoſt, vnder the name of God twiſe repeated, and the onely begotten ſonne of God, vnder the name of the Angell. For by the Angell he vnderſtandeth the redeemer, the word of God, our Sauiour or the miniſter of Gods helpe and diſpenſation; euen he, I ſay, bleſſe theſe children. Hitherto Lipomanus. who with that ancient Father Cyrill truely vnderſtand by this Angell Ieſus Chriſt, and not any other miniſtring ſpirit, or created Angel. And therefore this place proueth the inuocation of Chriſt, but not of other Angels. By the other words, Let my name be called vpon them, &c. Iacob meant nothing elſe, but that Manaſſes and Ephraim Ioſephs ſonnes ſhould be counted amongſt his ſonnes, to make vp the twelue tribes of Iſrael. And euen ſo Frier Lyra doth truely expound it in theſe words: Inuocetur ſuper cos nomen meum, quia vocati ſunt filij adoptiui Iacob, & facti ſunt capita 
                  
                     Lyra in 48. cap. Geneſ.
                   
                  duarum tribuum, ſicut alij filij Iacob: that is, Let my name be called vpon them, becauſe they were called the adopt ſonnes of Iacob, and were made the heads of two tribes, as were his other ſonnes. This phraſe of ſpeech is ſo vſed in other places of Scripture as Iſa. 4. 1. In that day ſeuen women ſhall lay hold of one man, ſaying, we will eate our owne bread, and we will weare our owne garments: onely let thy name be called vpon vs, and take away our reproch. Whereby is meant, that he ſhould be their husband, and they counted and called his wiues. The like phraſe is 2. Sam. 12. 28. Hierem. 7. 10. &c. And therefore that this expoſition of this place, whereby they go about to proue inuocation of Saints, is a priuate and falſe expoſition, any man may eaſily perceiue; And this is the more euident, for that ſome great papiſts are forced to confeſſe that inuocation of Saints is not commended nor commaunded in al the Scriptures. There is one Francis Hamilton a Scot, a papiſt, and fugitiue prior of S. Iames at Herbipolis in Germanie, who in a diſcourſe concerning inuocation of Saints writeth thus: Porro lihic
                  
                  concedimus, diſertis ſcripturarum verbis ipſam (inuocationem ſanctorum) non commendari. Quibus enim? cuius authoris? cuius libri? cuius inſtrumenti? Noui an veteris? 
                  
                     Franciſt. Hamiltonius de Iunocat. Sancto. demonſtrat. priore in appendice pag. 37. 81. 
                  commendantur Sancti, commendatur oratio, quam pro nobis ad deum faciunt: vt ipſos inuocemus, atque vt pro nobis orent, rogemus nullo loco commendatur. Vbi conſulatur, locus demonſtrari non poteſt. Sed neque conueniebat, vt aut commendaretur aut conſuleretur, naſcentis maxime eccleſiae exordijs: ne plures ſibi deos more gentium fingere aut conſtituere exiſtimarentur chriſtiani, quando etiam in ſuſpicionē Idololatriae venerunt, dū ſub ſpecie panis & vini verum deum colerent. 83. praecepta ne eſt? Non eſt praecepta, &c. that is, Moreouer we doe heere willingly graunt, that inuocation of Saints is not commended to vs by expreſſe words of the Scriptures. For by what words? of what authors? of what booke? of which teſtament? the new or the old? Saints are commended, prayer which they make to God for vs is commended: but that we ſhould call vpon them, and that we ſhould intreate them to pray for vs, is in no place commended. No place cā be ſhewed, where it is counſelled. Neither was it couenient that it ſhould be either commended or counſelled, eſpecially in the beginning of the Church ariſing, leſt chriſtians ſhould be thought to make vnto themſelues after the maner of the gentiles moe Gods: ſeeing they were ſuſpected of Idolatrie for worſhipping the true God vnder the forme of breade and wine. 83. Is it commaunded? It is not commaunded. Hitherto the words of this Papiſt Hamilton, by which it appeareth that inuocation of Saints is not commaunded nor counſelled in the Scriptures, and therefore they doe wreſt them, and bring a priuate and falſe expoſition to them, which ſeeke to proue it by them. You quote alſo in the margent Apoc. 1. 4. where at a man might well wonder, that you would quote a place ſo impertinent for this purpoſe, but that it is euer vſuall amongſt you and your fellowes in ſuch ſort to abuſe the word of God. The words of Saint Iohn be theſe: Iohn to the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia, Grace be with you and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come,
                  
                  and from the ſeuen ſpirits which are before his throne, and from Ieſus Chriſt, &c. What meaneth this man to alledge this for inuocation of Saints? will he by theſe ſeuen ſpirits vnderſtand the Saints? either he knoweth little, or he cannot be ignorant that this is expounded of the holy Ghoſt, who although he be in perſon one, yet by the communication of his vertue, and demonſtration of his diuine workes in thoſe ſeuen Churches, doth ſo perfectly ſhew himſelfe, as though there were ſo many ſpirits, euery one working in his peculiar Church. Ambroſe ſet out by Doctor Tunſtall Biſhop of Dureſme writeth vpon theſe words thus. Hic tota trinitas demonſtratur: that is, heere the whole Trinitie is ſhewed: and a little after: Per ſeptem autem ſpiritus, ſpiritus ſanctus eò quod ſit ſeptiformis intelligitur: that is, By the ſeuen ſpirits the holy Ghoſt is vnderſtoode, becauſe he worketh ſeuen manner of wayes. And hard it were, or rather abſurd, to pray for grace and peace from Saints, and that before Ieſus Chriſt: But vpon this I will not ſtand; onely the reader may conſider how barren this cauſe is, which hath no plainer proofes, and driueth this man to ſuch priuate and falſe expoſition of Gods word. Now whereas you ſay that by prayer you glorifie the Saints in heauen: I ſay, that by prayer we doe glorifie God: Call vpon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie 
                  
                     Pſal. 50. 15. 
                  me. But that by prayer we ſhould glorifie Saints, I doe not finde in all the holy Scriptures. If this man can, why doth he not ſhew it? I finde that God will not giue his glorie to any other, and that the Saints with Dauid ſay: Not 
                  
                     Iſa. 42. 8. Pſal. 115. 1. 
                  vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the glorie, for thy louing mercie and thy truths ſake. And that the Angell would not be worſhiped or glorified, but ſaid vnto Iohn 
                  
                     Apoc. 19. 10. 21. 8. worſhip God. As touching the Saints mediation, when Ieſus Chriſt ſhall ceaſe to be our mediator, and to ſit at the right hand of God to make interceſſion for vs, then we will ſeeke to your mediation of Saints. In the meane time take you heede, that in attributing that to the Saints, which is proper and peculiar to the ſonne of God, yea which he hath bought with his bloud, you doe not deny

the Lord which hath bought vs, and that you doe not horribly diſhonor thoſe Saints, and make Idols of them. Furthermore you ſay that we deny the communion of the Church militant, and the ſoules in purgatorie, &c. Whereunto I anſwer, yt when you ſhal plainely and pithily proue this your fayned fire of purgatorie (which the Greeke Church alwayes hath denyed) then we wil yeeld vnto you, and graunt our ſelues to be to blame, in not helping theſe ſeely ſoules with dirges, maſſes, &c. out of the paines of this forged fire. You quote in your margent for proofe thereof, 1. Cor. 3. v. 15. & 15. v. 29. Alas poore purgatorie, that hath no better proofes. The words of S. Paul in the firſt place be theſe: If a mans worke burne, he ſhall loſe, but he ſhall be ſaued himſelfe: neuertheleſſe yet as it were by fire. Here is mention of fire, and therfore it muſt needs be the fire of purgatorie: for ſuch is the great iudgement of theſe worthie writers, that if they reade in the Scriptures or Fathers this word fire, it is none other but the fire of purgatorie: if ſacrifice, it is the ſacrifice of the Maſſe: if confeſſiō, it can be nothing but auricular confeſſion to the prieſt: if tradition, it is vnwrittē verities or vanities. But touching theſe places of S. Paul, becauſe the author of this Pamphlet doth not alledge them, but barely quote them, I will but briefely touch them. To the firſt I ſay, that S. Paul there ſpeaketh not of all men, but onely of teachers and preachers, which be builders of Gods houſe and Church, which euen Bellarmine confeſſeth. Secondly, he ſpeaketh not of all their workes, but onely 
                     Tom. 1. contr. 6. de purgat. lib. 1. cap. 4. of their doctrine whereby they build the Church of God. Thirdly, he ſpeaketh not of the purging of workes or perſons, but of the probation of doctrines. Fourthly, the works are ſaid to be proued, and not the perſons. Laſtly, if this place ſhould be vnderſtood of purgatorie, then euery man ſhould bee throwne into it, for it is ſaid the fire ſhall try euery mans worke of what ſort it is: but this is contrarie to the doctrine of the papiſts, who will not haue all men come into purgatorie. Theſe things plainly ſhew that this place cannot be vnderſtoode of purgatorie: Saint Auguſtine in many places doth vnderſtand it of the afflictions

and troubles ſuſtained in this life, and not of the paines of Purgatorie after this life, Enchir. ad Laurentium cap. 68. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21 cap. 26. de ſide & operibus cap. 16. in Pſal. 80. But S. Paul ſpeaketh of triall of doctrine, ſhewing that as the fire trieth mettals, ſo the light of Gods truth trieth doctrines: and as gold and ſiluer abide in the fire, and hay and ſtubble be conſumed: ſo true, ſound, and holy doctrines abide the light and triall of Gods word; when either vntrue doctrines or vaine ſpeculations periſh and be conſumed. So doth S. Ambroſe expound it: Mala doctrina in 
                  
                     Ambroſ. in 1. Cor. 3. 
                  igne omnibus apparebit, nunc enim quoſdam fallit: that is, Euill doctrine ſhall appeare vnto all in the fire, for now it deceiueth ſome. Againe, Mala enim & adultera doctrina idcirco in ligno, foeno, & ſtipula ſignificata eſt, vt ostenderetur ignis eſſe eſca: that is, Euill and counterfeit doctrine is therfore ſignified by wood, hay, and ſtubble, that it might be ſhewed, that it is but meate to be conſumed of fire. And againe, Ignis ergo hic Christi ſermo eſt: & bonus ignis, &c. 
                  
                     Idē in Pſal. 118. in haec verba, ignitum eloquiū 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   This fire is the word of Chriſt, and it is a good fire, which warmeth, but burneth not but onely ſinnes. By this fire that gold of the Apoſtle laid vpon the good foundation is tried. By this fire that ſiluer of manners or workes is proued. By this fire thoſe pretious ſtones are lightened: but the hay and ſtubble is conſumed. Therefore this fire clenſeth the ſoule, and conſumeth error. Hitherto S. Ambroſe: whereby we may ſee yt neither S. Auguſtine, nor S. Ambroſe expound this place of Purgatorie, much leſſe the Greeke Fathers, who neuer acknowledged it. Therfore to expoūd it of Purgatorie, as the Papiſts do, whether it be not a priuate & falſe expoſition, let ye godly reader vprightly iudge.
               The words of the other place here quoted are theſe: Elſe what ſhall they doe, which are baptized for the dead: if the dead riſe not at all, why are they then baptized for dead? To picke Purgatorie pickpurſe out of this place paſſeth my skill. Here is mention made of baptiſme for the dead: but neither of Purgatorie, nor of prayer for the dead. I am not ignorant that there be ſundrie expoſitions of this place: yet I doe not remember that euer I read it expounded of Purgatorie,

or applied vnto it. And therefore I will write no more at this preſent of it, but wil expect a ſyllogiſme to be made of it for the proofes of Purgatorie, and then I ſhall further conſider what to ſay vnto it. We doe beleeue that they onely be members of that bodie whereof Chriſt Ieſus is the head, which be either triumphing with him in heauen: or be fighting for him againſt Satan, ſinne, and the world here vpon earth. Saint Paul ſaith, that Chriſt came to 
                  
                     Coloſſ. 12. 0. 
                  make peace by the blood of his croſſe, and to reconcile the things which are in earth, and the things which are in heauen. That is to ſay, his whole vniuerſall Church, whereof part was alreadie in heauen, and part remained behinde vpon the earth. They therefore that be in Purgatorie, be no members of his bodie, nor are to be deliuered by him: but being the Popes creatures, are either by him (who can at his pleaſure emptie and ſcoure Purgatorie) to be deliuered, or elſe ſtill in that fained fire to be tormented. Neither hath true Chriſtian charitie ſo much, as the curſed couetouſnes of Prieſts, been the bellowes to blow that forged fire for the heating of their kitchens.
               Now that I haue anſwered your reaſonleſſe reaſons of our denying this article of Chriſtian faith, the communion of Saints, I will briefly ſhew what is our beleefe of it. We beleeue that al the Saints of God, and members of the holie Catholike Church haue communion and fellowſhip with Ieſus Chriſt, and are partakers of all his benefits. Of this communion Chriſt ſpeaketh: I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the ſame bringeth 
                  
                     Ioh. 15. 5. 
                  forth much fruite. Of this ſpeaketh S. Paul: God is faithfull, by whom ye are called vnto the fellowſhip of his ſonne Ieſus 
                  1. Cor. 1. 9. 
                  Chriſt our Lord. This communion or fellowſhip is wrought by faith, by the which Chriſt dwelleth in the hearts of all his elect and faithfull people, and by which wee be graffed 
                     Epheſ. 3. 17. into him to receiue all grace and goodnes from him as the branch doth from the vine or ſtocke. And we beleeue that all the faithfull and godly be knit together in loue, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, whereby they are to communicate thoſe 
                     Coloſſ. 2. 2. graces and gifts, which God hath beſtowed vpon them, to

the edifiyng and helping of others, in ſuch ſort as God hath appointed. Yea we beleeue that all the faithfull haue communion and fellowſhip together in that they haue all one heauenly father, one Ieſus Chriſt their redeemer and mediatour, one holy Ghoſt their ſanctifier, are iuſtified by one faith common to all the elect, dedicated to God by one baptiſme, called by one Goſpell to be partakers of one kingdome of glorie. This is the ſumme of our beleefe concerning this article, wherein wee would know what fault you can finde. But your communion and vnion conſiſteth in being vnder one Pope of Rome, vnder whoſe obedience whoſoeuer is not, you think he cannot be ſaued, as is before ſhewed; neither will you haue communion with him: And therefore whereas Chriſtianitie hath continued (as I ſaid before) in Greece, Ruſſia, Aethiopia, Armenia, and other countries, amongſt whom no doubt but God hath had, and now hath his elect and choſen people, yet you haue no communion or fellowſhip with them, becauſe they be not vnder your owne Pope. And much leſſe haue you communion with the Saints in heauen, becauſe you haue not the faith of Gods elect. For did the faithfull Patriarkes, Prophets, Apoſtles and others beleeue to be 
                     Ti
                           •••
                        
                      1. 1. deliuered from the fire of hell by the merits of Nicholas, or to aſcend into heauen by the blood of Thomas Becket? Nay Ieſus Chriſt is the onely mercie ſeate, into the which the two Cherubinis did looke, that is, as I take it, both the faithfull before his comming in the fleſh, and they that be after doe looke onely vpon Chriſt, in him onely to ſeeke and finde mercie.
               Now let vs ſee the third article of our Creed, which you ſay we denie, which is Remiſſion of ſinnes. Here I beſeech the Chriſtian reader to conſider who they be that denie this article, containing a principall point of Chriſtian religion and ſaluation, whether wee or this accuſer with his partners. Wee beleeue, that whereas wee be children of wrath, vnprofitable ſeruants, and prodigall children, that haue ſinned againſt heauen and our heauenly father, and are ſo deeply indebted to God, that wee be neuer able to

make payment, for the which he might iuſtly throw vs into the dungeon of damnation for euer: wee I ſay beleeue that he hath giuen his onely begotten ſonne, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him, ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting 
                     Ioh. 3. 16. life, by whom wee haue redemption through his 
                     Epheſ. 1. 7. blood, euen the forgiuenes of ſinnes, according to his rich 
                     Coloſſ. 2. 14. grace, and that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs for his names 1. Ioh. 2. 12. ſake. And we beleeue that God of his great mercie in Ieſus Chriſt doth forgiue vs not onely our ſinnes, but alſo the puniſhment due vnto them, and which wee haue deſerued by them, accepting vs for veſſels of his mercie, and heires of his glorie. Now this accuſer of vs, and his companions doe firſt beleeue, that they doe make ſatisfaction to Gods iuſtice for their ſinnes: which is a flat deniall of the forgiuenes of our ſinnes. For whereas our ſinnes be called debts, and ſatisfaction is a paiment; it followeth, that if we doe make ſatisfaction for them, then we neither need, nor can haue forgiuenes of them. For our ſatisfaction, and Gods forgiuenes cannot ſtand together. For euen as if I owe a man a hundreth pounds, and I pay him, he doth not forgiue it; and if he forgiue it, I doe not pay it: So if we by ſatisfaction make paiment to God for our ſinnes, then hee doth not forgiue them; if hee forgiue them, then wee doe not make ſatisfaction for them.
               Now let vs ſee, what is the doctrine of theſe men concerning this their ſatisfaction, whereby they make paiment themſelues to God for their debts. Biſhop Fiſher, whom I ſuppoſe the Pope hath ſainted for ſtanding ſo ſtifly in his cauſe, writeth hereof thus: Thirdly, ſome there 
                     Iohn Fiſher in Pſal. 1. poenitens.
                   be, which by grace in this life haue ſo puniſhed themſelues for their offences, that they haue made a ſufficient recompence for them. Againe: So doth heartie weeping for ſinne, expell ſinne, and is a ſufficient and iuſt recompence Ibidem. for it. And againe: But whereas any creature haue made due ſatisfaction in this life, he neuer after ſhall ſuffer more 
                     In Pſal. 2. poenitent.
                   paine, and alſo is cleane out of debt, and nothing after that ſhall euer be claimed of him. Againe, They be called recti corde, that haue made ſatisfaction ſo plentifully, that God Ibidem.
                  
can aske no more of them. And in his Latin booke againſt Luther he hath theſe words: Secundo ſupponimus, quod quanquam nemo ſit cui non cumulatius praemium in coelis Deus largiatur, 
                  
                     Idem in confur. aſſert. Luther, articulo 17. 
                  quàm hic in terris ipſe meruit, innumeri tamen ſunt, qui longè grauiores aerumnas pertulerunt quàm adſuorum ſuffeciſſent delictorum expiationem: that is, Secondly, wee make this ſuppoſition, that although there is none, to whom God doth not giue a greater reward in heauen, then hee hath merited and deſerued: yet there be many which haue ſuffered farre more grieuous griefes and puniſhments, then would haue ſufficed to the expiation and purging away of their ſinnes. This is their doctrine, and is this to beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes? or is it not rather to denie 2. Pet. 2. the Lord Ieſus that hath bought vs? For I may ſay with S. Paul, that if righteouſnes come by the law (or by 
                     Galat. 2. our ſatisfaction) then Chriſt died in vaine. And with what face can theſe men accuſe vs of denying this article, The forgiuenes of ſinnes, themſelues teaching ſuch blaſphemous doctrine, ſo manifeſtly oppoſite and contrarie vnto it? Againe, they denie the forgiuenes of the puniſhment due for ſinne, ſaying, that Chriſt hath deliuered vs à culpa from the fault or offence, but not à poena from the puniſhment; or at leaſtwiſe he hath deliuered vs from eternall puniſhment, but not from temporall, which muſt be ſuſtained in Purgatorie, whereby our ſinnes or ſoules muſt be purged, and Gods iuſtice ſatisfied. And yet the Popes Pardons, Maſſes and Dirges may diſcharge and deliuer from it. Wherein firſt, what doe they but extenuate, and greatly diminiſh the vertue and power of Chriſts death? For if our Sauiour Chriſt haue not deliuered vs from the puniſhment due to our ſinnes, what great good hath hee done vs? And if he haue diſcharged vs from eternall puniſhment in hell, but not from the temporall in Purgatorie, then is he not a full and perfect Sauiour, but an halfe Sauiour. Haue you the teſtimonie of all Antiquitie for this doctrine? Tertullian ſaith, Exempto ſcilicet reatu, eximitur & poena: that is, The guiltines of ſinne being taken away, the Tertull. lib. de baptiſmo. puniſhment is alſo taken away. And Chryſostome ſaith:

                  Vbi enim gratia, ibi & venia: vbi verò venia, illic nulla erit 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. ad Rom. Homil. 8. 
                  poena: that is, Where grace is, there is forgiuenes: & where forgiuenes is, there ſhall be no puniſhment. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Ablato ergo peccato, auferetur & poena peccati: The ſin 
                     Auguſt. de vera relig. cap. 13. being taken away, the puniſhment of ſinne ſhall alſo be taken away. By this let it be diſcerned who they be that denie this article of the forgiuenes of ſinne. Moreouer, let the Chriſtian reader conſider how they attribute firſt that to their Purgatorie, which is proper to the blood of Chriſt, which, as S. Iohn ſaith, clenſeth vs from all ſinne: and ſecondly, 1. Ioh. 1. more to their Dirges, Maſſes, Pardons, and ſuch paltries, then they doe to the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt. For they may deliuer from the paines of Purgatorie, but Chriſts death doth not. O coelum non ſudas, ô terra, non tremes? &c.
               
               But now let vs come to your proofe of this your accuſation of our denying of this article. Your firſt reaſon is, that wee acknowledge no ſuch effect in the Sacrament of Baptiſme, &c. We acknowledge that baptiſme is a Sacrament of the forgiuenes of our ſinnes, by the death and paſſion of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, whereby our faith is confirmed, and wee aſſured, that as water waſheth away the filth of the bodie, ſo all the filth and guiltines of our ſinnes is ſo purged in the blood of Chriſt, that wee be accepted for iuſt and righteous before God. But we do not acknowledge that Baptiſme, or any other Sacrament, do conferre grace of themſelues, or haue grace included in them as in a veſſell: but wee affirme that they be ſeales of Gods promiſes, and inſtruments whereby God worketh in his elect and choſen people thoſe graces, which he hath in his word promiſed, and Ieſus Chriſt hath purchaſed for them. But all that be outwardly baptized, be not inwardly clenſed, as Simon Magus, who being baptized, was yet ſtill in the 
                     Act. 8. gall of bitternes, and in the bond of iniquitie. For the ſpirit of God worketh by them in whom, when, and how much it pleaſeth him. Neither doe we beleeue that Baptiſme ſerueth onely for the remiſſion of ſinnes committed before it, as you ſay here, but that the vſe and benefit of it,

pertaineth to our whole life, continually to aſſure vs, and confirme our faith in the forgiuenes of al our ſinnes by Ieſus Chriſt. And whereas you ſay, that this our doctrine is contrarie to the expreſſe word of God, which calleth this Sacrament the lauer of regeneration, for that in it the ſoule dead by ſinne is newly regenerate by grace: I anſwere that Baptiſme is ſo farre from being in this place of S. Paul expreſſed, that it is not mentioned, neither neceſſarily to be vnderſtanded. Saint Pauls ſweet words be theſe: When the bountifulnes and loue of God our Sauiour towards man appeared, not by the workes of righteouſnes, which wee had 
                  
                     Tit. 3. 4. 
                  done, but according to his mercie he ſaued vs, by the waſhing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghoſt, which he ſhed on vs aboundantly through Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour. Where is baptiſme here mentioned? or expreſſed to be the lauer of regeneration? Saint Paul doth here attribute this waſhing, whereby wee be regenerate and renewed, to the holie Ghoſt, alluding as it were to the words of God, by the Prophet Ezechiel: Then will I powre cleane water vpon you, 
                  
                     Ezech. 36. 25. 
                  and ye ſhall be cleane: yea from all your filthines, and from all your Idols will I clenſe you. By this cleane water is vnderſtood the ſpirit of God, as it is expounded in the two next verſes following. I confeſſe that Baptiſme is a Sacrament and pledge vnto vs of this waſhing and clenſing of the holie Ghoſt, to whom this waſhing is to be attributed, and not to baptiſme, as though it were included in it, or affixed to it: for (as I ſaid) many be outwardly baptized, which be not inwardly clenſed, but only the faithfull children of God, in whom Gods ſpirit inwardly worketh that, which by the word of God is promiſed, and in baptiſme ſealed and confirmed. And therefore this lauer is the ſpirit of God, by whom we be regenerated and renewed. Saint Augustine ſaith well: Ea demum miſerabilis eſt ſeruitus ſigna prorebus accipere, & ſupra creaturam corpoream oculum 
                  
                     Auguſt. lib. 3. de doctr. Chriſt. cap. 5. 
                  mentis ad hauriendum aeternū lumen leuare non poſſe: that is, This is miſerable ſeruitude to take the ſignes for the things ſignified, and not to be able to lift vp the eye of the minde aboue the corporeall creature to receiue eternall light.
               
                  
Your ſecond proofe is, that we allow not the ſacrament Penance, wherin all actuall ſins committed after Baptiſme are cancelled. Your popiſh penance conſiſting in ſhriuing to a Prieſt, receiuing abſolution frō him, & doing ſome 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , wil worſhippings appointed by him, we allow not: but true repentance, which conſiſteth in vnfained ſorrow for ſinne, earneſt confeſſion with remorſe of conſcience both to God and man offended, and a true reformation and amendment of life we allow and commend, and doe iudge that we can do nothing acceptable to God, which proceedeth not from this true repentance.
               The third thing whereby you would proue that we denie this article of remiſſion of ſinnes, which you ſay exceedeth all in abſurditie, is that we denie that our ſins are perfectly forgiuen, but only not imputed, & as it were veiled or couered with the paſſion of Chriſt, &c. Wherunto I anſwer, that you here bring an abſurd diſtinction. For what difference is there betweene forgiuing, not imputing, and couering and hiding of ſinne? Surely it ſeemeth that Dauid could find no ſuch ods betwixt them as you dreame of, whoſe words be theſe: Bleſſed is he whoſe wickedneſſe is forgiuen, and whoſe ſinne is couered. Bleſſed is the man, vnto whom 
                  
                     Pſal. 32. 1. 
                  the Lord imputeth not iniquitie, and in whoſe ſpirit there is no guile. Doth not Dauid here take theſe all for one, & attribute bleſſednes alike to euery one of thē? Whē S. Paul ſaith God was in Chriſt, and recōciled the world to himſelf, not imputing 
                  2. Cor. 5. 19. 
                  their ſins vnto them: what doth he meane by not imputing of ſin, but forgiuing of ſin? Primaſius expoundeth it Primaſius in illum locum. thus: Non reputans illis delicta ipſorum: hoc eſt, indulgens per ſolam fidem, quae gratis donata est: i. Not imputing to them their ſinnes: that is to ſay, pardoning them by only faith, which is freely giuen. And whereas you ſo much extenuate, Not imputing, and make it not ſo much as Forgiuing; Chryſostome a man of greater iudgement then you, affirmeth the contrarie, and maketh not imputing greater then 
                     Chryſoſtom. in 2. Corinth. hom. 11 
                  forgiuing, in theſe words: Attamen cùm tanta ſint noſtra peccata, non ſolum non expoſcit poenam, ſed & conciliatus eſt: non ſolùm dimiſit, ſed neque imputauit, &c. that is, But whereas

our ſinnes be ſo great, he doth not only not require puniſhment, but alſo is reconciled with vs: and not onely hath forgiuen, but hath not ſo much as imputed our ſins to vs. Bernard thinketh not baſely of not imputing as you do, his ſweete words be theſe: Sufficit mihi ad omnem iuſtitiam ſolum habere propitium cui ſoli peccaui: Omne quod mihi ipſe non 
                  
                     Bernard. in Cant. ſerm. 23. 
                  imputare decreuerit, ſic eſt quaſinon fuerit. Non peccare, Dei iuſtitia est: hominis iuſtitia indulgentia Dei: that is, It is ſufficient for me vnto all righteouſneſſe, to haue him mercifull, againſt whom onely I haue ſinned: whatſoeuer he hath determined not to impute vnto me, is ſo as though it had neuer beene. Not to ſinne is the iuſtice of God: mans iuſtice is Gods mercie. Bernard here ſaith, that the not imputing of our ſins vnto vs, is as much as though they had neuer beene committed: And will you ſay that notwithſtanding the not imputing of them, yet their botches, biles, filth and abomination remaine ſtill, exhaling a moſt peſtiferous ſent in the ſight of God? Is not the ſweet ſmelling ſacrifice of Ieſus Chriſt able ſo to perfume them and vs, that we and all our actions may be ſweet and acceptable 
                     Epheſ. 5. 2. in the ſight of God? And if the robe which the Father put vpon his prodigall ſonne could ſo hide all his 
                     Luk. 15. ragges, that he was deare in his fathers eyes; cannot the robe of Chriſts righteouſneſſe ſo couer and hide all our ragges, yea our botches, and biles, that we may bee deare and precious in the ſight of God our heauenly and moſt mercifull father? And if thoſe that had the mariage garment 
                     Matth. 22. 12. vpon them, were admitted to the mariage, without regard what the ſaid garment couered: ſhall not we hauing the mariage garment of Chriſts righteouſnes, be acpted to the mariage of the Lambe, notwithſtanding all the botches and biles which it couereth? Yet we doe not ſay that we can couer or hide all our ſinnes from the piereing eyes of God: but this we ſay, that euen God himſelfe doth hide them with this robe of Chriſts righteouſneſſe, and looking on vs in the face of Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne, doth accept vs his members, for ſuch as Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe is. And do you not think that that which God hideth

is well hid, and ſhall neuer come to light? Dauid ſaith of God, Thou haſt forgiuen the iniquitie of thy people, and couered 
                  
                     Pſal. 85. 2. 
                  all their ſinnes. Doth not Dauid here take forgiueneſſe and hiding both for one? And therefore this your diſtinction betwixt perfect forgiuing, and not imputing & couering, is as ſubſtantiall a one, as that is of your blind and barbarous Schooleman Richardus de Sancto Victore: Chriſtus potuit 
                  
                     Ri. de S. Victore de poteſtate ligandi & ſcluendi par. 1. cap. 14 
                  dimittere peccata: nos verò non poſſumus dimittere peccata, ſed tantum remittere. As great difference as there is betwixt dimittere and remittere, ſo much there is betwixt forgiuing, not imputing, and couering of ſin. This is (as Eraſmus ſaith) Frigidiſſimis diſtinctionibus omnia confundere: that is, with friuolous diſtinctions to confound all Eraſmus in vita Hieronymi. things. And this much for this Article of the Creede, which you do as fooliſhly proue, as you falſly affirm that wee denie it.
               Now I come to the fourth Article that you ſay the Puritanes in effect denie, which is no leſſe, then Chriſt to bee the Sonne of God. But who bee theſe Puritanes that bee thus grieuouſly charged? what are their names? why be not their bookes named, and ſayings produced? Theſe things ought to haue beene done, if you had beene diſpoſed rather ratiocinari quā calumniari: that is, to reaſon, then 
                     Pag. 50. to raile and ſlaunder.
               But to this your malicious and falſe accuſation I wil firſt oppoſe the true confeſſion of faith concerning this article, whereunto all the reformed Churches whereof I haue either heard or read do aſſent and agree. We beleeue and Ex Gall. confeſſione. acknowledge one onely God, who is one onely and ſimple eſſence, ſpirituall, eternall, inuiſible, immutable, infinite, incomprehenſible, almightie, moſt wiſe, good, iuſt, and mercifull; and that in that one and ſimple diuine eſſence, there be three perſons ſubſiſting, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghoſt. The Father the firſt cauſe in order, and the beginning of all things; the Sonne his wiſedome and euerlaſting word: the holy Ghoſt his true power and efficacie. The Sonne begotten of the Father from euerlaſting: the holy Ghoſt from euerlaſting proceeding from the

Father and the Sonne: which three perſons are not confounded, but diſtinct; and yet not deuided, but coëſſentiall, coëternall, and coëquall. If you miſlike any thing in this confeſſion confute it: if you know any of vs that maintaine any diuers doctrine diſſenting from this, name them, produce their ſayings, and quote the places. But you ſay that theſe (whom you terme puritanes) peremptorily affirme, that Chriſt is God of himſelfe, and not God of God: So that he receiueth not his diuinitie from his father. I anſwere, that if we conſider of Chriſt abſolutely in reſpect of the eſſence, he is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , God of himſelfe, to whom all things doe agree which are ſpoken of the diuine eſſence by it ſelfe: but if we conſider of him in reſpect of his perſon, he is not of himſelfe, but ſonne of the father, yet coëternall and coëſſentiall. So ſaith Saint Auguſtine, Chriſtus ad ſe deus 
                  
                     Auguſt. hom. de temper. 38. 
                  dicitur, ad patrem filius dicitur: that is, Chriſt in reſpect of himſelfe is called God, and in reſpect of the Father is called ſonne. Saint Baſil ſaith that it was an vndoubted principle of diuinitie in all ages: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     Lib. 1. contra. Eunomium.
                   that is, The godhead to be begotten neither of it himſelfe, nor of any other, but to be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   vnbegotten. And that Chriſt is God of himſelfe I proue it thus: He that is Iehoua, is God of himſelfe: Chriſt is Iehoua: ergo Chriſt is God of himſelfe. The firſt propoſition cannot be denyed: for God is called Iehoua, becauſe he hath his being of himſelfe, and all others haue their being of him: And that Chriſt is Iehoua, I thinke you will not deny, and if you doe, it may eaſily be proued. For he that appeared to Eſaias the Prophet cap. 6. and is there called Iehoua verſ. 3. is ſaid of Saint Iohn to be Chriſt in theſe words. Theſe things ſaid Eſaias, when he ſaw his glory and ſpake of him. That which 
                     Ioh. 12. 41. 
                  Eſaias. cap. 18. 13. 14. ſpeaketh of Iehoua; Saint Paul Rom. 9. 33. expoundeth of Chriſt. The Angel that appeared to Moſes in the buſh is called Iehoua: but Chriſt who is called the Angel of the couenant, and the Angel of the 
                     Exod. 3. 2. 7. great counſell, was that Angel, ergo Chriſt is I
                        •
                     houa: And ſo conſequently is God of himſelfe. And therefore Epiphanius 
                  
                     Epipha. hareſ. 69. (whom I truſt you will not terme a Puritane) calleth

Chriſt, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , God of himſelfe. The Fathers of the Nicene councell in calling Chriſt God of God, did thereby ſignifie that he is coëſſentiall, and of the ſame ſubſtance with the Father, and not as you falſely affirme that he receiued his diuinitie of his Father, which is in effect to make Chriſt no God. For it is proper to God to be of himſelfe. The deitie is the diuine eſſence, which is one and ſingular, and the ſame wholy in the Father, in the ſonne, and in the holy Ghoſt. And ſo we acknowledge a Trinitie of perſons, and a vnitie of eſſence, that is one only God. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſaith Saint Baſil &c. it is manifeſt that the names of Father 
                     Lib. 2. contra. Eunomium.
                   and ſonne doe not ſignifie the eſſence, but the proprieties of the perſons. So Damaſcene ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that is, The deitie ſignifieth the nature 
                     De orthodox fide lib. 3. cap. 11. (or eſſence) the word Father, the perſon. And the eſſence is wholy in the Father, wholy in the ſonne, and wholy in the holy Ghoſt, as euen your great Maſter of the ſentences Peter Lumbard confeſſeth; ſo that the Father is God of himſelfe, the Sonne God of himſelfe, the holy 
                     Peter Lumb. lib. 1. diſt. 5. cap. 1. Ghoſt God of himſelfe: and yet not three Gods, but one true and immortall God. And therefore with Athanaſius wee worſhip a vnitie in Trinitie, and Trinitie in vnitie.
               The fift article, which you ſay thoſe whom you diſdainfully call Puritaines doe deny, is the deſcenſion of Chriſt into Hell. Can you ſhew and name any ſuch puritanes which omit this article either in rehearſing it, or in expounding it, as you haue done the ſecond commaundement of God? I am ſure you cannot. Why doe you then ſay that they deny it? forſooth becauſe they receiue not your expoſition of it, to wit, that Chriſt deſcended in ſoule to Hell, and was there as long as his body was in the graue, and there harrowed Hell, and deliuered thence 
                     Catechiſ. Trident pag. 69. In Act. 2. the patriarkes, and all iuſt men there houlden in bondage vnto his death, as your Rhemiſts write. And doe all that receiue not this expoſition deny this article? Then did your owne Doctor Durand deny this article, who held and publiſhed in writing that Chriſts ſoule did not in 
                     Durand. in 3. A 22. q. 3.
                  
reſpect of the ſubſtance and eſſence thereof, but by effect, efficacy and operation deſcend into Hell. Then did Iohn 
                  
                     Io. Picus Apel. quaeſt. 1. in Tho. Aqui. 3. quaeſt. 52. 
                  Picus that learned Earle of Mirandula, and Cardinall Caietane, (whom the Pope ſent into Germanie to ſuppreſſe Luther) deny this article, who concurre and agree with Durand: yea I might ſay that then either Saint Cyprian or Ruffin denyed this article, who expoundeth it of Chriſts buriall. But you ſay that theſe nameles Puritans defend that Chriſt ſuffered the paines of Hell vpon the croſſe, whereby they blaſpheme moſt horribly that ſacred humanitie, as if Chriſt had deſpaired of his ſaluation, as if God had hated him, and he had hated God, &c. I anſwere that this doctrine of Chriſts ſuffering the paines of Hell vpon the croſſe, is not ſo deſperate, as your collections thereof are falſe, and blaſphemous. What deſperatnes or abſurditie is this, that Chriſt our Sauior, not in reſpect of himſelfe, but in that he became our ſuretie, and tooke vpon him our debts, and bare our ſinnes in his bodie vpon the wood as Saint Peter ſaith, did beare and indure in his humanitie 1. Pet. 2. the wrath of God, and the paines and torments which our ſinnes had deſerued, to deliuer vs from the wrath of God which we by our ſinnes had prouoked, and from the ſaid paines and torments which we had merited. We are not to thinke, that Chriſt did ſuffer onely an externall and corpōral death, for then he had ſhewed greater weakenes, then many meere natural men haue done, who with great courage and cheerefulneſſe haue gone vnto death: but Chriſt our Sauiour was in ſuch an Agonie, that his ſweate was like drops of bloud trickling downe 
                     Luk. 22. 44. verſ. 43. to the ground, ſo that an Angel appeared from heauen 
                     Math. 27. 46. 32. comforting him: He cryed, and ſaid, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me. Whereby it doth euidently appeare that he ſuffered not onely an outward death of the body, but did in his ſoule wraſtle with the paines of Hell, and beare the burden of Gods wrath, dewe to our ſinnes, to deliuer vs from the ſame, and to purchaſe the loue and mercie of God vnto vs. And when the prophet ſaith of him: He hath borne our infirmities, and carried our ſorrowes: 
                  
                     Iſa. 53. 4. 5. 6.
                  
                  he was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, he was broken for our iniquities: the chaſtiſement of our peace was laid vpō him, and with his ſtripes we are healed. All we like ſheepe haue gone aſtray: we haue turned euery one to his owne way, and the Lord hath laid vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. Did not our Sauiour Chriſt heerein ſuffer the puniſhment which was due to our ſinnes? Saint Paul ſaith, that Chriſt hath redeemed vs from the curſe of the law being made a curſe for vs: for 
                     Galath. 3. 13. it is written, Curſed is euery one that hangeth on the tree, yet Ieſus Chriſt was neuer accurſed of his Father; but he bare in his body and ſoule, the curſe that was due to our ſinnes, to deliuer vs from the curſe of God, and to purchaſe to vs the bleſſing of God. But theſe men (who otherwayes are ſo full of curious diſtinctions) doe herein erre, becauſe they doe not with Saint Auguſtine put a difference betweene that which appertained to Chriſts owne perſon, 
                     Auguſt. in pſal. 21. &c.
                   and that which he ſuffered in the perſon and place of vs, the which if this writer or rather ſlaunderer had done, he might haue abſtained from theſe his blaſphemous collections of his owne, and not our aſſertions: As if Chriſt had deſpaired of his Saluation, or God had hated him, &c. Whereunto I anſwere, that Chriſt was farre from ſuch deſpaire, which properly is a ſinne in the reprobate, and not a puniſhment of Gods iuſtice. And we hould that our Sauiour Chriſt ſuffered in our perſon, and for vs thoſe torments, which are righteous puniſhments of Gods iuſtice againſt ſinne, and not ſuch as properly bee ſinnes in the deuils, and in wicked and reprobate men, as are deſpaire and hatred of God. And therefore we confeſſe with our mouthes, and beleeue with our harts, that Chriſt was neuer hated of his Father, but alwayes the deerely beloued Sonne of God, in whom he was alwayes well pleaſed. But he hated ſinne, the which as man had committed, ſo in mans nature Gods iuſtice was to be ſatisfied. The which for that corrupt and ſinfull man was not able to performe, the Sonne of God as I ſaid, became our ſurety, tooke vpon him our nature, and in the ſame hath ſuffered vpon the croſſe, the puniſhment of Gods anger due to our

ſinnes, and thereby hath ſatisfied Gods iuſtice, pacified his anger, and purchaſed his loue and mercie to all thoſe that truly beleeue in him. And ſo Chriſt was tormented with anguiſh of minde, not for his ſinnes, as you falſely gather, but for our ſinnes, which hee bare in his bodie and ſoule vpon the croſſe: and God was not enemie to God, but enemie to our ſinnes, which were imputed to Chriſt, that his ſatisfaction and righteouſnes might be imputed vnto vs. To conclude, we beleeue that Chriſt ſuffered vpon the croſſe thoſe puniſhments of ſinne which proceede from Gods iuſtice, and be no ſinnes, which in ſome ſenſe may be called the paines of hell, becauſe that as Chriſt by his Deitie ouercame them, and it was impoſſible for him to be held and ouercome of them: ſo the diuell and the reprobate ſhall eternally indure them. And this is no deſperate doctrine, but a moſt comfortable doctrine to aſſure vs, that in Chriſt Gods iuſtice is ſatisfied, our ſinnes are diſcharged, hell is conquered, and wee from it be deliuered. So that we may with the Apoſtle ſay, O death where is thy ſting? O hell where is thy victorie? 
                  1. Cor. 15. 35.
               
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants haue no meane to determine controuerſies, and aboliſh hereſies. 5. Article.
               
               
                  
                     AS the Proteſtants neither know what they beleeue, nor why they beleeue: ſo haue they no meanes in their Church to ſettle them in vnitie of beleefe; nor to determine controuerſies, nor to aboliſh hereſies, as hath the Catholike Church: for our Sauiour Chriſt by his diuine prouidence did foreſee, that hereſies were to ariſe in his Church, as his Apostle S. Paul doth warne vs: the which as plagues were to infect his flocke, and therefore he not onely forewarned vs of them, but alſo gaue vs meanes how to preuent and
                  
                  extinguiſh them. He willed vs to heare his Church; if we would not be accounted as Etlmicks and Publicanes. He ordained Paſtors and Doctors, leſt we ſhould be carried away with euery blaſt of vaine doctrine. He promiſed to the Church the aſſistance of the holy Ghoſt, in ſuch ſort as they which would not heare her, would not heare him. The Catholikes therefore beleeuing certainly that the Church cannot erre: that the generall Councels cannot deliuer falſe doctrine: that the Paſtors and ancient Fathers with ioynt conſent cannot teach vntruths, when hereſies ſpring vp, preſently with the voyce of the Church plucke them vp euen by the rootes, and ſo euer hath practized: and after this manner hath ouerthrowne al encounters, falſe opinions, and errors, which the diuell by his miniſters euer planted, or eſtabliſhed in the world, and ſo they haue been freed from all braules, and quarrels, in matters of religion. But the Proteſtants admitting the ſole Scripture, as vmpire and Iudge in matters of controuerſies; & allowing no infallible interpreter thereof, but remitting all to euery mans priuate ſpirit & ſingular expoſitiō, cannot poſſibly without error winde themſelues out of the laborynth of ſo many controuerſies, wherewith they are now in
                        •••
                     
                     gled, and intricated. And the irreconciliable iarres bet
                        •
                     ixt them and the Puritanes in eſſentiall points of faith, giue ſufficient teſtimonie, that they will neuer haue an end, or can haue an end, holding thoſe grounds of opinion, which they obstinately defend. And finally, they haue no argument to prooue, that they haue the true Church, true religion, true faith, which all heretakes which euer were, will not bring to condemne the Church as well as they. For example, they alleage Scriptures, ſo did the Arrians: they contemne Councels, the Arrians did not regard them: they challenge to themſelues the true interpretation, the ſame did all heretikes to this day. And to conclude, they call themſelues, the little flocke of Chriſt, to whom God hath reuealed his truth, and illuminated them from aboue, all which the Donatiſts with as good reaſon, and better arguments did arrogate vnto themſelues. The ſame I ſay of Pelagians, Nestorians, Eutychians, with all the rabble of other damned heretikes. And to conclude theſe articles of faith, I ſay that if the principles of the Proteſtants religion be true, S. Paul himſelfe exhorteth
                  
                  vs to infidelitie, which I proue thus:
               
               
                  Whoſoeuer exhorteth vs to doubt of that which we are bound to beleeue by faith, exhorteth to infidelitie. But S. Paul doth exhort vs to doubt of our ſaluation, which we are bound to beleeue by faith, according to the Proteſtants religion: Ergo, S. Paul exhorteth vs to infidelitie.
               
               
                  The Maior is plaine: for to doubt of matters in faith is manifeſt infidelitie, becauſe whoſoeuer doubteth, whether God hath reuealed that which indeede he hath reuealed, being ſufficiently propoſed, as reuealed: vertually doubteth whether God ſaith truth or lieth.
               
               
                  The Minor is proued by the teſtimonie of S. Paul: Cum timore & tremore ſalutem veſtram operamini: With fears and trembling worke your ſaluation. All feare whether it be filiall feare or ſeruile feare, includeth doubt, the one of ſinne, the other of puniſhment.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  AS it is falſe that wee neither know what wee beleeue, nor why wee beleeue (as hath been before ſufficiently ſhewed) ſo is it no leſſe falſe, which is here boldly affirmed, but faintly proued: That we haue no meanes in our Church to ſettle vs in vnitie of beleefe, to determine controuerſies, and to aboliſh herefies. We haue the word of God, which wee acknowledge to be the onely touchſtone of truth, concerning religion and ſaluation: We haue learned, and godly Biſhops and Paſtors to teach the truth of Gods word, to confute both by preaching and writing errors and hereſies: And we haue Synodes, although not generall, yet prouinciall, wherein controuerſies may be decided, and hereſies condemned, as heretofore the truth hath beene maintained, and hereſies confuted; and confounded in ſome prouinciall Councels, as that called Gangrenſe, and ſome other Africane Councels, as well as they haue beene in ſome generall. I would faine know of you, what other and better meanes, the Church of God had for the ſpace of

three hundred yeeres after Chriſts in carnation then theſe, to determine controuerſies, and aboliſh hereſies. Generall Councels they had not before Constantines time, which therefore your fellow Papiſt Fighius counteth to 
                     Pigh. 6. de cecleſ. Hierarch. cap. 1. haue been an inuention of his: but your great Rabbin Rob. Bellarmine therein controlleth him, and ſaith it is falſe. 
                     Rellarm. tom. 1. contro. 4. lib. 2. cap. 13. So well theſe men be ſetled in vnitie of beleefe. And to your great Maſter of Rome (whom you now would make the Oracle of the world) there was before that time but 
                     Aeneas Siluius epiſt. 28. pag. 802. ſmall reſpect and regard had, as your owne Pope Pius 2. in theſe words confeſſeth: Ante Concilium Nicenum ſibi quiſque viuebat, & ad Romanam Eccleſiam paruus habebatur reſpectus: i. Before the Councel of Nice, euery one liued to himſelfe, and there was ſmall regard had to the Church of Rome. Shew vs therefore what meanes the Churches of God then had for maintenance of vnitie of faith, which we want?
               You ſay that Chriſt willed vs to heare his Church, if we would not be accounted for Ethnicks and Publicanes. The 
                     Matth. 18. 17. Bellarm. contro 1. lib. 3. cap. 5. which place your ſaid Rob. Bellarmine Reader full wiſely alleageth to proue the Pope and his Councel to be the ſupreme Iudge of controuerſies. As though our Sauiour Chriſt there ſpake of deciding of controuerſies in doctrine, or of expounding the Scriptures; or by the Church meant the Pope and his Councel, and that euery man againſt whom his brother treſpaſſeth, muſt goe to the Pope and his Councel to make his complaint. Theſe be vanities and follies, which nullo impellente ruunt, and neede no confutation. You further alleage out of Ioh. 14. 17. that Chriſt promiſed vnto the Church the aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt: where, by the Church you meane the Pope and his Councell, as your Maſter Bellarmine hath taught you, who writeth vs: Sed hîc in genere dicimus, iudicem veri ſenſus Scripturae & omnium controuerſiarum, eſſe eccleſiam, id 
                  
                     Idem ibid. cap. 3. 
                  eſt Pontificem cum concilio, in quo omnes Catholici] conueniunt: that is, Wee generally ſay, that the Church is the iudge of the true ſenſe of the Scripture, and of all controuerſies, that is to ſay, The Pope with the Councel, wherein

all Catholikes doe aſſemble (or rather diſſemble together). But our Sauiour Chriſt made this promiſe to his diſciples, ſaying: I will pray the Father, and he ſhall giue you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for euer, euen the 
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        h. 14. 16. 17. 
                  ſpirit of truth, whom the world cannot receiue, becauſe it ſeeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him: for he dwelleth with you, and ſhall be in you. This promiſe pertaineth not to all the ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles, but to all them that truly feare God, and beleeue and obey the holy doctrine which Chriſt deliuered to his Diſciples, and which they preached: the which when you ſhall ſoundly proue, that your Popes & Councels do, then we wil grant that this promiſe of Chriſt belongeth to them. In the meane time wee will follow Chryſostomes good counſell: Si videris aliquem Euangelica 
                  Chryſoſt. Hom. de Sancto & adorando ſpiritu. 
                  repetentem, profecto ſpiritum ſanctum habet. Venidt enins ſpiritus ſanctus vt recordari vos faciat eorum, quae docui. Si quis igitur corum, qui dicuntur habere ſpiritum ſanctum dicat aliquid a ſcipſo, & non ex Euangeliji, non crodite, meam doctrinam ſequimini: that is, If thou ſee any man ſpeaking out of the Goſpell, ſurely he hath the holy Ghoſt. For the holy Ghoſt ſhal come to put you in remembrance of thoſe things which I haue taught you. If therefore any of them, which are ſaid to haue the holy Ghoſt, doe ſpeake any thing of himſelfe, and not out of the Goſpels, beleeue him not, but follow my doctrine. Whereas you ſay, that you beleeue certainly that the Church cannot erre, that the generall Councels cannot deliuer falſe doctrine &c. I anſwere, that you fooliſhly begge that which is in queſtion. For as wee acknowledge Councels aſſembled of godlie, learned, and modeſt men, which ſimply ſeeke the glorie of God, and the profit of his Church, are good meanes to ſuppreſſe errors and hereſies, and to aboliſh abuſes and enormities; ſo to affirme that generall Councels cannot erre, or deliuer falſe doctrine, is moſt falſe & abſurd, as by many both reaſons and examples might be prooued. But for ſhortnes ſake I will touch but a few examples.
               The councell of foure hundred Prieſts of Iſrael erred, 1. King. 22. 6. and Santan was a falſe ſpirit in the mouth of them all to the 22.
                  
deſtruction of Achab that curſed king of Iſrael. The councell 
                     Matth. 26. 3. 65 66. of the Prieſts of Iuda erred in cōdemning Ieſus Chriſt to death. The Councell of the high Prieſt and other 
                     Act. 4. 5. 18. Prieſts, Rulers, Elders, and Scribes erred in forbidding Chriſts diſciples to ſpeake or teach in the name of Ieſus. The councel of Neocaeſarea erred in iudging hardly & falſly of ſecond marriages, which Gods word alloweth. Rom. 
                     Concil. Neoca. ſar. Can. 7. 7. 3. 1. Cor. 7. 39. the words of the Councell be theſe: Preſbyterum conuiuio ſecundarum nuptiarum, intereſſe non debere, maxime cum praecipiatur ſecundis nuptijs poenitentiam tribuere: that is, A prieſt ought not to be preſent at the feaſt of ſecond mariages, eſpecially becauſe he is commanded to appoint penance to ſecond mariages. This Councell although it were prouinciall, was confirmed by Pope Leo 
                  
                     Diſtinst. cap. 20 de libellis.
                   the fourth, as appeareth by Gratian, and the Papiſts hold, that prouinciall councels confirmed by the Pope cannot erre. The Councell of Ariminum, wherein were aſſembled 
                     Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 17. aboue foure hundred Biſhops, horribly erred, in maintaining the blaſphemous doctrine of Arius. The like did the Councels of Millaine, Seleucia, and of Tyrus. The ſecond Councell of Epheſus erred, and maintained the falſe doctrine of Eutyches. Theſe Councels the Papiſts confeſſe to haue erred, and why? becauſe they were not allowed and confirmed by the Biſhop of Rome. A ſimple and ſhameleſſe ſhift: as though the Biſhop of Rome had in thoſe daies power either to call, or confirme Councels any more then the other Patriarks had. In that ſecond Councel of Nice (moſt vnlike vnto the firſt) not only the wicked worſhipping of Images was allowed, and the Scriptures for the confirmation thereof moſt ſhamefully abuſed and detorted, as appeareth by the ſaid corrupt councell, and Caluin and Mart. Chemnicius haue largely ſhewed: but alſo in the 
                     Caluin. Inſtit. lib. 1. cap. 11. § 14. ſame was decreed, that the Angels haue bodies, and that the ſoule of man is corporall, and therefore they may bee 
                     Mart. Chemni. exam. Concil. Trident. part. 4 de imagin, Action. 5. painted; the which he foule errors. If you will not allow the worſhipping of Images to be an errour, then you cannot ſay but that the Councell of Conſtantinople vnder Leo the Emperour, where were preſent 338. Biſhops, and

another of Frankford vnder Charles the Great, in which the worſhipping of images was condemned, did erre. Some of theſe Councels erred: To omit for breuitie ſake manie other Councels, a Councell at Rome vnder Stephanus the ſixth, or as ſome reckon, ſeuenth, condemned 
                     Platina in Stepha. 6. Pope Formoſus and his doings. Another Councell at Rauenna vnder Pope Iohn the tenth, reſtored Formoſus, and condemned Stephen and the actes of his Councell. I 
                     Platina in Ioan. 10. hope you will not, or cannot ſay, but that one of theſe Councels erred. Another Councell at Rome vnder Pope Nicholas the ſecond, cauſed that excellent learned and godly man Berengarius to recant, and to confeſſe that the verie true bodie of Chriſt is indeed handled, and broken 
                     DeConſe. Inſt. 2. Ego Bereng. Seſſ. 13. by the prieſts hands, and torne with the teeth of faithfull people: The which is a groſſe, falſe, and blaſphemous doctrine. The Councell of Conſtance erred moſt wickedly in taking away the cup of the Lord from the lay people, contrarie to the word of God, and the teſtimonie of all antiquitie. And that their laſt Councell of Trident hath fouly erred, and confirmed falſe doctrine, repugnant to the truth of Gods word, and the Canons of ancient Councels, both theſe excellent learned men Martinus Chemnicius and Innocentius Gentilletus haue ſhewed: and we do, and will proue to the conſciences of all thoſe, whom the God of this world hath not blinded. I am not ignorant what colours that Ieſuite Bellarmine ſeeketh to caſt vpon the foreſaid errours of theſe Councels, and ſuch others, and what ſimple ſhifts he ſeeketh to elude and auoid them, the which I wil not ſtand here to anſwer, but I will referre the reader to the anſwers of Lamb. Danaeus, and to that excellent man of bleſſed memory D. Whitakers, where he may find the weakneſſe and nakedneſſe of Bellarmines ſaid ſhifts plainly diſcouered, and the ſame fully confuted, the which I thinke will ſtand (as other of his works haue done) long vndefended.
               Whereas you note in your margent the ancient Councels of Nice, Conſtantinople, Epheſus, and Chalcedon, wherin old heretikes were confuted and condemned: and

thereby claime them to appertaine to your Church. I anſwer, that as it is moſt certaine, that thoſe Councels were not called, not gouerned and directed by the Biſhops of Rome, as now by vſurpation they are; ſo you ſhall neuer proue, that thoſe godly and learned fathers agreed with you in manie great and principall points of Chriſtian doctrine. It were eaſie to ſhew that ſundry things were condemned by them, which be receiued and vſed by you: And therefore you vainly brag of their names, whoſe doctrine and proceedings you haue forſaken: neither haue you ſo much by diſputation in Councels, as by cruel perſecution through fire and fagot ſuppreſſed ſuch as in all ages haue complained of your idolatry and abominations, as plainly appeareth by hiſtories.
               As it is true that we admit the holy Scripture, or rather the holy Ghoſt, ſpeaking in the Scripture, to bee the ſupreme vmpier and Iudge in matters of controuerſies, and acknowledge him to be the onely infallible interpreter of his own words; ſo is it falſe, that we admit no other iudge, but remit al to euery mans priuate ſpirit, and ſingular expoſition. We ſay, that as the holy Ghoſt in the Scriptures is the high infallible iudge and interpreter of the Scriptures: ſo we acknowledge inferiour Iudges and interpreters both priuate and publike. Euerie man is a priuate iudge to diſcerne and iudge of the doctrine which he heareth or readeth in the Scriptures. So Saint Paul ſaith: I ſpeake as vnto wiſe men, iudge ye what I ſay. Let the Prophet! ſpeake two or three, and let the other iudge. Deſpiſe not prophecying. 
                  1. Cor. 10. 15. 
                  Try all things, and keep that which is good. Abſtain frō all 
                  
                     Ibid. 14. 29. 
                  appearance of euill. Beloued, beleeue not euery ſpirit, but try the 
                  1. Theſſ. 5. 20. 
                  ſpirits whether they are of God. The ſpirituall man iudgeth all 
                  1. Ioh. 4. 1. 
                  things. Good Chriſtians ought to haue their wits exerciſed 1. Cor. 2. 15. to diſcerne both good and euill. The true ſheepe of Chriſt 
                     Heb. 5. 14. heare and know his voice, and they will not follow a 
                     Iohn 10. 5. ſtranger, but they flie frō him; for they know not the voice of ſtrangers, whereby our Sauiour Chriſt ſheweth, that thoſe which be his ſheepe, and be truely gathered into his fold, can iudge and diſcerne betweene his voyce ſounding

in the Scriptures, and the voyce of ſtrangers, deliuering a ſtrange doctrine differing and diſſenting from the ſame, ſuch as is the falſe doctrine of the Church of Rome. We alſo admit publike iudges of controuerſies, both ſeuerally, as learned Biſhops, paſtors, and doctors; who may giue their ſentences and iudgements in matters in queſtion: and coniunctly, when they be aſſembled in Synodes and Councels to examine queſtions of greater difficultie, and to decide the ſame. How beit their iudgements be not infallible (for all men be lyars, and ſubiect to ignorance and errour) neither haue they any abſolute power and authoritie 
                     Pſal. 116. to iudge after their own ſpirit or mind, but according to the canonicall Scriptures: from the which if they bee found to decline and ſwarue, their iudgements are not to be followed. But your meaning is, that the Pope with his Councell is the ſupreme vmpire and iudge in matters of controuerſie, and the infallible interpreter thereof. How they haue moſt falſly interpreted the Scriptures, I haue in ſome part ſhewed before: and that he who is a partie, and whom a great part of Chriſtendome doth accuſe to bee Antichriſt, and guilty of moſt grieuous crimes, as of impietie, idolatrie, tyrannie ouer the Church, ſacrilege, treaſon, &c. ſhould be iudge in this his owne cauſe, is againſt all Vide Brutum Fulmen. law and reaſon. It is written in your owne Canon lawe, Si Papa cum aliquo cauſam habet, non debet ipſe eſſe iudex. i. If the Pope haue matter with any other, he ought not himſelfe to be iudge. And againe, Quando Papa est in ſtatu, qui pleriſque eſt offendiculo, & ſcandalizat Eccleſiā, noc eſt corrigibilis, tunc 
                  
                     Diſtinct. 40. Si Papa in gloſſ.
                   
                  non poteſt eſſe iudex, quia videtur male ſentire de fide. i. When the Pope is in that ſtate, that he is an offence to manie, and ſcandalizeth the Church, and is incorrigible; then he canot be Iudge, becauſe he ſeemeth to be of an euill faith. And euen ſo not only we do, but alſo manie of his owne fauourers haue iuſtly accuſed the Pope to be.
               You vainly and falſly exaggerate controuerſies and irreconciliable iarres (as you terme them) among vs in eſſentiall points of faith. But why do you not particularly expreſle ſome of thoſe eſſentiall points of faith? Surely becauſe

you cannot. I cōfeſſe there hath been in our Church ſome controuerſie concerning externall ceremonies, and forme of gouernment, as there hath beene heretofore betweene good men; as betweene Peter and Paul: betweene Paul and Barnabas: betweene Anicetus Biſhop of Rome 
                     Galat. 2. and Polycarpus: betweene Chryſostome and Epiphanius; and manie others: who all were godly men, agreeing in vnity of faith, and knowledge of the Sonne of God. But you that are ſo eager in traducing our iarres, cannot ſee your own manifold and vnreconciliable iarres and controuerſies among your ſelues. As betweene your Schoolemen, namely, your Thomiſts and Scotiſts, differing in ſundrie matters of moment, as not onely Eraſmus hath declared, but alſo Iohn Biſhop of Rocheſter hath affirmed. Alſo betweene 
                     Aſſert. Luth. art. 36. pag. 339 your Dominican and Franciſcan Friers, about the conception of the virgin Mary, debated not onely by words, but alſo by blowes, which controuerſie was neuer yet decided, but in the Councell of Baſil, which the Papiſts count a ſchiſmaticall Councell, and in the ſame was the falſe doctrine approued, to wit, that the Virgin Mary was conceiued without ſinne. You cannot ſee your iarres betweene your great Maiſter of Sentences Peter Lumbard (who iuſtled Saint Paul out of the ſchooles) and your Sorboniſt Doctors of Paris, which found and condemned 26. errours in him: nor the iarres betweene Ambroſius Catharinus Archbiſhop of Minorien, and Dominicus de Soto confeſſon to Charles the fift, concerning aſſurance of Gods grace, predeſtination, originall ſinne, freewll, and induration of a ſinner, as in their bitter bookes one againſt another about theſe matters appeareth: nor ye iarres betweene the ſaid Catharinus and Cardinall Caietane, whom Catharinus chargeth with 200. errors, of which he writeth thus: Quae vt non ſolum euidenter falſa meritò culpari poſſent, verum etiam vt Christianae religioni pernicioſa, &c. Which may be worthily reproued not onely as euidently falſe, but alſo as pernicious to Chriſtian religion. I might mention many mo iarres among the Papiſts, and namely betweene the ſecular Prieſts and Ieſuits, as appeareth by their bitter

bookes one againſt another, and particularly that of William Watſon a ſecular Prieſt lately publiſhed in print againſt the Ieſuits, which this camlling exclamor cannot eſpy, who can ſee a moate in our eyes, but cannot behold great beames in their owne: but for ſhortnes ſake I omit them at this preſent, onely the learned may ſee how that great Rabbi Rob. Bellarmine iarreth with all other his pewfellowes, and in very many eſſentiall points of doctrine diſſenteth from them, and controuleth them. Whereof alſo Iohannes Pappus hath made a large collection.
               Whereas you ſay yt we haue no argument to proue, that we haue the true Church, true religion, and true faith, but ſuch as al heretikes haue euer vſed: I anſwere, that we haue that argument & proofe for theſe things, which although Heretikes haue falſely pretended, as popiſh heretikes now doe, yet the godly learned Fathers haue ſincerely vſed. And that is the holy word of God, the onely touchſtone of truth and piller of the Church: for as the Church in one reſpect, is the piller of truth as Saint Paul ſaith: ſo in another, 2. Tim. 3. 15. the truth is the piller and prop of the Church, as Chryſoſtom ſaith: For by what meanes els haue the godly 
                     Chryſoſt. in illum locum homil. 11. and learned Fathers in all ages confuted hereſies, and proued the Church, but by the Scriptures? by them out 
                     Matth. 4. 4. 7. 10. Sauiour Chriſt foyled the Diuell, and put him to flight. By them he anſwered the Phariſies. By them he confuted 
                     Matth. 19. 4. the Sadduces. By them he proued himſelfe to be the promiſed 
                     ibid. 22. 29. 
                  
                     Luk. 24. 27. 32. 44. 46. Meſſias, and Sauiour of the world. By them Saint Paul confirmed the Goſpell which he preached: By them 
                     Rom. 1. 2. & 3. 21. & 4. 3. hee perſwaded the Iewes thoſe things which concerned Chriſt Ieſus, both out of the Law of Moſes, and out of the 
                     Act. 21. 23. ibid. 18. 2. 8. Prophets. By them Apollos confuted the Iewes, with great vehemencie, ſhewing by the Scriptures that Ieſus was the Chriſt. By them the godly and learned Fathers confuted and confounded the Arians and other Heretikes, whom you here name, as by their bookes and particular ſayings it euidently appeareth. Athanaſius ſpeaking of the godly decrees of the Councell of Nice, againſt the Arians writeth 
                     Athanaſ. de decretis Nicen. Syned pag. 528. thus: Atque harum rerum non aliunde nos quàm ex ſcriptutis
                  
                  perſuaſionem habemus: that is, We be perſwaded of theſe things, by no other meanes but by the Scriptures. Epiphanius ſaith: In Scripturis ſanctis Trinitas nobis annuntiatur ac 
                  
                     Epiph. contra Pneumatomachos haereſ. 74. 
                  creditur citra curioſitatem, &c. The Trinitie is in the holy Scriptures preached vnto vs, and without curioſitie beleeued. And that by thē all doctrines are to be confirmed, and all errors and hereſies to be confuted, they plainely and plentifully ſhew. Tertullian ſaith, that if Heretikes bee brought to examine and try their queſtions onely by the Scriptures they cannot ſtand. Epiphanius ſaith: that we Tertull. lib. de reſurree. carnia. are not to diſcuſſe queſtions, by our owne wits and reaſons, Sedex ſcripturarum conſequentia. By the conſequence 
                     Epiph. contra Paulum Samoſa. haereſ. 66. of the Scriptures. Saint Baſil ſaith: Let vs ſtand to the arbitrement of the Scripture inſpired of God, and with whome bee found doctrines agreeable to thoſe diuine 
                     Baſil. epiſt. 80. words, let the truth be iudged to be with them. Conſtantine ſaid vnto the Biſhops in the Nicene Councell. The Euangelicall and Apoſtolicall bookes, and the oracles of the 
                     Theod. lib. 1. cap. 7. fol. 284. Prophets doe plainely inſtruct vs of God, wherefore laying away all enimitie and diſcord, let vs take the explication or reſolution of the queſtions in controuerſie out of thoſe ſayings inſpired of God. So ſaith Saint Auguſtine: Verum nos ſacris literis accommodemus auditum, &c. that is, 
                     Auguſt. in Euang Ioan. tract. 60. Let vs harken vnto the holy Scriptures, and according to them let vs by the helpe of God diſſolue this queſtion. And againe. Non ſecundū opinionem, &c. We muſt conſider of this 
                     Auguſt. de cura pro mortuis cap. 2. matter not according to ye commō opinion, but according to the holy Scriptures of our religion. And of the church he ſaith thus: Sed vtrum ipſi eccleſiam teneant, non niſi diuinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris oſtendant: that is, But whether 
                     De vnitate eccleſiae. cap. 16. they haue the Church, let them ſhew by no other meanes, but by the Canonicall bookes of the diuine Scriptures. Chryſoſtom ſaith that we cannot know, which 
                     Chryſoſtom in Math. homil. 44. is the true Church of Chriſt, Niſi tantummodo per Scripturas: that is, but onely by the Scriptures. Therefore by the Scriptures proue your doctrine, and ſhew your Church. But you ſay the Arians and other Heretikes alleadged the Scriptures: whereunto I adde, that ſo did the Diuell alſo, 
                     Math. 4.
                  
but 
                     〈◊〉
                   in ſuch ſort as you and your fellowes do, in mangling them, and falſly expounding and applying them, as I haue in ſome part before ſhewed. I am cōtent to ioyne this iſſue with you, that they which be proued, to depraue, detort, mangle, and falſly expound and apply the ſcriptures, be heretikes, and to bee condemued with theſe old heretikes whom you here name, To whom whether you or we bee more like, let the vpright Reader indifferently iudge. The Arians ſeeing that they could haue nothing out of the Scriptures fled (as Athanaſius ſaith) vnto the Fathers, and euen ſo do you. The Arians vſed ſubtill diſtinctions 
                     Athanaſ. tom. 2 to elude and ſhift off the truth, and ſo do you. They denied the perſon of Chriſt: and you denie the office of Chriſt, in not acknowledging him to be our onely Prophet and teacher, whoſe onely voyce wee muſt heare and obey: nor the only King and head of his Church, nor our onely high Prieſt with the ſweete ſmelling ſacrifice of himſelfe once for euer offered, to redeeme and reconcile vs to God, nor our only mediatour to make interceſſion for vs. The Arians did cruelly perſecute the true Chriſtians, and ſo do Papiſts, when power is in their hand to do it. The Arrians when they could not preuaile againſt that excellent man Athanaſius, fell to raile vpon him, and to 
                     Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 17. ſlaunder him, accuſing him of adulterie, murther, and ſorcerie: and euen ſo do you deale now with ſuch as for their 
                     Socrates lib. 1. cap. 27. godlineſſe and learning may well bee compared with Athanaſius, I meane eſpecially Caluin, whom the Authour of that vnlearned libell and beaſtly booke intituled, A quartron of reaſons of Catholike religion, &c. is not aſhamed 5. Reaſon pa. 30 to call a ſeare backt prieſt for Sodomie. O thou ſhameleſſe man, or rather monſter! art thou not aſhamed to ſlaunder and belie ſuch a man? of whom they that knew him, did truly write of him, ipſa à quo potuit virtutem diſcere virtus, 
                  Theo. Beza. that euen vertue it ſelfe might (as it were) haue learned vertue of him. How doeſt thou know that Caluin was ſuch a man? I aſſure my ſelfe that thou didſt neuer ſee him nor know him: yea, I nothing doubt but that thou waſt ſcarſly borne whē he died. And how doeſt thou know yt he was

ſubiect to ſuch a filthie ſinne? where was hee euer accuſed or conuicted of ſuch a matter? In that Citie adulteries be puniſhed by death, and would Sodomie haue bin winked at in the Preacher? And if it were not knowne there, how doeſt thou know it? But I will not inſiſt any longer in cō
                  futing this ſhameleſſe ſlaunder. For moſt true it is which Tully ſaith: Nonne vt ignis in aquam coniectus continuò reſtinguitur & refrigeratur, ſic referuens falſum crimen in puriſſimam 
                  Cicero pro Roſcio Com. 
                  caſtiſſimamque vitam collatum ſtatim concidit & extinguitur? that is, As fire being caſt into water is ſtraight waies quenched: ſo a feruent falſe crime and ſlaunder being caſt into a moſt pure and chaſt life (ſuch as Caluines was) forthwith falleth downe and is extinguiſhed. And euen ſo let this 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , i. ſlanderer, and Bolſec the Apoſtata, and all other raile and ſlaunder what they can, yet Caluines memorie with God and all good men will be bleſſed for euer. And this railer herein ſheweth himſelfe like not onely to the Arians, but alſo to that ancient enemie to Chriſtianitie Porphyrius, who, as Euſebius ſaith, going about to reprehend and finde fault with the Scriptures and Preachers of the Word, not being able to reproue their doctrine: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : that is, wanting reaſons, he fell a railing and ſlaundering 
                     Euſeb. Eccleſ. Histor. lib. 6. cap. 19. the Preachers.
               But to returne to my matter, let the reader alſo with indifferencie conſider who be like to the Donatiſts, Pelagians, Neſtorians, and Euty chians, we or the Papiſts. The Donatiſts affirmed the Church to haue periſhed from the reſt of the world, and to haue remained onely with them in Africa: Doe not the Papiſts in like manner affirme only them to be the Church of God, which in a part of Europe be vnder the obedience of the Biſhop of Rome, vnleſſe now they will adde the Weſt Indians, of whom as the Spaniards haue murthered many millions: ſo peraduenture a few be either perſwaded or coacted to profeſſe Poperie, and ſubmit themſelues to the Pope of Rome. But the Chriſtian Churches in Grecia, Aethiopia, Armenia, Muſcouia and other countries, they acknowledge not for

the Church of God: becauſe they doe not ſubiect themſelues vnto the Church of Rome: we acknowledge al them to be of the Church of God, which in all the world hold the truth in the chiefe and fundamentall points of Chriſtian religion. The Pelagians held, firſt, that the grace of God, whereby wee be deliuered, is giuen according to our merits. Secondly, that the law of God may be fulfilled of vs. Thirdly, that wee haue free will: the Papiſts herein be ſo like to them, that as they maintaine in effect the ſame matters, ſo for the defence of them they alleage the ſame places of Scriptures now, as the Pelagians of old time did, as appeareth by the writings of S. Augustine, and S. Hierome againſt them. Nestorius did (as Theodoretus writeth of him) trouble and intangle the ſimple and plaine doctrine 
                     Theodores lib. 4. Haret. Fabul.
                   of Chriſtian faith with Greekiſh Sophiſtications. How the Papiſts haue herein ioyned with him, and by their curious Queſtions, and vaine Sophiſtications, haue troubled and peruerted the pure, ſimple, and plaine faith of Chriſt, by their Schoolemen it doth euidently appeare. Entyches confounded the two natures in Chriſt, and the properties peculiar to them: So doe the Papiſts, in making the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt to be at one inſtant in heauen and earth, and infinite places of the earth, which is only proper vnto the Deitie. This ſhall ſuffice to ſhew that the Papiſts be liker to theſe olde heretikes then wee are, whoſe doctrine wee abhorre, and be farre further from it, then they be. Yea I may not onely truly ſay, but can alſo plainly proue Poperie to be an hotchpotch of old hereſies long agoe condemned in the Church of God. The which as I did once in publike place ſhew, ſo I may (if it be the will of God) hereafter more plainly and plentifully proue.
               
                  At Pauls Croſſe Anno 1590. Now this worthie writer, or rather lewd libeller will proue, and that by a ſyllogiſme, out of the principles of our religion, that S. Paul exhorteth vs to infidelitie: This ſubtile ſyllogiſme is thus framed:
               Whoſoeuer exhorteth vs to doubt of that which we are bound to beleeue by faith, exhorteth to infidelitie.
               But Saint Paul doth exhort vs to doubt of our ſaluation

(which we are bound to beleeue by faith, according to the Proteſtants religion) Ergo: Saint Paul exhorteth vs to infidelitie.
               As the aſſumption or ſecond propoſition of this ſyllogiſme, as it now ſtandeth is falſe: ſo by a ſmall alteration, both it, and all the reſt may be very true, that is, by putting out the name of S. Paul, and putting Papiſts in place thereof, in this ſort.
               Whoſoeuer exhorteth vs to doubt of that which we are bound to beleeue by faith, exhorteth vs to infidelitie.
               The Papiſts exhort, or at leaſtwiſe teach vs, to doubt of our ſaluation: Ergo, the Papiſts exhort vs to infidelitie.
               The firſt propoſition of this ſyllogiſme is affirmed by 
                     Seſſ. 6. pag. 29. this writer to be plaine. The ſecond is the doctrine of the Papiſts concluded and determined in that Tridentine Cō
                  uenticle, where it is ſaid, that they which be truly iuſtified, cannot without all doubt account themſelues to be iuſtified. And againe, that no man can know by certaintie of faith, which is not ſubiect to error and falſehood, that he hath obtained the grace of God. And againe, Siquis 
                  
                     Ibid. Can. 73. 
                  dixerit, omni homini, &c. If any ſhall ſay, that it is neceſſarie for euery man to the obtaining of remiſſion of ſinnes, to beleeue certainly and without doubt of their owne infirmitie and indiſpoſition, that their ſins be forgiuen them, be he accurſed. But more plainly and pregnantly doe the Doctors of Louaine lay downe this doctrine of doubting: Fides, qua quis firmiter credit, & certò ſtatuit, per Chriſtum ſibi remiſſa 
                  
                     In articul aduerſ. Luther. artic. 9. 
                  eſſe peccata, ſeque poſſeſſurum vitam aeternam, nullum habet in Scripturis teſtimonium, imo eiſdem aduerſatur: that is, The faith whereby a man doth firmely beleeue, and is certainly aſſured that his ſinnes by Chriſt be forgiuen him, and that he ſhall poſſeſſe eternall life, hath no teſtimonie in the Scripture, yea is contrarie vnto them. Hereupon I conclude by this writers owne reaſon, that the Papiſts in maintaining this doctrine of doubting, teach infidelitie. But whereas theſe Louainian Doctors ſay, that this doctrine of the certaintie of forgiuenes of our ſinnes by Chriſt, and of our poſſeſſion of eternall life is not teſtified

in the Scriptures, but contrarie to them: how falſe this is, I referre it to be tried by theſe places here following. They that truſt in the Lord, ſhall be as mount Sion, which cannot be moued, but remaineth for euer. Being iuſtified by faith, we haue 
                  
                     Pſal. 125. 1. Rom. 5. 1. 2. 
                  peace towards God through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, by whom alſo through faith, we haue had this acceſſe vnto his grace, wherein wee ſtand, and reioyce vnder the hope of the glorie of God. Ye haue not receiued the ſpirit of bondage to feare againe: but ye 
                  
                     Rom. 8. 15. 
                  haue receiued the ſpirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The ſame ſpirit beareth witnes with our ſpirit, that we are the children of God. Who ſhall lay any thing to the charge of 
                  
                     Ibid. verſ. 33. 
                  Gods choſen? it is Chriſt that iuſtifieth: Who ſhall condemne? &c. Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the loue of Chriſt? ſhall tribulation, or anguiſh, or perſecution, or famine, or nakednes, or perill, 
                  
                     Verſ. 35. 
                  or ſword, &c. I am perſwaded that neither death, nor life, nor 
                  
                     Verſ. 38. 
                  Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things preſent, nor things to come neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature ſhall be able to ſeparate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Ieſus our Lord. It is God which ſtabliſheth vs with you in Chriſt, and hath annointed vs, who hath alſo ſealed vs, and 
                  2. Cor. 1. 21. 
                  hath giuen the earneſt of the ſpirit in our hearts. In whom alſo ye haue truſted, after that ye heard the word of truth, euen the 
                  
                     Epheſ. 1. 13. 
                  Goſpell of your ſaluation, wherein alſo after ye beleeued, ye were ſealed with the holy ſpirit of promiſe, which is the earneſt of our inheritance, &c. Let vs therefore goe with confidence or boldnes 
                  
                     Hebr. 4. 16. 
                  vnto the throne of grace, that wee may receiue mercie, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede. So God, willing more abundantly to ſhew vnto the heires of promiſe the ſtablenes of his 
                  
                     Chap. 6. 17. 
                  counſell, bound himſelf by an oth, that by two immutable things, wherein it is impoſſible that God ſhould lie, we might haue ſtrong conſolation, which haue our refuge to lay hold vpon that hope that is ſet before vs, which hope we haue, as an ancre of the ſoule, both ſure and ſtedfaſt, and it entreth into that which is within the vaile, &c. Let vs draw neere with a true hart in aſſurāce of 
                  
                     Chap. 10. 22. 
                  faith, our hearts being pure from an euill conſcience, and waſhed in our bodies with pure water, let vs keepe the profeſſion of our hope without wauering (for he is faithfull that promiſed.) Therfore by faith, that by grace the promiſe might be ſure to all the 
                  
                     Rom. 4. 16.
                  
                  ſeede. And he not weake in the faith conſidered not his owne 
                  
                     Verſ. 19. 
                  bodie, which was now dead, being almoſt an hundred yeeres old; neither the deadnes of Saraes wombe: neither did he doubt of the promiſe of God through vnbeleefe, but was ſtrengthened in the faith, and gaue glorie to God, being fully aſſured that he which had promiſed, was able to doe it, and therefore it was imputed to him for righteouſnes.
               
               Hereunto I will adde to the confuting of this doctrine of doubting, two or three ſayings of the Fathers. Chryſoſtome ſaith: Spes humana ſubinde intercidit, & ſperantem pudore afficit: Noſtra verò eiuſmodi non eſt, ſed firma & immobilis 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. ad Rom. Homil. 9. 
                  perdurat, &c. that is, The hope that is had in man ſundrie times falleth away, and ſhameth him that hopeth: but our hope is not ſuch, but abideth firme and vnmoueable. Augustine ſaith: Gaudium ergo nostrum, fratres, nondum est in
                        •
                     e, ſed iam in ſpe. Spes autem noſtra tam certa eſt, quaſi iam 
                  
                     Auguſt praefat. in Pſal. 123. 
                  res perfecta ſit: 1. Our ioy O brethrē is not as yet in poſſeſſion, but in hope. And our hope is ſo certaine, as though the thing were alreadie done. Bernard ſaith: Ergo, aut dixi, fides ambiguum non habet: aut ſi habet fides non eſt, ſed opinio: 
                  
                     Bernard. lib. 5. de conſidera.
                   Faith hath no doubting: or if it haue, it is not faith, but an opinion. Hereby the indifferent reader may ſee, both how falſe this deſperate doctrine of doubting is (againſt the which Ambroſus Catherinus an Archbiſhop & a great doer in the Councell of Trent did earneſtly write) and alſo that the Papiſts by this principle of their doctrine teach infidelitie. And withall let him conſider whether is a more true, godly, and comfortable doctrine, to beleeue by faith our ſaluation, or to be vncertaine and to doubt therof, as they teach.
               But now let vs ſee how S. Paul exhorteth vs (as this man ſaith) to doubt of our ſaluation. He ſaith: Cum timore & tremore ſalutem vestram operamini: which is thus tranſlated, With feare and trembling worke your ſaluation. This text was alleadged by heareſay, and not by ſight. For this worthie writer, who ſo highly thinketh of himſelfe, and ſo greatly diſdaineth others, quoteth in the margent 1. Cor. 2. whereas it is not in that chapter, nor in all that Epiſtle, but

it is Philip. 2. 12. But the fault hereof will be laid vpon the Printer. Yet that the Printer ſhould ſo much erre, and ſet 1. Cor. 2. for Philip. 2. it is not likely. And that this error is not of the Printer, but of this mans fine memorie, it may hereby appeare, yt it is not in the vulgar editiō, which they both do, and are bound to follow, cum timore, but cum metu. Hereby the reader may ſee, with what care theſe men alleage the Scriptures, not looking vpon the words, nor conſidering the ſimple ſenſe and meaning, but ſnatching at the words, and wreſting them contrarie to the purpoſe and meaning of the Apoſtle. Whoſe intent is not to teach the Philippians, that they be ſaued by their workes, which 
                     Rom. 3. 28. & 4. 2. 5. Galat. 2. 16 is contrarie to his doctrine, in many other places; but to diſſwade them from careleſſe ſecuritie, and to exhort them 
                     Epheſ. 2. 8. 9. 2. Timoth. 1. 9. to walke in good workes, and to runne on the race of their 
                     Tit. 3. 4. life in the feare of God, vntil they come to attaine that faluation, which God hath promiſed, and Ieſus Chriſt for vs hath purchaſed. Saint Paul to the Epheſians doth as it were to the explication of this place, make-declaration both of the true doctrine of ſaluation, and of the way whereby wee are to walke vnto it. By grace ye are ſaued through faith, and that not of your ſelues, it is the gift of God; not of works, leaſt any man ſhould boaſt himſelfe. For we are his 
                  
                     Epheſ. 2. 8. 
                  workmanſhip created in Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes, which God hath ordained, that we ſhould walke in them. Thus good workes, and holy obedience of life, which cannot be ioyned with careleſſe ſecuritie, but doe flow from the feare of God, are not cauſes to merit and deſerue ſaluation, which Ieſus Chriſt by his blood ſhedding hath purchaſed for vs, but alwaies to walke vnto it, without the which wee ſhall neuer ſee God, as the Apoſtle ſaith. 
                     Heb. 12. 14.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The Pamphlet. Articles concerning good life and pietie.
               The Proteſtants are bound in conſcience neuer to aske God forgiuenes of their ſinnes.
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer is aſſured by faith that his ſins are forgiuen him, ſinneth moſt grieuouſly in asking God pardon for them: but all true Protestants are aſſured by faith, that their ſinnes are forgiuen them. Ergo.
               
                  All true Protestants ſinne grieuouſly in asking pardon of God for them.
               
               
                  The Maior is euident: for who but an Infidel or a mad man, would demaund of God the creation of the world, which he is aſſured by faith that God hath alreadie created? or Chriſts incarnation, which alreadie is performed? or the institution of Sacraments, which alreadie is effected? In like manner, who but an Infidel or a mad man will demaund pardon of his ſins, which he beleeueth alreadie by faith that God hath forgiuen? for it is a ſigne that he doubteth of that which he is bound by faith to beleeue, which doubting faith is infidelitie.
               
               
                  Moreouer, what ſoeuer we demaund, that wee hope to obtaine: but no man hopeth to obtaine that he alreadie poſſeſſeth, as no man will demaund of God his owne ſoule, or bodie, becauſe alreadie he poſſeſſeth them.
               
               
                  The Minor is vndoubted, becauſe this is that liuely faith, whereby the Proteſtants are iuſtified: by this they apprehend Chriſt, by this they applie his merits and paſſion vnto them, and without this no man can attaine vnto ſaluation. Hereupon I will inferre, that no Proteſtant can with a ſafe conſcience ſay the Lords Prayer, becauſe he cannot pray as he ought without true faith, and call God his father; and if he haue true faith, he cannot without note of infidelitie vtter this petition, Forgiue vs our ſinnes: for that moſt aſſuredly he beleeueth and protesteth in the firſt ingreſſe of that prayer, that he is the Son of God, and conſequently beleeueth by faith that his ſins are forgiuen him.
               
            
            
               
               Anſwere.
               
                  TO the firſt propoſition of this ſubtill ſyllogiſme, I anſwere, that the aſſurance by faith, which Gods elect haue of the forgiuenes of their ſinnes, doth well ſtand with the asking of forgiuenes of them. For we are to aske forgiuenes of our ſinnes, becauſe God doth commaund it, and require it of vs. Moreouer, it is our dutie to aske forgiuenes of them: for otherwiſe wee cannot be aſſured by faith that they be forgiuen vs: for by asking pardon of them, we doe make confeſſion of them, and doe acknowledge our owne guiltines, the which if we ſhould refuſe to doe, we can haue no aſſurance of the remiſſion of them. For Salomon ſaith, He that hideth his ſinnes ſhall not proſper: but he that confeſſeth them and forſaketh them, ſhall 
                  
                     Prou. 28. 13. 
                  haue mercie. And S. Iohn ſaith, If wee confeſſe our ſinnes, God is faithful and iuſt to forgiue vs our ſinnes, and to clouſe vs from 
                  1. Ioh. 1. 9. 
                  all vnrighteouſnes. Moreouer, wee aske forgiuenes of our ſinnes, to confirme our faith, and to increaſe the aſſurance we haue of the forgiuenes of them, and that we may more and more haue the feeling of the forgiuenes of them increaſed in our hearts. For we doe not meane that any man hath any ſuch firme aſſurance of faith, but that the ſame is mixed with weaknes, and many times ſhaken with temptations, againſt the which wee muſt ſtriue and pray, and ſay both with him in the Goſpell, Lord I beleeue, Lord helpe my vnbeleefe: and with the Apoſtles, Lord increaſe our faith. 
                  
                     Mark. 9. 24. Our faith is but as a graine of Muſtard ſeede, which muſt 
                     Luk. 17. 5. grow and increaſe. Saint Paul ſaith, that by the Goſpell the righteouſnes of God is reueiled from faith to faith. Vpon 
                     Rom. 1. 17. which words Clement Alexandrinus writeth thus: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
                     Clemens Alex. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Apoſtle ſeemeth to declare a double faith: but rather one faith, which receiueth increaſe and perfection. And therefore in praying for the forgiuenes of ſinnes, wee pray that our faith of the forginenes of them may be more

and more confirmed, and our aſſurance thereof increaſed in vs. Laſtly, ſeeing wee daily ſinne, both in doing that which God forbiddeth, and omitting that which he commandeth, why ought wee not daily to aske forgiuenes of them? And in praying for the remiſſion of our ſinnes, we deſire all thoſe things which be effects and fruites thereof, as Sanctification and eternall life, &c. And yet wee muſt pray in a true perſwaſion of faith of Gods mercie towards vs to the forgiuenes of our ſinnes not onely paſt, but alſo future and to come. And ſo our praying for the forgiuenes of them, is a crauing of the continuance of Gods mercie, to the continuall pardoning of them, which we continually commit.
               Now whereas hee ſaith, the Maior is euident, and none but an Infidell or mad man would demaund of God, the creation of the world, which hee is aſſured by faith that God hath alreadie created? &c. I anſwere, that none that is well in his wits would make ſuch a fooliſh and abſurd compariſon, as is betweene the asking of God the creation of the world, the incarnation of Chriſt, &c. and the remiſſion of our ſinnes. For thoſe are neither commaunded, nor at all to be asked: and will this man ſay, that forgiuenes of ſinnes is not at all of any to be prayed for? Of thoſe things we neede not further to be confirmed, but of the forgiuenes of our ſinnes, our faith had neede to be ſtrengthened, and the feeling thereof in our conſciences to be increaſed. Moreouer (as I ſaid before) for as much as we daily ſin and offend God, wee ought daily to craue Gods mercie in pardoning our ſinnes. What likenes hath prayer for the creation of the world, or for the incarnation of Chriſt, &c. herewith? And whereas this man thinketh it ſo abſurd a thing to pray to God to forgiue vs our ſinnes, becauſe wee beleeue the forgiuenes of them, I would aske of him, whether S. Paul praying both in the beginning, and in the end of his Epiſtles, for Gods grace to the faithfull, did not aſſuredly beleeue, that they were euen then, and before thoſe his prayers indued with Gods grace? No doubt but hee did beleeue that they were indued with it, for els he would

not haue acknowledged the effectuall faith, the diligent loue, and patient hope of the Theſſalonians, and that they 1. Theſ. 1. 3. were elected of God. Which gifts of Gods ſpirit could not be in them, without the grace of God. Now by this mans diuinitie what a madneſſe was it, for him to pray for grace vnto them, whom hee did beleeue to bee endued with Gods grace alreadie? And where as Saint Iohn ſaith, Theſe things haue I written vnto you that beleeue in the name 
                  1. Ioh. 5. 13. 
                  of the ſonne of God, that yee may know that yee haue eternall life, and that ye may beleeue in the name of the ſonne of God. By this mans deepe doctrine, it might ſeeme madneſſe for Saint Iohn to write vnto them that did beleeue in the name of the ſonne of God, that they ſhould beleeue in the name of the Sonne of God. But it ſeemed not ſo to S. Iohn, who writeth to them that as they had bleſſedly begunne to beleeue in the name of the Sonne of God, ſo they might ſtill continue, grow, and increaſe in the ſame faith. Moreouer alſo I would aske of this man and his fellowes, whether they praying do beleeue the forgiuenes of their ſins? if they doe not, then are they Infidels, and deny the article of the creede, I beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes, which before he falſely obiected to vs. If they doe beleeue the forgiuenes of their ſinnes, why doe they then (by this mans doctrine) pray for it? If he ſay, that he beleeueth that there is in generalitie, a forgiuenes of ſinnes, but particularly he is not aſſured by faith, of the forgiuenes of his owne ſinnes; then what doth his faith differ from the Diuels faith? who beleeueth and trembleth, as Saint Iames ſaith: and what is this his doubting, but (as he himſelfe here ſaith) flat infidelitie? 
                     Iame. 1. And no meruaile though theſe men feele in their harts no aſſurance of faith, for that they ground it not vpon the vnmoueable rocke of Gods promiſe, but vpon the vnſure ſand of their owne workes and ſatiſfactions, by the which indeede neither can their faith be aſſured, nor their conſciences quieted. The which falſe doctrine, while they beleeue, I would know how they can aske forgiuenes of their ſinnes? for whoſoeuer maketh ſatiſfaction to God for them, needeth not to aske forgiuenes of them. But the

Papiſts maintaine that they make full ſatiſfaction to God for them (as I haue before ſhewed) therefore I may much more iuſtly ſay, then he doth here, that it is madnes to aske forgiuenes of them. For what man not being mad, owinge a ſumme of money, and paying it, will deſire the ſame to be forgiuen him? Concerning your ſcoffing in the proofe of your Minor or ſecond propoſition, we indeede beleeue 
                     Rom. 3. 18. Epheſ. 3. 17. that we are iuſtified by faith without the workes of the law, and that Chriſt dwelleth in our hearts by faith, and that by this hand of a true and vnfained faith in Ieſus Chriſt, we apply the plaiſter of his precious bloud ſhed for our ſinnes, to cure all the ſorances and ſores of our ſoules. And take you heede, that you truſting in your owne workes and merits, in your Maſſes, agnus deis, holy water, pardons, and manifold other ſuch paltries, fall not into the ditch of damnation. And this ſhall ſuffice for this article, which is ſo abſurd that it deſerueth not ſo much.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants are bound in conſcience to auoyde all good workes. 2. Article.
               
               
                  
                     EVery man is bound vpon paine of eternall damnation to auoyde all deadly ſinnes. But faſting, praying, almes deedes, and all good workes, according to the 
                  
                     Luther in aſſert. artic. 31. 32. & 36. Caluin. lib. 3. inſtitu. cap. 12. §. 4. & cap. 14 §. 4. 19. Melan. in Loc. tit. de peccato.
                   
                  Proteſtants religion, are deadly ſinnes: Ergo, according to the Proteſtants religion all men are bound vpon paine of eternall damnation, to auoyde faſting praying, almes deedes and all good workes. The Maior is manifeſt: for the wages of deadly ſinne is death, 
                  
                     Rom. 6. 24. Stipendium peccatimors. The Minor is euident: for according to the Proteſtants religion and common expoſition of this text of Scripture: 
                  
                     Iſa. 64. 6. Factiſumus vt immundi omnes nos, & tanquam pannus menſtruatae omnes iuſtitiae noſtrae:

                  We are made all as vncleane, and all our iuſtices are as ſtayned cloth. That is to ſay, the beſt workes we can doe are infected with deadly ſinne, and conſequently deſerue eternall damnation, and therefore to be auoyded.
               
            
            
               Anſwere
               
                  AS Hannibal ſaid of Phormio, that he had heard 
                     Cicer. lib. 2. de oratore.
                   many doting fooles, but he neuer heard any that ſo much doted as did Phormio: ſo may I ſay, that I haue heard and read many fooliſh diſputers, but any that did ſo fooliſhly diſoute and reaſon as this man doth, I neuer heard nor read. For what man in his wits will reaſon thus: that becauſe the corruptions of men doe creepe into theſe workes of faſting, praying, and almes giuing, therefore the workes themſelues bee deadly ſinnes? Our doctrine is, firſt, that theſe workes and ſuch other, being done by vnfaithfull hypocrites and wicked men be turned into ſinne, as Dauid ſaith: for they be ſo corrupted and defiled with 
                     Pſal. 109. 7. their infidelitie and wickednes, that they be but ſplendida peccata: that is, glittering ſinnes before God, as Saint Auguſtine tearmeth them. For euen as moſt pure water flowing through a filthie ſinke or priuie, is made foule, filthie, and ſtinking: euen ſo theſe workes, prayer, faſting, &c. which be good workes commaunded of God, flowing from their faithles and wicked hearts and bodies be ſo defiled, that they be but filthie ſinnes in the ſight of God.
               
                  Salomon ſaith: the ſacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the righteous is acceptable 
                     Pro. 15. 8. to him. God ſaith by the Prophet Eſay: Bring no 
                     Eſa. 1. 13. moe oblations in vaine: incenſe is an abomination vnto me: I cannot ſuffer your new moones, nor Sabboths, nor ſolemne dayes (it is iniquitie) nor ſolemne aſſemblies. My ſoule hateth your new moones, & your appoynted feaſts, 
                     Ibid. cap. 66. 3.
                  
&c. He that killeth a bullocke, is as if he ſlew a man: he that ſacrificeth a ſheepe, as if he cut off a dogges necke, &c. Theſe ſayings ſhew that euen the ſacrifices commaunded in the law of God, were wicked and abominable, when they were offered of wicked and prophane perſons voyde of true faith and repentance. So it is in the prophet Haggai: Thus ſaith the Lord of Hoſtes, Aske now the prieſts concerning the law. If one beare holy fleſh in the skirt of 
                     Hagg. 2. 12. his garment, and with his skirt doe touch the bread, or the pottage, or the wine, or ale, or any meate, ſhall it be holy? And the prieſts anſwered and ſaid no. Then ſaid Haggai, if a polluted perſon touch any of theſe things, ſhall it be vncleane? and the prieſts anſwered and ſaid, it ſhall be vncleane. Then anſwered Haggai and ſaid, ſo is this people, and ſo is this nation before me, ſaith the Lord: and ſo are all the workes of their hands, and that which they offer here is vncleane. Agreeable to this is that which Saint Paul ſaith: Vnto the pure are all things pure, but vnto them that are defiled, and vnbeleeuing is nothing pure, 
                  
                     Tit. 1. 15. 
                  but euen their mindes and conſciences are defiled. Chriſt our Sauiour ſaith: Doe men gather grapes of thornes, or figges 
                  
                     Matth. 7. 16. & 12. 33. 
                  of thiſtles? and a corrupt tree bringeth forth euill fruite. Whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, and without faith it is impoſſible 
                  
                     Rom. 14. 23. 
                  to pleaſe God. Here of we conclude that euen thoſe workes 
                     Hebr. 11. 6. which God hath commaunded and commended to vs, in his word, being done by the vngodly and reprobate be ſo corrupted by their infidelitie and wickednes, that they bee not acceptable, but rather abominable before God. So ſaith Saint Auguſtine: Sine qua (fide) quae videntur 
                  
                     Auguſt. lib. 3. ad Bonifac. cap. 5. 
                  bona opera, in peccata vertuntur: that is, Without faith thoſe workes which ſeeme to be good are turned into ſinne. Saint Ambroſe ſaith: Sine cultu veri dei, etiam quod virtus 
                  
                     Ambroſ. de vocat. gentium lib. 1. cap. 3. pag. 6. 
                  videtur eſſe peccatum est, nec placere vllus deo ſine deo poteſt: that is, Without the worſhip of the true God, euen that which ſeemeth to be vertue is ſinne, neither can any pleaſe God without God. Anſelme ſaith: Omnis vita infidelium 
                  
                     Anſelme in Rom. cap. 14. 
                  peccatum eſt: & nihil bonum ſine ſummo bono. i. The whole life of the vnfaithfull is ſinne: and there is nothing good

without the chiefeſt good, which is God. By this the Chriſtian reader may ſufficiently ſee, how falſe the doctrine of the Papiſts, and namely of our fine and delicate Ieſuites is, who teach (as their proctor Andradius one of that 
                     Explicat. orthodox. lib. 3. pag. 277. pag. 279. nulla culpa contaminata pag. 280. coate bluſheth not to auouch) that all actions of thoſe which bee voyde of the true knowledge of God bee not ſinne: yea that they may doe workes defiled with no fault, but worthie of great praiſe; and that we are not to thinke, that all the workes of them which be voyd of faith do ſo diſpleaſe God, that they be crimes worthie eternall puniſhments. Let the godly reader compare theſe ſayings of this Iebuſite, with thoſe alledged before out of the Scriptures and ancient Fathers, and diſcerne which is more ſound and agreeable, not to the blinde reaſon of man, but to the will of God reueiled in his word. Secondly, concerning the workes of there generate, that belong to Gods election and mercie, we ſay, that although they be done with imperfection, and not ſo fully, with their whole ſoule, hart, and minde, as they ſhould be; but carrie the touch of mans corruption, and are not able to abide the ſtrict & ſtreight iudgement of God: yet becauſe they proceede from harts purified by faith, and ſanctified in ſome meaſure with Gods holy ſpirit, they pleaſe God, and the 
                     Act. 15. imperfections of them being pardoned in Ieſus Chriſt, they bee accepted for pure and holy. Chriſt ſaith: A good 
                  
                     Matth. 7. 16. & 12. 33. 
                  tree bringeth forth good fruite: to the pure are all things pure. The prayer of the righteous is alwayes acceptable to God. 
                  
                     Pro. 15. 8. 
                  The faithfull be an holy prieſthoode to offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices 
                  1. Pet. 2. 5. 
                  acceptable to God by Ieſus Chriſt. To doe good, and to diſtribute 
                  
                     Hebr. 13. 16. 
                  forget not: for with ſuch ſacrifices God is pleaſed. This therefore is a falſely, which this man with a braſen brow affirmeth, that faſting, praying, and almes deedes according to our religion be deadly ſinnes. Theſe workes be commaunded of God, who commaundeth no ſinnes. We ſay that the corruption of our nature, which is but in part and imperfectly regenerate in this life, doth creepe into them; and therefore they be not ſo purely & perfectly done of vs as God requireth: whereby we acknowledge,

that euen the beſt workes we doe had neede of Gods mercie. So Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, ſi remota miſericordia diſcutias eam: that is, Wo be 
                     Auguſt. confeſ. lib. 9. cap. 13. to the laudable life of man, if thou O God examine it without mercie. Now what reaſonable man will reaſon or imagine vs to reaſon thus, that becauſe we doe good workes not ſo purely and perfectly as Gods righteouſneſſe requireth and deſerueth, that therefore good workes as prayer, almes deedes, &c. be deadly ſinnes, or are to be auoyded of vs.
               But let vs come to examine the proofe of your Minor or ſecond propoſition. You ſay that according to our religion and common expoſition of this text of Scripture: we are made all as vncleane, and all our iuſtices are like a ſtained cloth: the beſt workes we can doe are infected with 
                     Iſaia 64. 6. deadly ſinne, and deſerue eternall damnation, and therefore to be auoided. We indeed expound this place not only of wicked hypocrites, but alſo of the regenerate and faithfull, and ſay that all our owne righteouſneſſe of works is ſo ſtained with the corruption of our ſinfull nature, that it is not able to ſtand before Gods iudgement ſeate, nor abide his ſeuere triall and examination. For when wee haue done all thoſe things which are commaunded vs, we muſt 
                     Luke 17. 10. ſay, that we are vnprofitable ſeruants. And if thou O Lord 
                     Pſal. 130. 3. ſtreightly markeſt iniquities, O Lord, who ſhall ſtand? and therfore we muſt pray and ſay: Enter not into iudgement 
                  
                     Pſal. 143. 2. 
                  with thy ſeruant: for in thy ſight ſhal none that liueth be iuſtified. And with Daniel we ſay: O Lord vnto vs appertaineth open ſhame, to our Kings, to our Princes, & to our Fathers, becauſe we 
                  
                     Daniel. 9. 8. 
                  haue ſinned against thee: yet compaſſion and forgiuenes is in the Lord our God. Whereupon we acknowledge that our Iuſtice and righteouſneſſe conſiſteth not in the perfection of our vertues, but in the forgiuenes of our ſinnes. Bernard thus expoundeth and applieth the place of Eſay: Nostra ſi 
                  
                     Bernard. de verbis Eſaiae. Serm. 5. 
                  qua est humilis iustitia, recta for ſitan, ſed non pura: niſi forte meliores nos eſſe credimus quàm patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter quàm humiliter aiebant: omnes iustitiae noſtrae tanquam pannus menstruatae mulieris. Quomodo enim pura iustitia,
                  
                  vbi adhuc non potest culpa deeſſe? i. Our humble or baſe iuſtice if it be any, is peraduenture right, but not pure: vnles we beleeue our ſelues to be better than our Fathers, who no leſſe truly then humbly ſaid, all our righteouſneſſe is as the cloth of a menſtruous woman; for how can righteouſneſſe be pure where ſinne as yet wanteth not? And againe: Sed quid potest eſſe omnis iustitia nostra coram Deo? Nonne iuxta Prophetam velut pannus menstruata reputabitur, & ſi districtè iudicetur iniusta inuenietur omnis iustitia noſtra: i. What can all our iuſtice be before God? Shall it not according to the Prophet be reputed like the cloth of a menſtruous woman, and if it be ſtreightly iudged, all our iuſtice ſhall be found to be vniuſt. How you expound this place I know not, belike you ſatisfying Gods iuſtice ſo fully with your owne pure workes, that he can aske no more of you, as I alleaged before out of Biſhop Fiſher, thinke that this place is not to be vnderſtood of you, and your iuſtice, which is pure and perfit: but of the iuſtice of Lutherans, Caluinists, and ſuch other prophane perſons. Wherein take you heede that you ſhew not your ſelues to be of them whom Chriſt came not to call, who ſaith, I am not come to call the righteous, that is to ſay, them that be puffed 
                     Matth. 9. 13. vp with a vaine and falſe perſwaſion of their owne righteouſneſſe, but ſinners to repentance: And that they whom you diſdaine and deſpiſe as Publicanes and harlots, 
                     Ibidem 21. 31. goe not before you into the kingdome of God. We take vpon vs the perſon of the Publican, in acknowledging our 
                     Luke 18. 13. owne vilenes and vnworthines, and in reſpect thereof are abaſhed to lift vp our eyes to heauen, but flee in all our workes to Gods mercie, and are content that you with the Phariſce glory of your owne workes, merits, and righteouſnes. Salomon ſaith as I haue before alleaged: There is a 
                  
                     Prouerb. 30. 12 
                  generation that are pure in their owne conceite, and yet are not waſhed from their filthines. Now briefly to anſwere your ſyllogiſme, I reaſon thus: No good workes are to be auoyded: but faſting, prayer, and almes deedes, being commanded of God, and proceeding from faithfull hearts, are by our doctrine good works: Ergo they are not to be auoyded;

but diligently in the feare of God to be vſed of vs: but the corruptions of our ſinfull nature which creepe into them, are to be auoided, and reſiſted, and we are to pray vnto God in mercy to pardon them. And ſo we may be aſſured, that as in mercy through Chriſt he hath accepted of vs: ſo he will in like mercie accept our workes as pure and perfit in Chriſt Ieſus.
               Now I will retort your reaſon vpon your owne head in this ſort: Euery man is bound vpon paine of eternall damnation to auoide all ſinne: but faſting, praying and almes deedes, as they be vſed by Papiſts to make ſatisfaction to God for their ſinnes, and to merite and purchaſe heauen, be ſinnes: Ergo, faſting, prayer, and almes deedes done in ſuch ſort are to be auoided. The Minor or ſecond propoſition, I proue thus. He that attributeth that to his workes, which is proper and peculiar to Ieſus Chriſt, ſinneth grieuouſly: but to make ſatisfaction for our ſinnes appertaineth onely to Ieſus Chriſt: Ergo, he that attributeth the ſame to his workes, grieuouſly ſinneth. But I ſhall haue occaſion hereafter more largely to handle this matter, therefore now I omit it, and ſo I will alſo the quotations of Luther, Caluine, and Melanchthon ſet in the margent, for that they deliuer no other doctrine, but that which I haue before declared, the which I nothing doubt, but it is ſo ſound, that it will indure and abide this mans hammer.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants either haue no faith at all, or ly moſt damnably, in denying that a man aſſiſted by Gods grace, can keepe the commaundements. 3. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer knoweth God, keepeth his commaundements: But all true Proteſtants know God. Ergo all true Proteſtants keepe his commaundements. The Maior is expreſſe Scripture: 
                  
                     Iohn. epist. 1. cap. 2. verſ. 4. qui dicit ſe noſſe deum, & mandata

eius non cuſtodit mendax eſt, & in eo veritas non eſt. He that ſaith he knoweth God, and keepeth not his commaundements is a lyer, and truth is not in him. The Minor no Proteſtant doubteth of: for this knowledge of God is nothing elſe but a liuely faith wherewith all zealous Proteſtants (as they ſay) are indewed. Hence from, manifeſtly it followeth, that either the moſt zealous Proteſtants lacke a liuely faith, and ſo are Infidels: or if they haue a liuely faith, and deny that they keepe, or can keepe Gods commaundements, they are damnable lyars: if they chuſe the firſt, they are Pagans, Heretikes or Iewes: if they take the ſecond, they are damnable ſeducers, and impoſtors in religion, and conſequently their faith is falſe.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  THis ſyllogiſme according to Saint Iohns meaning is wholy true. The Apoſtles purpoſe is to ſhew that the knowledge of God in the faithfull ought not to be idle, but effectuall and fruitfull in godlineſſe and holy obedience, working a care and conſcience in them to keepe Gods holy commaundements, by diligent endeuouring both to auoyd all wickedneſſe which he forbiddeth, and to yeelde that holy obedience which he requireth. The which they that doe not, but liue prophanely, wallowing in wickedneſſe, and committing vngodlineſſe with greedineſſe; and yet make a profeſſion of the knowledge of God (as too many do) their profeſſion and knowledge is in vaine. For as Saint Iames ſaith: if any ſeeme religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceiueth his owne 
                  
                     Iam. 1. 26. 
                  hart, that mans religion is in vaine. So if any ſeeme to haue the knowledge of God, and liueth looſely and wickedly, hauing no care to frame his life to the obedience of Gods commandements, his religion, profeſſion, and knowledge is in vaine. For not euery one that ſaith vnto me, Lord, Lord, 
                  
                     Matth. 7. 21. 
                  ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth my fathers will which is in heauen. But your meaning is, that by keeping of Gods commandements is vnderſtood an abſolute

and perfit fulfilling of them, in yeelding without any tranſgreſſion at all that full and perfect righteouſnes which God commaundeth. The which neuer did any man 1. Pet. 2. yeeld, but only the man Ieſus Chriſt, who neuer did ſinne, and in whoſe mouth was neuer guile. This your doctrine of the perfect fulfilling of Gods law in this life is falſe, and you in maintaining of it, ſhew your ſelues to be blind and proud Phariſies, not knowing either the perfect righteouſnes of God, nor the corruption of our nature, againſt the which I reaſon thus: Whoſoeuer ſinneth, tranſgreſſeth and breaketh Gods law and commaundements: but all men doe ſinne: therefore all men tranſgreſſe and breake Gods lawes and commaundements. The firſt propoſition is manifeſt: for S. Iohn ſaith, Sinne is the tranſgreſſion of the law. The ſecond propoſition cannot with any face be 1. Ioh. 3. 4. denied. Salomon ſaith, There is no man that ſinneth not. Saint 1. King. 8. 46. 
                  Paul ſaith, All haue ſinned, and are depriued of the glorie of 
                  
                     Rom. 3. 23. 
                  God. Saint Iames ſaith, In many things we ſinne all. Saint Iohn 
                  
                     Iam. 3. 2. ſaith, If we ſay that we haue no ſinne, we deceiue our ſelues, and 
                  1. Ioh. 4. 8. 
                  the truth is not in vs. Moreouer, S. Paul ſaith, As many as are 
                  
                     Galat. 3. 10. 
                  of the workes of the law, are vnder the curſe: for it is written, Curſed is euery one that continueth not in all things, which are written in the booke of the law to doc them. Where Saint Paul doth reaſon after this ſort: Whoſoeuer doth not continue to doe all that is written in the booke of the law, are vnder the curſe: but there is none that continueth to doe all that is written in the booke of the law: Ergo, there is none but is vnder the curſe. The firſt propoſition Saint Paul proueth by a place of the law, Deut. 27. The ſecond Saint Paul taketh as a thing graunted, and not to be denied, that there is no man which continueth to doe all that is written in the booke of the law to doe it, the which if it be not graunted, Saint Paules argument is nothing worth: for it might be ſaid, that ſome doe fulfill the law of God, and therefore are not vnder the curſe. So that which ſeemed to Saint Paul abſurd to be denied, is now denied by theſe abſurd and blind Phariſies. Furthermore, Saint Paul ſaith, That which was impoſſible to the law, in as much as it was 
                  
                     Rom. 8. 3.
                  
                  made weake, becauſe of the fleſh, God ſending his owne ſonne in the ſimilitude of ſinfull fleſh, and for ſinne, hath condemned ſinne in the fleſh. Doth not S. Paul here ſhew, that whereas wee could not be ſaued by the law, God hath ſent his ſonne in the fleſh to ſaue vs? And he declareth why wee could not be ſaued by the law, becauſe the weakenes of our ſinfull fleſh, is not able to yeeld that perfect righteouſnes which the law of God requireth: the which if we could doe, wee ſhould liue thereby. For God ſaith, which if a man do he ſhall liue in them. And that euen they that are regenerate with 
                     Ezech. 20. 21. Gods ſpirit, doe not perfectly fulfill the law, and keepe Gods commaundements, it is moſt euident by Saint Pauls confeſſion of himſelfe: I am carnall, ſold vnder ſinne. I allow 
                  
                     Rom. 7. 14. 
                  not that which I doe: for that I would, I doe not: but what I hate, that I doe. It is no more I that doe it, but ſinne that dwelleth in me: For I know that in me, that is, in my fleſh, dwelleth no good thing: for to will is preſent with me. But I finde no meanes to performe that which is good. For I doe not the good thing, which I would, but the euill which I would not, that doe I, I finde that when I would doe good, euill is preſent with me. I ſee another law in my members, rebelling againſt the law of my minde, leading me captiue to the law of ſinne, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of death? If S. Paul that elect veſſell of God, which was taken vp into the third heauen, and into paradiſe, and heard 
                     Act. 9. 15. 2. Cor. 12. 2. words which cannot be ſpoken, did not fulfill the law, and fully without tranſgreſſion keep Gods commandements; who but a blind hypocrite and proud Phariſie will arrogate to himſelfe the ſame? Bernard ſaith well: Aut te ergo ſi audes praefer Apostolo (nempe ipſius ista vox eſt) aut fatere 
                  
                     Bernard ſuper Cantic. ſerm. 58. 
                  cum illo te quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vitijs non carere: that is, Either if thou dareſt preferre thy ſelfe before the Apoſtle (whoſe ſaying this is) or els confeſſe with him that thou alſo art not void of vices.
               I will adde hereunto a few teſtimonies out of the auncient Fathers, to prooue that none in this life is aſſiſted ſo fully with Gods grace, that he perfectly fulfilleth the law, and keepeth Gods commaundements without any tranſgreſſion

or breach of them. Iustinus Martyr ſaith 
                     Iustinus dialog 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . pag 98.: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c. And that none hath exactly done all things, you your ſelues dare not denie: but there be which haue kept the things commaunded, ſome more, and ſome leſſe then others. S. Hierome ſaith: Facilia dicis eſſe Dei mandata, & tamen nullum proferre potes qui vniuerſa compleuerit. 
                  Hieron. ad Cteſiphontem aduerſ. Pelagianoi. 
                  Reſponde mihi, facilia ſunt an difficilia? Si facilia, profer quis ea impleuerit: Thou ſaiſt Gods commaundements be eaſie, and yet thou canſt not bring forth any that hath fulfilled all. Anſwere me, be they eaſie or hard? If they be eaſie, ſhew any that hath fulfilled them. Again, Haec hominibus ſola perfectio, ſi imperfectos ſe eſſe nouerint: that is, This is Idem ibid. the onely perfection of men, to acknowledge themſelues to be imperfect. Againe, Tunc ergo iusti ſumus, quando nos 
                  
                     Idem lib. 1. aduerſ. Pelagianos.
                   
                  eſſe peccatores fatemur, & iuſtitia noſtra non ex proprio merito, ſed ex Dei conſiſtit miſericordia: that is, Then wee be iuſt, when wee confeſſe our ſelues to be ſinners, and our iuſtice conſiſteth not in our owne merits, but in Gods mercie. Saint Augustine ſaith: Ipſa iuſtitia noſtra tanta eſt in hac vita, 
                  
                     Auguſt. de ciuit. Dei lib. 19. c. 27. 
                  vt petius peccatorum remiſſione constet, quam perfectione virtuium: that is, Our iuſtice is ſo great in this life, that it conſiſteth rather in the remiſſion of our ſinnes, then in the perfection of our vertues. And againe, Omnia mandata 
                  
                     Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 19. 
                  facta deput antur, quando quicquid non fit ignoſcitur: that is, All the commaundements are then reputed to be done, when whatſoeuer is not done is pardoned. Againe, Gratia Dei tribuit in hac vita ſtudium praecepta ſeruandi: & eadem, 
                  
                     Ad Bonifa. lib. 3 cap. 7. 
                  ſi quid etiam in illis praeceptis minus ſeruatur, ignoſcit: that is, The grace of God doth giue in this life a deſire to keepe his commaundements: and the ſame grace, if any thing in them be not obſerued, forgiueth it. The like I might alleage out of many other places of his workes: As, De natura & gratia cap. 36. Contra Iulianum lib. 4. cap. 3. De libero Arbitrio cap. 16. and ſuch others, but for ſhortnes ſake I omit them. Chryſostome ſaith: Neque enim alios licet in lege 
                  
                     Chryſoſt ad Rom. Hom. 17. 
                  iuſtificari, niſi eum qui cuncta adimpleuerit. Id verò nemini dum poſſibile factum eſt: that is, None can be iuſtified by the law, but he that hath fulfilled all. And that hath beene as

yet poſſible to no man. Bernard ſaith: Quomodo ergo iubenda 
                  
                     Bernard ſuper Cantica ſerm. 50 
                  fuit quae implenda nullo modo erat? &c. How was the law to be commaunded, which can by no meanes be fulfilled? or if thou rather thinke that the commaundement De affectuaſi. was giuen for the ruling of our affections, I will not hereupon ſtriue, ſo that thou alſo doe yeeld vnto me, that in this life it neither can, or euer could be fulfilled of any man. For who dare arrogate that to himſelfe, which Paul himſelfe confeſſeth that he had not comprehended? Neither was the commaunder ignorant, that the weight of the commandement exceeded mans ſtrength: but he iudged it to be profitable, that thereby they might be put in mind of their owne inſufficiencie, and ſo might know that they ought according to their power labour to the end of righteouſnes. Therefore by commaunding things impoſſible, he made men not tranſgreſſors, but humble, that euery mouth might be ſtopped, and all the world made ſubiect vnto God, becauſe that by the workes of the law no fleſh ſhall be iuſtified before him: for wee receiuing the commaundement, and feeling our owne want, will crie vnto heauen, and God will haue mercie vpon vs. Again, Quantumlibet in hoc corpore manens profeceris, erras vitia ſi putas 
                  
                     Idem ibidem ſerm. 58. 
                  emortuae, & non magis ſuppreſſa: velis nolis intra fines tuos habitat Iebuſaeus, ſubiugari poteſt, ſed non exterminari: ſcio (inquit) quod non habitat in me bonum: that is, How much ſoeuer thou doeſt profit, whileſt thou abideſt in this bodie, thou art deceiued if thou thinke vices to be dead in thee, and not rather ſuppreſſed: whether thou wilt or no the Iebuſite will dwell within thy coaſts: he may be ſubdued, but not vtterly baniſhed. I know (ſaith Paul) that no goodnes dwelleth in me. This was Bernards iudgement concerning our keeping of Gods commandements and fulfilling of the law. Ferus alſo a late Frier, but yet a man of better iudgement in many matters, then many others were, or be, hereof writeth thus: Per Chriſtum implenda erat omnis iuſtitia, per quem ſolum lex poterat impleri, nam maledicta erat natura humana, legem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      implere non potuit, iuxta illud: neque 
                  
                     Ferus in Matth. cap. 3. 
                  nos neque patres onus hoc portare potuimus: that is, All righteouſnes

was to be fulfilled by Chriſt, by whom onely the law could be fulfilled. For mans nature was accurſed, and could not fulfill the law, according to that ſaying, neither we nor our Fathers were able to beare this burden. Againe, the ſame Ferus ſaith: Si nemo poteſt gloriari ſe á peccato 
                  
                     In cap. 19. Matth.
                   
                  immunem, nec quiſquam gloriari poteſt ſe legem ſeruaſſe: cum peccatum nihil aliud ſit quàm tranſgreſſio legis: that is, If no man can glorie that hee is free from ſinne, neither can any man glorie that he hath fulfilled the law, ſeeing that ſinne is nothing elſe but the tranſgreſſion of the law. Hence from it followeth, that zealous Proteſtants want neither a liuely faith in Gods mercies, nor true obedience to Gods commaundements, although they vnfainedly confeſſe their manifold imperfections and ſinnes, by which they bee farre from perfectly fulfilling the law of God. And now pro coronide I will requite you with another Syllogiſme. They that thinke they can fulfill the law of God, be proud Hypocrits and Phariſees: but the Papiſts thinke that they can fulfill the law of God, yea can doe ſuperarrogant workes, I ſhould ſay workes of Supererogation aboue them that the law requireth: Ergo, the Papiſts be proud Hypocrites and Phariſees.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. The moſt points wherein the Proteſtants diſſent from the Catholikes tend to looſenes of life, and carnall libertie. 4. Article.
               
               
                  His article may be proued by a generall induction in all ſuch matters, as now the Proteſtants call in queſtion. Firſt ſay they that man hath not free will to doe good, but all goodneſſe proceedeth ſo from grace, that it lyeth not in his power neither to haue it, nor reſiſt it, but of neceſſitie it muſt haue effect.
               
               
                  To what other ende tendeth this ſenceles doctrine and fatall
                  
                  fancie, but to make men negligent in diſpoſing and preparing their ſoules to receiue Gods grace, and to rouſe it vp, and put it in execution after they haue it? making man not much vnlike a ſicke aſſe, who neither can diſpoſe nor prepare himſelfe to ſeeke for his medicine, but of neceſſitis muſt expect till his maſter thruſteth it into his throate, neither after hee hath drunke it, can cauſe it cure his diſeaſe, but careleſly letteth it worke as it will.
               
               
                  Secondly, they defend that men be iuſtified by faith alone, the which ſolifidian portion ouerthroweth flatly true repentance, ſorrow for ſinnes, mortification of paſſions, and all other vertues which tend to perfect reconciliation of the ſoule with God, cauſing men only to procure a certaine falſe fantaſtical apprehenſion of Chriſts death and paſſion, the which faith although they erroniouſly auerre, cannot be ſeuered from charitis, vertues, and good workes; yet both experience teacheth that it may, for alſo few or none haue faith, becauſe few or none of them haue theſe workes: and the Scriptures plainely proue that all faith, yea and the moſt noble faith which hath force to remoue mountaines, may be without charitie.
               
               
                  Thirdly, they aſſure vs that faith once had can neuer be loſt, the which vaine ſecuritie openeth the gap to all libertine ſenſualitie: for if a man be certaine that he hath true faith, if it be impoſſible he ſhould loſe it, if he be ſecured, that by it alone he ſhall be ſaued; why may be not wallow in all licencious pleaſures in this life, and neuer doubt of glorie in the other? could euer Epicurus haue found a better ground to plant his Epicuriſme? could euer Heliogabalus haue better patronized his ſenſualitie? could Bacchus, or Venus euer haue forged better reaſons to enlarge their dominion?
               
               
                  Fourthly, they ſay, a man cannot keepe all the commaundements: for what other cauſe I pray you; but thereby to make men negligent in keeping of them, to pretend an excuſe of impoſſibilitie, whenſoeuer they tranſgreſſe them.
               
               
                  Fiftly, why deny they the Sacrament of penance; but to make men careles how they liue, and neuer regard the auoyding of ſinnes, as though they were neuer to render an account of them? to hinder that ſhame and bluſhing which men conceiue
                  
                  in diſcouering their ſinnes, the which are moſt excellent meanes to deter them from ſinning another time: to ſhuffle vp reſtitution and ſatiſfaction of iniuries committed againſt our neighbours, to draw men from remorſe of conſcience by burying their ſinnes in eternall obliuion: the ſores whereof confeſſion rubbeth, and cauſeth.
               
               
                  Sixtly, why exclude they the true and reall body of Chriſt from the bleſſed Sacrament of the altar, but for that they perceiued how by the preſence thereof, they were deterred from ſinne and wickednes? for they knew well that ſinfull liues conſorted not with thoſe ſacred myſteries, and therefore they rather reſolued to baniſh Chriſt from the Sacrament, then ſinnes from their ſoules.
               
               
                  Finally, for what other cauſe haue they ioyned a new negatiue religion, wholy ſtanding vpon negation of Sacraments, ceremonies, rites, lawes, cuſtomes and other practicall points of the catholike Church; but for faſting, to bring in feaſting; for praying, playing; for deuotion, diſſolution; for religious feare of God, vaine ſecuritie; for zeale and mortification, a number of vaine verball ſermons: and to conclude, for a poſitiue working a flat deniall almoſt of all points of faith and religion?
               
            
            
               Anſwere
               
                  COncerning this article, I will firſt anſwere theſe cauils, which this cauiller obiecteth to the ſlaundering of our doctrine, as tending to looſenes of life, and carnall libertie: Secondly, I will ſhew to what looſenes and wickednes of life the doctrine of the Church of Rome tendeth, and what fruites, or rather weeds of wickednes it hath brought fourth euen in Popes & their clergie, and namely in Rome that holy Citie, where that holy Father reſideth, and whereupon he eſpecially breatheth and bleſſeth. He beginneth with free will, wherein he neither ſetteth downe truely our doctrine, nor the ſtate of the controuerſie: which is a vſuall cuſtomewith his companions, to peruert and alter the ſtate of the queſtion, as

Doctor Whitakers ſheweth that Bellarmine vſeth to do. I wil 
                     Epiſt. dedica. in controuerſ. 1. therefore lay downe our doctrine truely as we teach concerning this matter wee beleeue, that although in worldly matters concerning this life, man haue wit, reaſon, and vnderſtanding to know; and will, for the choiſe of good and euill, iuſt and vniuſt: yet in ſpirituall matters pertayning to eternall life, and the worſhip of God, we beleeue, that mans reaſon is ſo darkened, and will ſo corrupted, that he can neither truely know, loue, nor couet, much leſſe doe and performe, thoſe things which be agreeable to Gods will, and acceptable vnto his Maieſtie, vntill God in his elect and choſen people doe by his holy ſpirit regenerate them, by lightning their blind reaſon, and reforming their wicked wils. This we proue by theſe places of Scripture here following. The Lord ſaw that the wickednes of man was great vpon the earth, and all the imaginations 
                  
                     Geneſ. 6. 5. 
                  of the thoughts of his heart were euill continually. And that the imagination of mans heart is euill from his youth. Fleſh and 
                  
                     Ibid. cap. 8. 21. 
                  
                     Matth. 16. 17. 
                  bloud hath not reueiled it vnto thee, but my Father which is in Heauen. That light ſhined in the darkenes, and the darkenes 
                  
                     Ioh. 1. 5. 
                  comprehended it not. Which are borne not of bloud, nor of the 
                  
                     verſ. 13. 
                  will of the fleſh, but of God. Except a man be borne againe, he 
                  
                     Ioh. 3. 3. 
                  cannot ſee the kingdome of God. That which is borne of the fleſh 
                  13 
                  is fleſh: and that which is borne of the ſpirit is ſpirit. A man can receiue nothing, except it be giuen him from Heauen. No 
                  27 
                  man can come to me, except the Father which hath ſent me, 
                  
                     Cap. 6. 44. 
                  draw him. Therefore I ſaid vnto you, that no man can come 
                  65 
                  vnto me, except it be giuen vnto him of my Father. Without me ye can doe nothing. The wiſdome of the fleſh is death. The wiſedome 
                  
                     Cap. 15. 5. 
                  of the fleſh is enmitie againſt God. The naturall man perceiueth 
                  
                     Rom. 8. 6. 
                  not the things of the ſpirit of God, for they are fooliſhnes 
                  1. Cor. 2. 14. 
                  to him, neither can he know them, becauſe they are ſpiritually diſcerned. What haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued? No man 
                  
                     Cap. 4. 7. 
                  can ſay that Ieſus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghoſt. By the 
                  
                     Cap. 12. 3. 
                  grace of God I am that I am. Not that we are ſufficient of our 
                  
                     Cap. 15. 10. 
                  ſelues to thinke any thing as of our ſelues: but our ſufficiencie 
                  2. Cor, 3. 5. 
                  is of God. It is God that worketh in you, both the will and the 
                  
                     Philip. 2. 13. 
                  deede, euen of his good will and pleaſure. The God of peace 
                  
                     Hebr. 13. 21.
                  
                  make you perfit in all good workes to doe his will, working in you that which is pleaſant in his ſight through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Whoſoeuer committeth ſinne is the ſeruant of ſinne: If 
                  
                     Ioh. 8. 34. 36. 
                  the ſonne ſhall make you free, ye ſhall be free indeede. By theſe ſayings let the Chriſtian reader conſider of what value and force our wit and will is in heauenly matters, vntill the one bee lightened, and the other reformed by Gods grace and ſpirit. Hereunto I will adde a few places of the ancient Fathers. Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Quid boni operari poteſt perditus, niſi quantum fuerit perditione liberatus? Nunquid 
                  
                     Auguſt. Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 30 
                  libero voluntatis arbitrio? & hoc abſit: Nam libero arbitrio male vtens homo & ſe perdidit & ipſum. Sicut enim qui ſe occidit, &c. that is, What good can he that is loſt doe, but in as much as he is deliuered from perdition? Can he be reſtored by his free will? God forbid. For man vſing ill his free will, loſt both himſelfe, and it alſo. For as one killing himſelfe, doth kill himſelfe whileſt he liueth, but hauing killed himſelfe, doth not liue, nor can raiſe and reſtore himſelfe being dead: ſo when man ſinned by his free will, ſinne hauing gotten victorie, his free will was loſt. Againe, Quid tantum de naturae poſſibilitate praeſumis? vulnerata, ſauciata, vexata, perdita eſt: vera confeſſione, non falſa 
                  
                     De Natura & gratia cap. 53. 
                  defenſione opus habet. Gratia ergo dei non qua inſtituatur, ſed qua reſtituatur, quaeratur: that is, What doſt thou preſume ſo much of the power of nature? it is wounded, maymed, vexed and loſt: it hath neede of a true confeſſion, not of a falſe defence. Therefore the grace of God, not whereby the will is ordained, but whereby it is reſtored, is to be ſought. Many ſuch other ſayings he hath in his workes againſt the Pelagians, which I omit.
               But this man ſaith, that man may diſpoſe and prepare his ſoule to receiue Gods grace; and this he proueth not by Scripture, but (I will not ſay Aſſedly) by the ſimilitude of a ſicke Aſſe, that cannot diſpoſe, nor prepare himſelfe to ſeeke for his medicine. By this diuinitie men preuent Gods grace, and it doth not preuent them; men firſt ſeeke God, and not God them. For anſwere whereof, I would aske this man, whether it be not with all the of spring of Adam, as it

was with Adam himſelfe after his fall. Now whether did Adam ſeeke God firſt, or God him: the Scripture ſaith, that God called vpon Adam, and that he was ſo farre from 
                     Geneſ. 3. ſeeking God, that he and his wife hid themſelues from the preſence of the Lord God. So that if God in mercie had not ſought them, and called vpon them, it ſeemeth that they had neuer ſought nor called vpon God. And euen ſo it is with all his poſteritie, as our Sauiour ſheweth by the loſt ſheepe, whom the Shepheard ſeeketh and bringeth home, the ſheepe nothing diſpoſing nor preparing it ſelfe to ſeeke to the Shepheard, or to returne to the fould. So God ſaith: I was found of them that ſought me not. Did Peter 
                  
                     Iſai. 65. 1. repent vntill Chriſt had looked on him, and the Cock had crowed? What diſpoſition and preparation was in Paul to ſeeke the grace of Chriſt? Therefore I may truly ſay, that as Lazarus prepared himſelf being dead in graue, to be raiſed vp by Ieſus Chriſt; ſo doe men dead in ſinne, diſpoſe and prepare themſelues to receiue the medicine of Gods grace. Saint Paul ſaith: God which is rich in mercie, through his great 
                  
                     Epheſ. 2.4. 
                  loue wherewith he loued vs, euen when we were dead by ſinnes, hath quickned vs together in Christ, by whoſe grace ye are ſaued. To this doctrine the auncient Fathers beare witnes. Saint Augustine ſaith: Vt totum Deo detur, qui hominis voluntatem 
                  
                     August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 32. 
                  bonam & praeparat adiuuādam, & adiuuat praeparatam: that is, All is to be giuen to God, who both prepareth the good will of man to be helped, and helpeth it being prepared. Againe, Nolentem praeuenit vt velit, volentem 
                  Idem ibidem. 
                  ſubſequitur ne frustra velit: that is, God preuenteth him that is not willing, that he may be willing: and he followeth him that is willing, that he may not will in vaine. Now if this our doctrine concerning the will of man be the truth of God confirmed both by the word of God, and by the teſtimonies of the moſt learned Fathers, then without blaſphemie it cannot be ſaid to tend vnto looſenes of life, or carnall libertie: it teacheth vs both true humilitie, in acknowledging our owne miſerie and wants, and to attribute all to Gods grace and mercie, and to arrogate nothing to our ſelues, and doth it tend to carnall libertie, and

careles ſecuritie? We are both to exhort others, and alſo to ſtirre vp our ſelues, to feare and ſerue God in holines of life. And yet we muſt acknowledge, that God worketh thoſe things in vs, whereto he exhorteth vs. And therefore the ſame ſpirit that ſaith: Turne vnto me with all your hearts, 
                  
                     Ioel. 2. ſaith alſo, Turne vs O Lord, and we ſhall be turned. He that 
                     Lament. 3. ſaith, Make you a new heart, and a new ſpirit: for why will ye dye 
                  
                     Ezech. 18. 31. 
                  O houſe of Iſrael? ſaith alſo, I will put a new ſpirit within their 
                  
                     Ezech. 11. 19. 
                  bowels, and I will take the ſtonie heart out of their bodies, and will giue them an heart of fleſh. And againe: Create in me a 
                  
                     Pſalm. 51. 20. 
                  cleane heart, O Lord, and renew aright ſpirit within me. The ſame ſpirit that ſaith, Waſh you, make you cleane, ſaith alſo, 
                     Iſai. 1. 16. 
                  Purge me with Hyſſope, and I ſhall be cleane: Waſh me, and I 
                  
                     Pſalm. 51. 7. 
                  ſhall be whiter then Snow. And againe, I will power cleane water 
                  
                     Ezech 36. 25. 
                  vpon you, and a new ſpirit will I put within you, and ye ſhall be cleane: yea from all your filthines, and from all your Idols will I cleanſe you. The ſame ſpirit that ſaith: Be ye holy, for I am 
                  1. Theſſ. 5. 23. 
                  holy, ſaith alſo, the God of peace make you holy. And ſo we muſt come to that ſaying of Saint Augustine: Da quod iubes, 
                  
                     Auguſt. Confeſſ. lib. 10. cap. 29. 
                  & iube quod vis: Giue vs O Lord, that which thou commaundeſt vs, and then commaund vs what thou wilt. And therefore they reaſon like doltiſh Aſſes, which inferre vpon the exhortations to grace and godlines which be in the Scriptures, that there is a power and abilitie in vs to performe thoſe things whereunto God in his word exhorteth vs. Exhortations be Gods inſtruments and meanes which he vſeth, to worke his heauenly graces in vs. I would here end this matter, but that I muſt tell you, that you write improperly and falſely in charging vs, that we ſay all goodnes proceedeth ſo farre from grace, that it lieth not in mans power neither to haue it, nor to refuſe it, but of neceſſitie it muſt haue effect. Improperly you write, in putting, hauing Gods grace, in ſteede of obtaining and getting it. We ſay, it is in man to haue it, when God doth giue it, without which gift it is not in mans power to get it. But it is in man to reſiſt it. For the grace of God offereth ſaluation 
                     Tit. 2. 11. to all, but it is reſiſted and reiected of many, in that their hard and ſtony hearts will not admit it. The grace of

God is offered to men, when his word is preached, and they be called to repentance; but it is with many, and namely you, as Zacharie ſaith: They refuſed to hearken, and 
                  
                     Zachar. 7. 11. 
                  pulled away the ſhoulder, and ſtopped their eares, that they ſhould not heare. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant ſtone, 
                  As the Papiſts doe now. 
                  least they ſhould heare the Law and words which the Lord of hosts ſent in his ſpirit by the ministerie of the former Prophets. I know no man that denieth, but ſuch men doe reſiſt the grace of God, which yet is receiued of them that are written in the booke of life, whoſe wils it reformeth, and of euill wils maketh good wils, willing and couering thoſe things which be acceptable in Gods ſight. Finally, I thought good for the better ſatisfying of the reader in this matter, to let him vnderſtand: that wheras Eraſmus (a man as all men muſt needs confeſſe of great learning) was had in ielouſie of the Papiſts, as too much leaning to Luther and his doctrine, he was at the laſt prouoked and ſet on by them to write againſt him: who chuſing this matter of free will, and writing in defence thereof, yet afterward he retracted and reuoked his former opinion and writing, and was not abaſhed to confeſſe the truth, as appeareth by theſe his words. Verum vt ingenuè dicam; perdidimus liberum 
                  
                     Eraſm. lib. 19. epist. ad Ludonicum Vinem.
                   
                  arbitrium: illic mihi aliud dictabat animus, aliud ſcribebat calamus: that is, But ſimply to ſpeake my minde. We haue loſt our free will: in that matter my minde did indite to me one thing, and my hand did write another.
               I come now to the ſecond doctrine of ours, which you vntruely charge, and falſely ſlander to tend to looſenes of life, and carnall libertie, that men be iuſtified by faith alone, which you ſcornefully call a ſolifidian portion, and falſely ſay, but doe not proue, that it flatly ouerthroweth true repentance, ſorrow for ſinnes, mortification of paſſions, and all other vertues, which tend to the perfect reconciliation of the ſoule with God, &c. Where firſt I would exhort you (if the ſame might any thing preuaile with you) to take heed that by ſcorning in this manner at Gods truth, you ſhew not your ſelfe to be one of them that ſit in 
                     Pſalm. 1. 1. the ſeate of the ſcornefull. Salomon ſaith, that iudgements 
                  
                     Prou. 19. 29.
                  
                  are prepared for the ſcorners, and ſtripes for the backe of fooles. Secondly, as this doctrine which you deride is true, godly, and comfortable, confirmed by the word of God, and ancient Fathers; ſo doth it not exclude, much leſſe ouerthrowe repentance, or any other good worke, but ſheweth the true and right vſe of them. Saint Paul ſaith, We conclude that a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the 
                  
                     Rom. 3. 28. 
                  Law. And in the fourth chapter he reaſoneth thus from Abraham the father of the faithfull: If Abraham were iuſtified 
                  
                     Rom. 4. 2. 
                  by workes, he hath wherein to reioyce or glory: But Abraham hath not wherein to reioyce or glorie before God. Ergo, Abraham was not iuſtified by workes. And after ſaith; To him that worketh not, but beleeueth in him that iuſtifieth the vngodly, his faith is counted for righteouſneſſe. 
                     Galat. 2. 16. We know that a man is not iuſtified by the workes of the lawe, but by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, euen we haue beleeued in Ieſus Chriſt, that we might be iuſtified by the faith of Chriſt, and not by the workes of the lawe, becauſe that by the workes of the lawe no fleſh ſhall be iuſtified. This doctrine was neither ſcorned nor denied by the auncient godly Fathers, of ſome of whom I will ſet downe a few ſayings.
               
                  Origene ſpeaking of the theefe that was hanged with 
                     Origen. in 3. ad Rom.
                   Chriſt, ſaith, Pro hac ſola fide ait ei Ieſus, Amen dico tibi; Hodie mecum eris in paradiſo: that is, For this his onely faith, Ieſus ſaid vnto him: Verely I ſay vnto thee, this day ſhalt thou be with me in paradiſe. And of the woman that had the iſſue of bloud: Ex nullo legis opere, ſed pro ſola fide ait ad 
                  Ibidem. 
                  tam. Remittuntur tibi peccata: that is, For no worke of the law, but for faith onely he ſaid vnto her, Thy ſinnes be forgiuen thee. Hilarie ſaith: Solafides iuſtificat: that is, Only 
                     Hilar. in Math. Can. 8. & Can. 21 Ambroſ. in Rom. 3. faith doth iuſtifie. Ambroſe ſaith, Iuſtificati ſunt gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque vicem reddentes ſola fide iuſtificati ſunt dono Dei: that is, They are iuſtified freely, becauſe working nothing, nor rendring any recompence, they are iuſtified by faith onely through the gift of God. The like he writeth in Rom. 4. and 10. and vpon the 1. Cor. 1. Praefat. ad Galat. and vpon chap. 3. Saint Hierome ſaith: Conuertentem
                  
                  impium per ſolam fidem iuſtificat Deus, non opera bona 
                  
                     Hieron. in Rom. cap. 4. 
                  quae non habuit: God doth by faith only iuſtifie the wicked man conuerting, not by good workes which he had not. Many ſuch other ſayings I might alleage out of Hierome, but I leaue them. Saint Augustine faith: Sine bonorum operum 
                  
                     Auguſtinus in Pſal. 67. 
                  meritis per fidem iuſtific atur impius: that is, The wicked man is iuſtified by faith without the merits of good works. Againe, Quia ſola fides in Chriſtum mundat &c. that is, Becauſe 
                     In Pſal. 88. onely faith in Chriſt doth make cleane, they that do not beleeue in Chriſt, be voide of cleanenes. He hath alſo often this fine ſaying: Fides impetrat, quod lex imperat: that is, 
                     Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 117. Faith obtaineth that, which the law commaundeth: that is to ſay, the law commaundeth a righteouſnes of workes, faith obtaineth the righteouſnes of Chriſt, which onely is able to hide and diſcharge all our vnrighteouſnes.
               This doctrine which this diſdainfull man ſo much diſdaineth, is acknowledged of the Greeke Fathers. Baſil ſaith, This is perfect and ſound glorying in God, when a 
                     Baſil. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     pag. 388. man doth not boaſt himſelfe for his owne righteouſnes, but knoweth himſelfe to be voide of true righteouſnes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : i. And is iuſtified by only faith in Chriſt: 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Chryſostome ſaith: Nobis pro cunctis ſola fides 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. in Matth. Hom. 12 Idem de proditione Iuda.
                   
                  ſufficiat: that is, Onely faith is ſufficient to vs for all other things. Againe, Illud vnum aſſeuerauerim, quò ſola fides per ſe ſaluum fecerit: that is, This I may affirme, that only faith by it ſelfe ſaueth. Againe, Rurſus illi dicebant, qui 
                  
                     Idem in Galat. cap. 3. 
                  ſola fide nititur, execrabilis eſt: hic contrà demonſtrat, qui ſola fide nititur eum benedictum eſſe: that is, They ſaid, he that leaneth only to faith is accurſed: but Paul on the contrarie part ſheweth, that he that leaneth to faith onely is bleſſed.
               Many ſuch other places out of the Latine and Greeke Fathers I might produce, but I omit them. I hope he will not ſay, that theſe Fathers which deliuered this doctrine of ſolifidian faith (as he diſdainfully termeth it) did ouerthrow repentance, mortification, and all other vertues. Nay this true faith, which neither falſely, nor fantaſtically,

but truly and effectually apprehendeth Chriſts death and paſtion, and applieth the ſame as a moſt ſoueraigne ſalue to cure all the ſores of our ſoules, is that which grueth life to repentance, mortification, and all other vertues. For as faith without workes is dead, as S. Iames ſaith: ſo workes 
                     Iames 2. 26. Cyril in expoſit. Symbol. Nicen. tom. 1. Concil. pag. 543. Chryſoſt. in 1. ad Timoth. Hom. 5. without faith are dead, as Cyril and Chryſostome ſay. And we truly auerre, that this true faith in Gods mercifull promiſes, by the which Chriſt doth dwel in our hearts, cannot be ſeuered from charitie, vertues, and good workes, as he falſely affirmeth, but faintly and fooliſhly prooueth that it may. His firſt reaſon is taken from experience, becauſe few or none of vs haue faith, for that few or none of vs haue theſe workes. How many or few of vs haue faith and good workes, you are no competent iudge for to determine. And therefore wee appeale from your affectionate and erronious iudgement, to the true and iuſt iudgement of God. I doubt not but before I haue ended this article, to proue that we be not ſo void of good workes, & ſo full of abominable wickednes, as your Popes and ſpitefull ſpiritualtie hath been.
               Your ſecond proofe you will draw out of the Scripture, that all faith; yea, and the moſt noble faith which hath force to remoue mountaines, may be without charitie. I 1. Cor. 13. anſwere, that Saint Paul ſpeaketh not there of the faith of Gods elect, but of that which is a gift to worke miracles, 
                     Tit. 1. 1. Matth. 7. which may be in wicked reprobates, ſuch as Iudas was: and ſo doth Oecumenius the Greeke Scholiaſt expound it in theſe words: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , 
                     Oecumen. in 1. Cor. 13. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. He ſpeaketh not of the common and Catholike faith of the faithfull, but of a certaine gift of faith. For there was a certaine kinde of gift, which by an equiuocation was called faith. So that S. Paul, as he had before compared charitie with the gift of tongues, and with the gift of propheſying: ſo here he compareth it with the gift of doing miracles. And as thoſe gifts may be in the wicked ſeuered from charitie, ſo alſo may this. Some writers alſo in the former chapter, where S. Paul ſaith: To another is giuen 
                  1. Cor. 12. 9.
                  
                  faith by the ſame ſpirit, do expound it of the particular faith of doing miracles. As Theophilactus: Non fides dogmatum, 
                  
                     Theophilact. in 1. Cor. 12. 
                  ſed miraculorum, que & montes transfert: that is, He ſpeaketh not of faith of doctrine, but of miracles which moueth mountaines. And therefore S. Paul meaneth, that if the whole faith which is in doers of miracles were in him ſeparated from charitie, as it may be, he were nothing. But that faith by which Chriſt dwelleth in the hearts of his elect, neither is, nor can be ſeparated from charitie, but worketh by it. And therefore S. Paul in his gratulations in the beginning of his Epiſtles, doth alwaies ioy ne them 
                     Galath. 5. 6. together, as being ſuch graces of Gods ſpirit, which be neuer ſeparated aſunder, Hearing of the faith, which ye haue in 
                  
                     Epheſ 1. 15. 
                  the Lord Ieſus, and loue towards all the Saints. To conclude 
                     Coloſſ. 1. 4. this point, that this doctrine doth not tend to looſenes of 1. Theſſ. 1. 3. life, we teach that they which doe not follow peace and 2. Theſſ. 1. 3. holines ſhall neuer ſee God, and that good workes are the 
                     Philem. 1. 5. waies, wherein wee muſt walke to the kingdome of God, 
                     Hebr. 12. and eternall life; to the which, they that doe not walke in them, ſhall neuer come. For without the holy Citie ſhall be dogs, and enchaunters, and whoremongers, and murtherers, and 
                  
                     Apocal. 22. 15. 
                  idolaters, and whoſoeuer loueth or maketh lies. And although good fruites make not the tree good, yet they be neceſſarie effects of a good tree: ſo euery tree that bringeth not forth good fruit ſhall be cut downe and caſt into the fire.
               
               The third doctrine of ours, which you vntruly charge 
                     Matth. 3. 10. to tend to looſenes of life, is, That faith once had can neuer be loſt: the which vaine ſecuritie (you ſay) openeth the gap to all libertine ſenſualitie: and hereat you make great exclamations. Here I will firſt cleere the doctrine, and afterward anſwere your vaine cauillations, and needleſſe exclamations. Faith is diuers waies taken in the holie Scriptures. Firſt, it is taken for the doctrine of faith, or the Goſpell which wee beleeue: as, By whom wee haue receiued 
                  
                     Rom. 1. 5. 
                  grace and Apoſtleſhip, to the obedience of faith among all Gentiles: that is, that all nations might obey the Goſpell. Alſo to the Galathians: This onely would I know of you, Receiued ye the ſpirit by the workes of the law, or by the hearing of faith, 
                  
                     Galat. 3. 2.
                  
that is, by hearing the Goſpell preached. So wee call the Chriſtian faith, and the Apoſtolicall faith. In this ſenſe faith being taken for the doctrine of the Goſpell: we confeſſe that many may know it, make profeſſion of it, and hiſtorically beleeue it, and yet afterwards may fall from it, as Iudas and many in Aſia did. Secondly, it is taken for 2. Tim. 1. 15. that promiſe which wee make in Baptiſme, whereby wee binde our ſelues to profeſſe true religion, and to beleeue in God, in whoſe name we be baptized. Hereof S. Paul ſpeaketh, Refuſe the younger widowes: for when they haue begun to 
                  1. Tim. 5. 11. 
                  waxe wanton againſt Chriſt, they will marrie, hauing damnation becauſe they haue broken the firſt faith. The which is to be vnderſtood of the firſt profeſſion of faith in Baptiſme, and not of the latter vow of ſingle life, as the Papiſts falſely and fooliſhly expound it. From this faith all they doe fall, which turne either on the right hand to falſe doctrine, or on the left hand to wicked life. Many other waies faith is taken, but this queſtion is of that true, liuely, and iuſtifying faith, which is the faith of Gods elect, whereby Chriſt dwelleth in their hearts, and they receiue nouriſhment 
                     Tit. 1. Epheſ. 3. and life from him. This faith may be couered by temptations and falles, as fire in the night with aſhes, but neuer vtterly extinguiſhed. For they in whom this true faith is, are like a tree planted by the riuers of waters, that will bring forth her fruite in due ſeaſon, whoſe leafe ſhall not 
                     Pſal. 1. 3. fade. And they that truſt in the Lord ſhall be as mount 
                     Pſal. 125. 1. Sion, which cannot bee moued, but remaineth for euer. They that by this faith are built vpō the rocki Ieſus Chriſt, hell gates ſhall neuer ouercome them. Chriſt ſaith, He that 
                  
                     Matth. 16. 18. 
                  beleeueth in the Sonne of God hath euerlaſting life. He that heareth my word, & beleeueth in him that ſent me, hath euerlaſting 
                  
                     Ioh. 3. 36. Chap. 5. 24. 
                  life, and ſhall not come into condemnation, but hath paſſed from death to life. He that beleeueth in me ſhall neuer thirſt. Saint Paul ſaith, Wherein after ye beleeued ye were ſealed with 
                  
                     Chap. 6. 35. Epheſ. 1. 13. 
                  the holy ſpirit of promiſe, which is the earneſt of our inheritance, for the redemption of that libertie purchaſed vnto the praiſe of his glorie. Theſe places ſufficiently ſhew, that that faith which is common to all Gods elect, and proper onely to

the elect, can neuer periſh, nor be vtterly loſt in them. And this true & comfortable doctrine bringeth no vaine ſecuritie, nor openeth the gap to any libertine ſenſualitie. For they that by this faith haue taſted how ſweete the Lord is, cannot but loue and feare God, and greatly delight in his commaundements. And that faith which ſwimmeth in mens lips, but is not printed in their hearts, nor ſhineth by 
                     Pſal. 112. 1. godlines and good workes in their liues, is a dead faith, and is no more that true faith, whereby we liue vnto God, then a dead man is a man. To conclude this matter, although we diſtinguiſh betweene iuſtification and ſanctification: yet we acknowledge that they be inſeparable, and the one doth neceſſarily follow the other. For whoſoeuer are iuſtified by Gods grace and mercie through faith in Chriſt Ieſus, be alſo ſanctified with Gods holy ſpirit, to abhorre that which is euill, and to cleaue to that which is good, and to ſerue God in true holines and righteouſnes 
                     Tom. 12. 9. Luk. 1. 75. all the daies of their life. And therefore we teach that they which without repentance perſiſt in ſinne, wallow in wickednes, and commit vngodlines with greedines, haue no faith, nor haue any aſſurance of the remiſſion of their ſins: but may be aſſured that the wrath of God hangeth ouer them, and if they doe not truly repent, and bring foorth fruites worthie amendement of life, will fearefully fall vpon them. So that you might haue ſpared your vaine and fooliſh exclamations, concerning Epicures, Heliogabalus, Bacchus and Venus, which are more honoured in Rome (as hereafter I will ſhew) then allowed of vs. For of whom did Mantuan the Italian Carmelite Frier an 100. yeeres paſt write this, but of your Popes and his fauourers: Neglecto ſuperum cultu, ſpreto
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tonantis imperio, Baccho indulgent, 
                  
                     De calamitat temper. lib. 2. 
                  Veneri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      miniſtrant: that is, Neglecting the worſhip of God, they ſerue Bacchus and Venus.
               Concerning the fourth point of doctrine, of keeping Gods commaundements, I haue ſpoken ſufficiently before. Onely now I ſay that our doctrine tendeth hereunto, to ſhew vs our miſerie by tranſgreſſing of them, that wee may thereby bee moued to hunger for Gods mercie in

Chriſt: and although we cannot perfectly fulfill them (for in many things wee ſinne all) yet wee ought according to 
                     Iames 3. 2. the meaſure of Gods grace giuen to vs, haue a care and conſcience to walke in them, and to frame our liues to the obedience of them.
               Whereas fiftly you charge vs, that wee deny the Sacrament of Penance, thereby to make men careles how they liue: I anſwer, that although we deny your penance to be a Sacrament, becauſe it hath no outward viſible ſigne, and reiect your clancular confeſſion, your abſurd abſolution, and your ſuperſtitious or rather blaſphemous ſatisfaction, thereby to anſwere Gods iuſtice, and diſcharge your ſins: yet we truly teach ye doctrine of repentance, as it is deliuered vnto vs in the word of God. We teach men to come to the knowledge of their ſins, by ye law of God, which is the 
                     Rom. 3. glaſſe to ſhew vs our ſpots, and the firſt ſtep to repentance: then to lament their ſinnes, whereby they haue offended their gracious God, and mercifull father, to confeſſe their ſinnes with remorſe of conſcience, both to God and men, whom they haue offended: and eſpecially wee call vpon men for amendement of life, in bringing forth fruits worthie of repentance, without the which there is no repentance. One part of which amendement is ſatisfaction to our brethren for iniuries committed, and reſtitution of goods vnlawfully and vngodly gotten. As touching our iniuries againſt God, we plead not our owne ſatisfaction, but craue Gods mercie in Chriſt Ieſus, who is our only ſatisfaction, and by whom only we ſeeke to haue remiſſion of them. Whereas you ſay, that your confeſſion rubbeth the ſores of ſinne, and cauſeth remembrance of them, I ſay that this more truly and effectually is wrought by the preaching of Gods word, whereby ſinne is more ſhewed, and the wrath, and iudgements of God againſt ſinne are more threatned, and thereby the conſcience more pricked and wounded, then by your confeſſion. So Dauid was brought to repentance for his foule ſinnes of adulterie and 2. Sam. 12. 7. murther, by Nathans preaching, and thundring Gods iudgements againſt him, and not by his ſecret confeſſing.

So the people hauing heard Peter preach the word of God, were pricked in their hearts, and ſaid vnto Peter, and the 
                     Act. 2. 37. Depaenitent. diſt. 5. cap in poenitent. in gloſſa.
                   other Apoſtles, Men and brethren what ſhall we doe? This is Gods holy ordinance, the other a plant which God hath neuer planted, but an inuention of man, as euen your 
                     Concil. tom. 1. part. 1. P. 155. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 19. Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 16. own Canoniſts againſt your Schoolemen do confeſſe. And what wickednes hath come of it, the eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie partly ſheweth, and God who ſeeth al ſecrets knoweth.
               To your ſixt accuſation I anſwer, that we exclude and baniſh our Sauiour Chriſt, neither from the Sacrament of his ſupper, nor from the hearts of the faithfull; but acknowledge that as by faith he dwelleth in the one, ſo by the ſame he is receiued of the godly in the other. Your falſe and groſſe doctrine of Tranſſubſtantiation, which the 
                     Epheſ. 3. 17. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Greeke Church neuer beleeued, and the Latine Church lately defined as Eraſmus ſaith, we iuſtly reiect and condemne. We exhort men, when they come to receiue that 
                     Eraſm. Anntotat. in 1. Cor. 7. holy myſterie, the Sacrament and pledge of our ſaluation in Chriſt, to examine themſelues: and ſo to eate of that breade, and drinke of that cup: For he that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation, becauſe he diſcerneth not the Lords bodie. But if (as you ſay) 1. Cor. 11. 28. ſinfull liues conforte not with this ſacred myſterie, I meruaile how your Prieſts liues conſorted with it, which how holy they were, I will ſhew hereafter. Laſtly, you charge vs with a new negatiue religion, wholy ſtanding vpon negation of Sacraments, ceremonies, rites, lawes, cuſtomes, and other practicall points of the Catholike Church: whereunto I anſwere, that we deny nothing that God hath commaunded, in the holy canonicall Scriptures, the which as I haue before ſhewed, is the onely rule of our religion and life. In deede we deny and defie your trifling traditions and vnwritten vanities, and inuentions, with the which you haue gone a whoring as the Prophet ſaith. If you can ſhew that we deny any thing, which God hath commaunded, as wee can plainely proue that 
                     Pſal. 106. 39. you doe, then ſpare not to charge vs with a new negatiue religion. You deny the ſufficiencie of the Scriptures, and

that all doctrine neceſſarie to ſaluation is contayned in them. You deny the ſame Scriptures to bee in the vulgar tongue, for all Gods people to reade and heare to their comfort. You deny prayer and the publike ſeruice of God to be in the ſame vulgar tongue. You deny Chriſt to be our only mediator betweene God & vs. You deny the Cup of Chriſts Supper to Gods people. You deny the lawful authoritie which Princes haue ouer their people & ſubiects, in all cauſes eccleſiaſticall and temporall. You deny mariage to eccleſiaſticall miniſters, whereby what great and horrible wickedneſſe you haue cauſed, I will hereafter declare. You ſay we bring in for faſting, feaſting; for praying, playing, &c. Concerning your faſting, conſiſting in a ſuperſtitious obſeruing of times, and diuerſitie of meates, and tending to the honouring of Saints, and ſatiſfying Gods iuſtice for your ſins, we deny it. But faſting purely vſed according to Gods word, to humble our ſoules before God, & to mortifie the wicked affections of our ſinful fleſh, we allow; and eſpecially that great and principall faſt, in abſtayning from ſinne, whereof Saint Auguſtine ſpeaketh in theſe words: Ieiunium autom magnum & gerale eſt 
                  
                     Auguſt. in Ioan tract. 17. & diſtinct. de conſecra. cap. Ieiunium.
                   
                  abſtinere ab iniquitatibus, & ab illicitis voluptatibus ſeculi, quod eſt perfectum ieiunium in hoc ſeculo: The great and generall faſt is to abſtaine from iniquities, and vnlawfull pleaſures of the world, which is the perfect faſt in this world. Chryſoſtome ſaith, Ieiunium dico abſtinentiam à vitijs, I ſay that faſting, which is to abſtaine from vices. 
                     Chryſoſt. in Ganeſ. hom. 8. Hereby let it be diſcerned, who doe moſt truely faſt. In deede I know that it is your manner, much to glorie in your writings and ſpeeches, of your outward faſting from meates, as the Phariſee in the Goſpell did, who gloried that he faſted twiſe a weeke, which neither God in his law 
                     Luk. 18. 12. had required, nor the Apoſtles of Chriſt (for any thing we reade) vſed. Whereby wee may note, that true godlynes neither is to bee meaſured by ſuch outward abſtinence from meates, nor is alwayes ioyned with it. Iohn Baptiſt vſed greater auſteritie in his diet, and abſtinence 
                     Matth. 11. 18. from meates, then our Sauiour Chriſt did; yet was his

life nothing ſo holy. Iohns Diſciples vſed more faſting then the Diſciples of our Sauiour Chriſt did. Yet it is not 
                     Matth. 9. 14. to be doubted, but our Sauiours Diſciples liued as godly or more, then they did. The Montaniſts Heretikes were greater Tertul. de I
                        •
                     iunio aduerſ. Pſychicos. faſters then were ye true Chriſtians, as Tertullian ſheweth. And S. Hierome writeth yt they obſerued three Lents in a yeere, and yet were Heretikes condemned by the Church 
                     Hierom. in Aggaetim. cap. 1. pag. 230. of God, although then fauoured by the Biſhop of Rome, as Tertullian ſheweth in the beginning of his booke againſt Praxeas. The Iewes vſed ſuch great abſtinence and faſting, that they brought weakeneſſe and ſickeneſſe to their bodies: as Saint Hieromie writeth, who neuertheleſſe were enemies to our Sauiour Chriſt. The Moſcouites which 
                     Hieronymus ad Algaſiam. quaeſt. 10. neuer acknowledged the Popes authoritie bee as great faſters as Papiſts are. And ſo alſo be the Turkes. And therefore theſe men neede not to boaſt ſo much of their faſting. Saint Paul ſaith, that bodily exerciſe profiteth little, but 1. Tim. 4. 8. godlineſſe is profitable to all things, and hath the promiſe of this life preſent, and that which is to come. Howbeit, as I will not deny, but that there may be leſſe faſting, and more feaſting, then were requiſit: yet that there is more feaſting and ſuperfluitie in fare now, eſpecially in eccleſiaſtical perſons, I thinke it would be too hard for this man to proue. Whence came theſe phraſes, As fat as an Abbot, he hath a face like an Abbot, and an Abbey Lubber, but of their immoderate fare and feeding? And how theſe men were giuen to gluttonie and exceſſe, I will ſhew at this time but by one example. Giraldus Cambrenſis in his Booke intituled, Speculum Eccleſiae, writeth, that the Abbot and Monkes of Saint Swithens in Wincheſter, came to King Henry the ſecond, hunting at Gilford in Surrey, and fell downe in myre and durt before him, pitifully crying out. The King asked them, what was the matter. They anſwered, that their Biſhop had taken three diſhes of meate from their dinners and ſuppers. He asked them how many he had left vnto them. They anſwered tenne, but from the foundation of their houſe they had vſed daily to haue thirteene diſhes at a meale. The king turned to his Nobles

and ſaid: By the eyes of God (for that was his oath) I thought their houſe had bin burnt, and now I ſee it is but a matter concerning their paunches. And then turning to the Abbot and Monkes ſaid: If your Biſhop deale not with you, as I haue done with my court, to bring you to three diſhes, I would he were hanged. This was the remedie, that theſe gluttonous Monkes found at the hands of that prudent Prince. Where the reader may note, not onely the great gluttonie, but ſhameles impudencie of theſe men or monſters, in making ſuch a lamentable complaint, for wanting of three diſhes, hauing tenne remayning. The ſame Cambrenſis writeth, that in ſome Abbeies they had at euery meale ſixteene diſhes, which ſlender diet was a good meanes to preſerue their vowed virginitie. Monkes bellies were Bacchus barrels. Hereof came the old ryming verſe. O monachi veſtri ſtomachi ſunt amphora Bacchi, &c. To come to the next, I wiſh there were more praying, and leſſe playing then there is: yet this wil I ſay, that there is now more true praying according to the will of God, & leſſe playing then was euer in poperie. Dicing and carding is in ſome reformed Churches aboliſhed, and of thoſe that truely profeſſe the Goſpel leſſe vſed, then it hath been of Papiſts. But I wil not Cicero pro Ligario. ſtand to proſecute the particularities that here you name. I will ſay vnto you as Tullie ſaid to Tubero, Habes Tubero quod eſt accuſatori maxime optandum, confitentem reum, &c. Thou haſt O Tubero that which an accuſer would moſt wiſh for, the partie accuſed confeſſing himſelfe guiltie, yet ſo confeſſing that hee was on the ſame ſide that thou Tubero and thy Father were. So we ſay and confeſſe, that there is leſſe deuotion, and more diſſolution, leſſe religious feare, and more vaine ſecuritie, leſſe zeale and mortification, then there ought to be: but I truſt hereafter to ſhew, that theſe vertues haue as much or more wanted, & theſe vices abounded among Papiſts, as they doe with vs.
               Now I will come to the ſecond part of my anſwere promiſed to this article. To ſhew to what looſenes & wickednes of life, the popiſh doctrine doth tend, and what weedes of wickednes it hath brought forth.
               
                  
Firſt their doctrine of keeping Gods word in a ſtrange tongue, and reſtrayning Gods people from reading and hearing of it, hath been and is a great cauſe both of error in doctrine, and wickednes in life. Our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, You erre not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of 
                  
                     Matth. 22. 29. Pſal. 19. 7. 8 
                  God. Dauid ſaith, That the law of God giueth wiſedome to the ſimple, it lightneth the eyes, it maketh Gods ſeruant circumſpect: and that it is a light vnto our feete, and a lanterne vnto our 
                  
                     Pſal. 119. 105. 
                  ſteppes. He ſheweth alſo that it is a meane to preſerue men from ſinne. For ſpeaking of the righteous man hee ſaith: The law of his God is in his heart, and his ſteppes ſhall not ſlide. And againe: I haue hid thy words in my heart, that I might 
                  
                     Pſal. 37. 31. Pſal. 119. 11. 
                  not ſinne againſt thee. That good Father Chryſoſtome, who was a moſt earneſt exhorter of all men to the reading of 
                     De Lazaro & diuite. Homil. 3. & ad Rom. in praefatione.
                   the Scriptures ſaith: Magna aduerſus peccatum munitio Scripturarum lectio: magnum praecipitium, profundum barathrum Scripturarum ignoratio. Haec haereſes peperit, haec vitam corruptam inuexit, haec ſurſum & deorſum omnia miſcuit: that is, The reading of the Scriptures is a great ſauegard againſt ſinne: the ignorance of the Scripture, is a ſlipperie meanes to fall into ſinne, and a deepe gulfe of ſinne. This hath bred Hereſies, this hath brought in corruption of life, this hath turned all things vpſide downe. Againe: Hoc omnium malorum cauſa eſt, quod Scripturae ignorantur: that 
                     Ad Coloſſ. hom. 9. is, This is the cauſe of all euils, that men be ignorant of the Scriptures. Saint Hierome who exhorteth Ladies to bring vp their young daughters, being but ſeuen yeares old in the reading of the holy Scriptures, ſaith, Ama ſcientiam Scripturarum, & cartis vitia non amabis: that is, Loue the Hieron. ad Ruſticum. knowledge of the Scriptures, and thou ſhalt not loue the vices of the fleſh. Many ſuch other ſayings might bee alledged out of the Fathers, which plainely ſhew, that the keeping of the holy Scriptures in an vnknowne tongue, and the reſtrayning of Gods people from reading & hearing of them is a doctrine tending to looſenes, and great wickednes of life.
               Their doctrine of vowing chaſtitie and ſingle life, and prohibiting matrimonie, what an occaſion it hath been of

horrible filthines and wickednes of life, I will briefly declare. Chryſoſtome of ſome women in his time which vnder 
                     Chryſoſt. tom. 5. quod regulares faecmi. tum viris cohabitant.
                   a profeſſion of virginitie liued wickedly, ſaith thus: Virginitas iſta cum viris plus ab ominibus argultur quàm ſtuprum ipſum: that is, This virginitie of women with men is more reproued of all men then whoredome it ſelfe. Saint Hierome in his time complained of the like women. Sanctum virginum propoſitum, &c. that is, The euill name of ſome, which behaue not themſelues well, doth ſlander the holy Hieron. ad virg. Demetri. adem. purpoſe of virgines. Saluianus the Biſhop of Maſſalia, who liued in the yeare of our Lord 480. writeth thus: Nouum eſt prorſus religionis genus. Licita nō faciunt, & illicita committunt. Temperant à concubitu (quamuis nec hoc faciunt niſi à licito) 
                  
                     Saluianus lib. 5. de prouidentia.
                   
                  & non temperant à rapina, &c. i. This is a new kinde of religion. They do not things lawful: and commit things vnlawfull. They abſtaìne from copulation (although they abſtaine not from that neither, but frō that which is lawfull) and refraine not from rape. What doeſt thou O fooliſh perſwaſion? God hath forbidden ſinne; and not mariage, your deeds agree not with your ſtudies or profeſſion. You ought not to bee fauorets of vices. There is extant an epiſtle of Huldricus Biſhop of Auguſta, who liued about the yeare of our Lord 860. vnto Pope Nicholas the firſt concerning 
                     Paralip. Abba. Vſperg. p. 414. the forbidding of Prieſts marriage, wherein is declared, that Gregorie the Pope hauing giuen forth a decree, for the ſingle life of Prieſts, vpon the finding of 6000. childrens heads in ponds of water, where they had been drowned, did reuoke the ſame decree, and commended the ſaying of the Apoſtle, It is better to marrie then to burne: 1 Cor. 7. 9. adding thereunto, that it was better to marrie then to giue occaſion of murther. Of this epiſtle Pope Pius the ſecond maketh mention, intreating of Germanie, and it was found in a librarie in Holland before Luthers time. Bernard the Abbot, who liued Anno domini 1150. complaineth of the wicked life of the clergie, in theſe words: Epiſcopi & ſacerdotes huius temporis caſtitatis ſanctimoniam, ſine qua 
                  Bernardus in concil. Romenſi. 
                  nemo videbit deum; tam in corde, quam in corpore quomodo ſtudent obſeruare? traditi in reprobum ſenſum facrunt quae
                  
                  non conueniunt. Quae enim in occulto fiunt ab epiſcapis, turpe eſt dicere: that is, How doe the Biſhops and Prieſts of this time keepe holy chaſtitie both in heart and bodie, without which no man ſhall ſee God? Being giuen vp into a reprobate minde, they doe the things that are not conuenient: for what things bee done of Biſhops in ſecret, it is a ſhame for to ſpeake. Againe, Tolle de eccleſia honorabile connubium, &c. Take from the Church honorable marriage, 
                     Suprae. Cantica. ſermo. 66. and the bed vndefiled, and thou ſhalt fill it full of whoremongers, inceſtuous perſons, buggerers, and all kinde of vncleane ones. Againe, hee ſheweth that there 
                     Bernardus de ſuſtinenda perſecutione. cap. 29. were very many, who abſtayning from the remedie of marriage, fell afterwards into all kinde of wickednes. About that time, the Pope ſent a Cardinall called Ioannes Cremenſis into England, to diſſolue Prieſts marriages, who in a ſynod hauing inueyed againſt their marriage, ſaying, that it was a ſhamefull thing, that a Prieſt ſhould riſe from his wife, to conſecrate the body of Chriſt, was the ſame night after taken with a whore; as Fabian and other writers doe witnes. And I reade the ſame ſtorie in an ould 
                     Fabian. part. 7. cap. 229. fol. 154 written booke, which I thinke was the ſtorie of Henrie Huntington, where theſe words were added: Celari non potuit, taceri non debuit .i. It could not bee kept ſecret, and it ought not to be ſuppreſſed in ſilence. In the gloſſe vpon Gratians decrees it is ſaid, that a Prieſt for ſimple fornication is not to be depoſed from his benefice, and the reaſon is, becauſe Pauci ſine, illo vitio inueniuntur: i. Few are found 
                     Diſtinct. 81. Maximinus in gloſſa.
                   without that vice. Robert Holket an Engliſh man, & a Dominike Frier, who liued about the yeere of our Lord 1340. writeth of the Prieſts in his tune in theſe words: Sed pro
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     olor, his diebus verificatur nim is illud Iob. cap. 3. Eoce qui ſeruiunt ei, id est, Domino, non ſunt ſtabiles, & in Angelis ſuis raperit 
                  
                     Rober. Holket ſupra lib. Sapient. lecti. 173. 
                  prauitatem. Sunt enim quidā de modernis ſacerdotibus Angeli Sat anae per diſcordiam: quidā Angeli Apoſtatici per ſuperbiam: quidā incubi per laxuriam: & quidam Angeli abyſſiper auaritiam: i. But alas in theſe daies that ſaying of Iob cap. 3. is too true: Behold, they that ſerne the Lord, are not ſtable or conſtant, and in his Angels he hath found naughtines.

For of the Prieſts of theſe dayes, ſome be Angels of Satan, by diſcord and contention: ſome Apoſtaticall Angels by pride: ſome be filthy ſpirits by riotouſnes and vncleannes: and ſome the Angels of the bottomles pit, by couetouſnes. Againe, Hunc viliſſimum deum (Priapum) excolunt non pauci Idem ibidem. ſacerdotes moderni, diſcipuli illius magni Angeli de quo loquitur Paulus, 2. Cor. 12. Datus est mihi Angelus Satanae &c. This moſt vile and filthy god (Priapus) not a few Prieſts of theſe dayes doe ſerue, being the diſciples of that great Angell, of whom Paul ſpeaketh 2. Cor. 12. The Angell of Satan was giuen vnto me, &c. Auentinus writing of Pope Hildebrand, called Gregorie the ſeuenth, who earneſtly forbad Prieſts mariage ſaith: Maxima pars ſub honesto nomine 
                  
                     Auentinus in Annalibus Boiorum lib 5. pag. 564. excuſi. Ingolſtadij. 1554. 
                  castimoniae ſtupra incestus, & adulteria paſſim & impunè committunt: that is, A great number of Prieſts, vnder the honeſt name of chaſtitie, committed euery where, and without puniſhment, Whoredome, Inecſt, and adulteries. Yea, what other great miſchiefes were committed he there declareth. There is a treatiſe in the ſecond tome of the Councels, intituled Opuſculum Tripartitum, in the ſecond part whereof are theſe words. Tanta immunditia luxuriae notoria 
                  
                     Concil. tom. 2. pag. 1002. 
                  est in multis partibus mundi, non ſolum in Clericis, ſed etiam in Sacerdotibus, imo (quod horribile est audire) in praelatis maloribus: that is, So great vncleanenes is notorious in many parts of the world, not onely in Clearks, but alſo in Prieſts, and (that which is horrible to heare) in great Prelates. Panormitane who liued anno 1431. and was a great dooer in the Councell of Baſile, hauing ſhewed that the vow of continencie is not of the order of Prieſthood, nor holdeth by the lawe of God, but is a conſtitution of the Church, addeth theſe words: Credo quod pro bono & ſalute animarum, 
                  
                     Panormita. parte. 3. de clericis coniuga. cap. cum olim.
                   
                  &c. I beleeue that it were a holeſome ordinance for the good and ſaluation of ſoules, to leaue it to their owne wils, that would liue continently, and merite more, and that they which could not conteine, might marrie: becauſe that experience doth teach, that a cleane contrarie effect doth follow of that law of continencie, for that now adaies they doe not liue ſpiritually, nor be cleane, but be

defiled by vnlawfull copulation to their moſt grieuous ſinne, whereas they might liue chaſtly with their own wife, as the Nicene Councell ſaid. Iohn Gerſon in his time complained 
                     Iohn. Gerſon. Tom. 1. declar. defectuum virorum. Eccleſ.
                   that ſome Cloyſters of Nunnes were become ſtewes of ſtrumpets and whores: his words be theſe: Rurſus oculos aperite, & inquirite, Si quae 
                        ••
                     die Claustra monialium facta ſunt quaſi prostibula moretricum. Mantuan the Carmelite Italian Frier, who was an excellent learned man, and liued an hundred yeeres paſt, writing of this vow, and the fruites thereof ſaith thus:
               
                  Propterea leges quae ſunt connubia contra,
                  Eſſe malas quidam perhibent: prudentia patrum Lib. 1. Fastor.
                  
                  Non ſatis aduertit, dicunt, quid ferre recuſet,
                  Quid valeat natura pati; ceruicibus, aiunt,
                  Hoc inſuaue iugum nostris imponere Christus
                  Noluit: iſtud onus quod adhuc quàm plurima monſtra
                  Fecit, ab audaci dicunt pietate repertum,
                  Tutius eſſe volunt, qua lexdiuina ſinebat,
                  Iſſe via, veterumque ſequi vestigia patrum,
                  Quorum vita fuit melior cum conings, quam nunc
                  Nostra ſit, excluſis thalamis & coniugis vſu.
               
               
                  Mantuan here ſheweth, firſt, that many in thoſe dayes miſliked that law of vowing ſingle life. Secondly, that it had bred many monſters, that is to ſay, ſuch as for their wickednes did leade a monſtrous life. Thirdly, that the life of the auncient Fathers that liued in mariage, was better then of theſe which vowed chaſtitie. Polidorus Virgilius an Italian, and gatherer of the Popes Peter penſe here in England, writeth thus: Illud tamen dixerim tantum abfuiſſo vt ista coacta castit as illam coniugalem vicerit, &c. Yet this I 
                     Polidor. Virg. de inuent. rerum. lib. 5. cap. 4 will ſay, that this enforced chaſtitie is ſo farre from excelling that chaſtitie of mariage, that no crime and ſinne hath brought more ſhame to the order of Prieſthood, more euill to religion, nor more griefe to all good men, than that blot of the filthines of Prieſts. Wherefore peraduenture it were expedient, both for the Chriſtian common wealth, and the eſtate of that order of Prieſthood, that at the laſt the right of publike mariage were reſtored vnto Prieſts, which they

might holily vſe without infamie, rather then moſt filthily defile themſelues with ſuch a naturall vice. Such a looſenes and filthines of life, this doctrine of vowing chaſtitie, and forſaking matrimonie hath brought forth: whereof much more might be alleaged, but this ſhall ſuffice. Yet hereunto I will adde not onely their practiſe, but alſo their doctrine of hauing Lupanaria ſtewes, where whoredome is publikely permitted; for the reſtoring of which, Frier Perine preached at Paules Croſſe in Queene Marier daies, and D. Harding calleth them neceſſarie euils. And if it Confut. Apolog. were not the doctrine of the Church of Rome to allow them, neither would they haue ſo long permitted them, nor Sixtus the fourth would haue built Nobile Lupanar, a noble Brothell houſe in Rome, as before I alleaged out of Cornelius Agrippa. In theſe places, what filthines and inceſt, and what murders were committed, God knoweth, and auncient men may ſomewhat remember. God ſaith, There ſhall be do whore of the daughters of Iſrael, nor 
                  
                     Deut. 23. 17. 
                  whore keeper of the ſonnes of Iſrael.
               
               Another doctrine of theirs tending to looſeneſſe and wickedneſſe of life, is their doctrine of Popes pardons, whereby they falſely faine, that the Pope hauing the merites of Martyrs (which they cal the treaſure of the Church) to diſpenſe and beſtow at his pleaſure, hee can pardon whatſoeuer ſinne men haue committed, and acquit and diſcharge them both à poena & culpa; that is from the ſinne and puniſhment, which is more by their doctrine, then the death and paſſion of Chriſt can doe. What miſerable miſchiefe hath flowed from theſe pelting pardons of Popes (from which the ruine of their kingdome hath iuſtly proceeded) By Luthers dealing againſt them. I will declare out of the words of the Princes and eſtates of Germanie in their 100. grieuances exhibited to the Popes Legate at Norenberg anno 1522. and printed at 
                     In Faſciculo rerum expeiendarum. fol. 177. Grauamen. 3. Colen, anno 1533. In the third grieuance be theſe words: Illud importabile tam olim increbuit Romanarum indulgentiarum onus, &c. That importable burden of Romiſh pardons hath now a long time increaſed, when vnder pretence of pietie, either for the building of Churches in

Rome, or that the Biſhops of Rome promiſed avoyage againſt the Turke, they ſucked all the marrow of money from the ſimple and ouer eredulous Germanes. And that which is much more to be regarded, by theſe deceits, and the publiſhers and Preachers of them, the true godlines of Chriſtians is aboliſhed, whileſt they to broach the ſale of theſe their buls, and pardons, giue praiſe vnto their wares, that by theſe bought pardons, great and ſtrange offences both which be paſt, and that are to come, not onely of the liuing, but alſo of the dead, being in the fire of Pargatorie; (as theſe publiſhers of pardons call it) be pardoned, ſo that money be paide, and that it tingle in their right hand. And by the ſale and merchandiſe of this ware, both Germanie of money is ſpoyled, and Chriſtian godlines is extinguiſhed, when euery one according to the quantitie, which he beſtoweth vpon this ware, doth take vnto himſelfe libertie and impunitie to ſinne. Hence whoredome, inceſt, adulteries, periurie, murther, theft, robberies, vſurre, and an whole heape of miſchiefes haue proceeded, and taken their beginning. For what miſchiefes will men be afraid to commit, when they be once perſwaded, that they obtaine by money of theſe brokers and pardoning pediers; licence and impunitie to ſinne, not onely in this life, but alſo after their death? &c. By theſe words it doth euidently appeare, to what looſenes of life, and manifold miſchiefes this doctrine did tend, which 
                     Alphonſ. de cast. libr. 8. Duran. in lib. 4. diſt. 20. queſt. 3. Antoni. 1. parte ſumma. 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        , 10. cap. 
                     
                        •
                     . ſome Papiſts themſelues confeſſe, to haue no warrant of the Scriptures, 
                     Iohn. Maier. in 4. ſent. dist. 20. quest. 2. and other ſome affirme ſuch pardons as be graunted for twentie thouſand yeeres to be ſuperſitious and fooliſh. I might ſpeake much of this matter, but at this time I will conclude it with two ſayings, the one contained in a booke printed at Colen, anno. 1531. intituled Omio Eccleſiae, wherein after great complaint of theſe pardons, and of the wickednes that proceeded of them, be theſe words: Illi autem indulgentiarum buccinateres omnimodumpromittunt 
                  
                     Onns Eccleſ. cap. 15. fol. 26. 
                  ſecuritatem, quae paritnegligentiam, & negligentia offenſum Dei: that is, Theſe publiſhers of pardons doe promiſe all manner of ſecuritie, which breedeth negligence, and:

negligence the offence of God. The other is in the treatiſe I named before in the ſecond Tome of the Councels, called Opuſculum Tripartitum, in theſe words: Item habent 
                  
                     Opuſeul. Tripart. tom. 2. Concil. part. 3. pag. 1002. 
                  breuia, quae relinquunt in ſingulis parochijs, in quibus continentur tot indulgentiae, quod mir antur boni viri, Si vnquam de conſcientia Papae vel etiam alicuius boni viri potuerunt. illa procedere: that is, They haue alſo briefes which they leaue in euery pariſh, in which ſuch pardons be graunted, that good men doe maruell, that euer they could proceede from the conſcience of the Pope, or of any good man.
               The doctrine of the Popes diſpenſations to what looſenes and wickednes of life did it tend? Firſt, hereby inceſt was committed, as before I ſhewed how Pope Martin 5. gaue a diſpenſation to one to marrie his owne Siſter, Ferdinandus a King of Naples married his Annt, and lately Maximilian the Emperors daughter was married to King Philip. Comines. 
                  Philip of Spaine her Vncle, of whom he begat this preſent King. Theſe and many ſuch other were not done without the Popes diſpenſation. So Bonifacius a Biſhop of Germanie in one Epiſtle to Pope Zacharie ſheweth, how a great 
                     Tom. 2. Concil. pag. 447. man by the Popes diſpenſation maried his Vncles widow. Fabian our Engliſh Chronicler, who liued ſomewhat before Luther, writeth that Charles the fift the French King 
                     Fabian. 7. parte in Charles 5. pag. 189. did by the diſpenſation of Pope John 22. put away Blanch his wife, becauſe her mother was his Godmother, and afterward was by the ſame Pope diſpenſed with to marrie 
                     Vide Rob. Gaguinum lib. 8. fol. 133. his Coſin Germaine. Many Kings, by meanes of ſuch diſpenſation bought of the Pope for money, haue put away their lawful wiues, & married others: as Vladiſtaus King of 
                     Micha. Ritus lib. 2. Rob. Gaguinus in Ludo. 12. Sabel. Ennead. 10. libr. 9. Hungary, Ludauicus the 12. the French King, &c. Yea I am aſhamed to expreſſe what a horrible ſinne Pope Sixtus 4. did diſpenſe with, to be vſed in the hote moneths of Iune, Iuly and Auguſt, as writed Veſelus Groningenſis in his treatiſe of Pardons. They did diſpenſe to keepe as many Benefices as one could get, ſo that Cardinals of Rome, had ſome 200. ſome 300. Benefices, as I haue out of Io. Gerſon, and Nicholaus Clemangis before declared Hereof alſo that learned Earle of Mirandula Io. Franc. Picu: complained in

an Oration to Pope Leo 10. in theſe words: Sanctiſſime cauetur, 
                  
                     In faſciculo rerum expetend. ac fugiend. impreſſ, Coloniae 1553. fol. 210. 
                  ne multa ab vno Saoerdotia, quibus annexa ſit animarū cura, poſſideantur: diſpenſatio (ita ſolet appellar
                        •
                     ) effecit, vt iam non multa, non plura, ſed innumera teneant multi, qui ne diaconi quidem mererent ur officio defungi at eiuſmodi rerum diſſipationem non ego; ſed Bernardus tot ante ſee
                        •
                     lis appellauit: It was moſt godly prouided that one man ſhould not haue many Benefices whereunto cure of ſoules is annexed. But diſpenſation (for ſo it is called) hath brought to paſſe that many men haue not ſome, and many, but innumerable Benefices, which are not worthie to execute the office of a Deacon. This not I, but Bernard many ages paſt called a 
                     Ex lib. 3. de conſideratione ad Euge.
                   diſſipation: Io. Gerſon, hauing made mention of Bernards complaint, addeth theſe words: Quid modo dicendum putabimus de tam facill, vt appellant, diſpenſatione per Papam & 
                  
                     Io. Gerſon tom. 1 de potesta. eccleſia conſider. 10. 
                  Praelatos ſuper iuramentis licitis, ſuper votis rationabilibus ſuper immenſa beneficiorum pluralitate, ſuper generali conciliorum non obstantia, ſuper priuilegiorum & exemptionum commune ius priuantium conceſſione. Quis omnia denumeraret per quae nune vigor eccleſiasticae, imo & Euangelicae diſciplinae totus vere elanguit, emareuit, euanuit? 1. What ſhal we think is to be ſaid now of ſuch eaſie diſpenſing by the Pope, and Prelates, concerning lawfull othes, reaſonable vowes, infinite pluralitie of Benefices, the generall infringing of Councels, and the graunting of priuileges and exemptions, which take away common rights. Who can number vp all, by which the whole ſtrength of Eccleſiaſticall and Euangelicall diſcipline is languiſhed, withered, and periſhed. Hereby it may ſufficiently appeare what diſſolution and looſenes of life hath proceeded from the doctrine of the Popes power in diſpenſing.
               What great miſchiefes and calamities haue comen of their doctrine concerning the Popes power in depoſing Emperours, Kings and Princes from their Crownes and dignities, no pen can expreſſe, nor any minde ſufficiently conceiue. Hereupon infinite bloudie battels haue beene fought, Cities ſacked, Countries waſted, and millions of people conſumed. As appeareth by ye hiſtories of Henry 4.

                  Henry 5. Fredericke 1. and Fredericke 2. Ludouicus Bauarus, and many others. From hence came that fearefull faction of the Gibellines, holding with the Emperour; and the Guelfes, holding with the Pope: whereby not onely 
                     Vide Platinam in Bonifacio 9. the Cities of Italy were diſtracted and in a manner waſted, but alſo the inhabitants of ſingular Cities were diuided amongſt themſelues, expelling, killing, and murthering one another. So that euen in Rome it ſelfe, thoſe two great families the Columnes being Cibellines, and the 
                     Carion per Pencerum part. 4. lib. 5. pag. 94. Vrſines, being Guelfes, haue fought one with another daily three moneths together. Here by the way the Chriſtian Reader may conſider, how vainly and falſely the author of that other lying and ſlanderous Libell, intituled A Quartron of reaſons, &c. glorieth that peace and tranquillitie finde harbour and intertainment onely in Catholike 
                     Reaſon 24. pag. 150. Realmes and Common-wealths: and that their Catholike religion euer bringeth with it, peace, quietnes, loue, friendſhip, plentie, and all kind of happines. Whereby he ſheweth his groſſe ignorance in hiſtories, which moſt plainly and plentifully ſhew the contrarie, and that it was with Chriſtian countries in time of Poperie, as Azaria 
                  2. Paral. 15. 5. ſaid, There was no peace to him that did go out and in, but great troubles were to all the inhabitants of the earth. For Nation was deſtroyed of Nation, and Citie of Citie: for God troubled them with all aduerſitie. But of this I will ſpeake no more at this preſent: hereafter God may giue an occaſion more largely to handle it.
               Moreouer, their doctrine of eaſie expiation and purging of ſinnes by a Prieſts abſolution, by buying the Popes Pardons, by hearing Maſſes, by procuring Dirges & Trentals, by ſprinkling holy water, by bearing Agnus Dei, and many ſuch other paltries, whereunto did it tend but to looſenes and wickednes of life, by incouraging them to commit that, which might by ſuch eaſie meanes be diſcharged? Whereunto did their doctrine of worſhipping Images tend, but to Idolatrie? whereof what calamitie hath come to the Chriſtian Common-wealth, by weakening and renting aſunder the Empire, and thereby ſtrengthening

Infidels, I will not at this preſent ſhew. Whereunto doth their doctrine of keeping no oth nor faith with Infidels and Heretikes tend, but to cauſe periurie, and to take peace and tranquilitie from Countries? What fearefull plagues of God haue enſued hereof, might eaſily bee ſhewed. I will onely note one, namely that great ouerthrow which the Chriſtians receiued at Varna by Amurathes the Turk, with whom Vladiſtaus the king of Polonia, and Ioannes Huniades hauing made an honourable and 
                     Ponſi. Decad. 3. lib. 6. pag. 457. profitable peace, and confirmed the ſame with othes and writings, Pope Eugenius 4. vrged them firſt by Francis the Cardinall of Florence, and afterward by Iulianus the Cardinall, to breake peace, and to renew warre. Whereat the Turke wondred, and in the heate of the battaile, as Bonſlnius writeth, Amurathes tooke out of his boſome the writings of the peace and leagui, and looking vp to heauen 
                     Bonſin. Decad. 3. lib. 5. pag. 464. ſaid, This is the league, O Ieſus Chriſt, which thy Christians haue made, and confirmed by thy name, who haue falſified their faith giuen by thy name. If thou be God, as they ſay, auenge thy miurie, and puniſh theſe falſe abuſers of thy name. After which words the victorie fell to the Turke, there Vladiſlaus the King was ſlaine, all the Poionians killed, the Nobles of 
                     Aeneas Siluius Commens. in Europ. pag 399. Hungarie deſtroyed, Iulianus the Cardinall the Popes Meſſenger, and cauſer of that miſchiefe in flight murthered. By which great ouerthrow, the power of Hungarie was ſo weakened, that afterward it was the eaſilier conquered by the Turke. This great calamitie came of their doctrine of keeping no oth nor league with Infidels and Heretikes, and of the Popes power in diſpenſing therewith. And what a hindrance of ſtabliſhing peace among Chriſtian Princes it is at this day, any man of meane vnderſtanding may eaſily conſider.
               Now for as much as this man maketh ſo much of their deuotion and our diſſolution and looſenes of life; I will according to my promiſe before made, ſhew what holineſſe the Popes haue inſpired and breathed into the Citie of Rome, where they reſide, and into their owne Court. Bernard writeth of Rome in theſe words: Quid iam notum ſeculis
                  
                  quam proteruiae & faſtus Romanorum? gens inſueta paci, 
                  
                     Bernard. lib. 4. de conſiderat.
                   
                  tumultui aſſueta. Gens immitis & intractabilis, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adhuc ſubdi neſcia, niſi cum non valet reſistere: that is, What is ſo well knowne vnto ages as the frowardnes and pride of the Romanes? A people vnacquainted with peace, accuſtomed to tumult and trouble: A people cruell and vntractable, which will not as yet be ſubiect, but when it is not able to reſiſt. And of the Court of Rome those Curia bonos facilius 
                  Idem eodem lib. 
                  recipere, magis quàm facere conſueuit, &c. The Court rather receiueth good men, then maketh them good. But if wee haue proued, that moe good men haue become naught in it, then euill men haue become good then ſuch are to be ſought, as neither decaying in them is to be feared, nor amending is to be wiſhed, as being alreadie perfect.
               
                  Franciſcus Petrarch, who liued in Rome, greatly cōplaſſneth of the abominations of Rome, and the Popes Court: 
                     Anno 1370. 
                  Quicquid vſpiam perfidiae & doli, quicquid inclementiae ſuperbiae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quicquid impudicitiae, effraenatae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      libidinis audisti aut 
                  
                     Epiſt. 19. 
                  legisti, quicquid deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      impietatis & morum peſſimorum ſparſim habet aut habuit orbis terrae, totum iſtic cumulatim videas, 
                        〈◊〉
                      reperias. &c. i. What other treacherie and deceit, whatſoeuer crueltie and pride, whatſoeuer vncleannes and vnbridled luſt thou haſt heard or read, finally whatſoeuer impietie the world now hath, or hath had, thou maiſt ſee, it and finde it wholy in full heape and meaſure there. For I neede not to ſpeake of couetouſneſſe and ambition, of the which the one hath there ſet the throne of her kingdome, from whence ſhe might rob be and ſpoile the world; and the other dwelleth no where but there. I would the learned reader would reade the reſt of that 19. Epiſtle, and the next Epiſtle following, and ſee how hee painteth forth the a bominations of Rome, and the Popes Court, which would be too long and tedious for me to write. F
                     ••
                  er Mantuan (of whom I made mention before) writeth thus of Rome:
               St quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum, Ecloga. 5.
Verba dat. Heu Romae nunc ſala pecunia regnat:
Exilium virtus patitur.
               
                  
If Rome giue any thing, it giueth trifles; it receiueth gold, and giueth words: Alas onely money doth raigne in Rome, vertue is baniſhed out of Rome.
               Againe.
               Viuere qui ſanctie cupitis diſcedite Roma;
Omnia cum liceant, non licet eſſe pi
                     •••
                  . i.
               
                  Lib. 1. Sihiarum. You that deſire to liue godly depart ye from Rome, whereas all things are lawfull there, it is not lawfull to be a godly man there.
               Againe.
               I pudor in villat, ſi non patiuntur eaſdem
Lib. 2. Faſtorū. Et villae vomicas: vrbs eſt iam tota Lupanar. i.
               Depart honeſtie into villages, if they alſo be not infected with the like filthie impoſtumes. The citie (meaning Rome) is wholy become a Stewes. Many ſuch other complaints he hath which I omit. Palingenius another Italian Poet and Papiſt ſaith:
               Atque rogant, quidnam Romana ageretur in vrbe.
Cuncti luxuriae atque gulae, furtiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   doliſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ,
Marcel. Paling. in Capricorno. Certatim incumbunt, noſter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt ſexus vter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . i.
               They aske what is done in the citie of Rome. All are wholy giuen to riot, to gluttonie, to theft, to deceit, and to Sodomitrie.
               
                  Andrew Boord Doctor of Phiſicke and a popiſh Prieſt writeth thus of Rome: And ſhortly to conclude, I did neuer 
                     Andrevv Boord in his Breniarie of health named Extranag. cap. 2 ſee no vertue nor goodnes in Rome, but in Biſhop Adrians daies, which would haue reformed diuers encrmities, and for his good will and pretence he was poyſoned within three quarters of a yeere after hee did come to Rome, &c. Againe, And now to conclude, whoſoeuer hath been in Rome, and hath ſeene their vſuage there, except Ibidem. grace doe worke aboue nature, hee ſhall neuer bee good man after, &c. Catherina Senenſis that holy woman, whom Pius 2. canonized for a Saint, becauſe ſhe was his countrie woman, talking with Pope Gregorie the 11. complained, 
                     Antoni. part. 3. titul. 23. cap. 14. § 13. fol. 224. Foetorem infernalium vitiorū.
                   as Antoninus the Archbiſhop of Florence writeth, that in the Court of Rome where ſhould be a delicate paradiſe of vertues, ſhe found a ſtinke of helliſh vices. And

of the ſame Court Aeneas Siluius himſelfe a Pope writeth thus: Nihil eſt quod abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      argento Romana curia dedat. Nam 
                  
                     Aeneas Siluius epiſt. 66. p. 554. 
                  & ipſae manus impoſitiones, & ſpiritus ſancti dona venduntur. Nec peccatorū venia uiſi nummatis impenditur: that is, The Court of Rome graunteth nothing without money: for euen impoſition of hands, and the gifts of the holie Ghoſt are ſold. Forgiuenes of ſinnes is not graunted but to them that haue money. Againe, Quid eſt Romana curia 
                  
                     Idem epiſt. 188. pag. 763. 
                  his qui ſummam tenent, niſi turpiſſimum pelagus ventis vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      duriſſimis tempeſtatibus agitatum? Auaritiae ibi atque inuidiae procella vix quenquam intactum praeterit: that is, What is the Court of Rome in them that be the chief, but a moſt filthie ſea on euery ſide toſſed with winds and ſtrong tempeſts? The ſtorme of couetouſneſſe and enuie doth there ſcarſely leaue any one vntouched. And becauſe this man complaineth ſo much of our diſſolution and looſenes of life: I will adde hereunto a few complaints of ſome Papiſts, of the great and generall diſſolution, looſenes, and prophanenes of life of former ages, when Poperie moſt floriſhed. The ſame Aeneas Siluius who liued aboue eight ſcore yeeres paſt writeth vs: Vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeo apud homines noſtri 
                  
                     Hiſtor. de Europa cap. 21. p. 763. Commene. in dicta & facta Alphonſi.
                   
                  ſeculi diuina & humana perierunt: that is, So greatly both diuine and humane things bee periſhed with men of our age. Againe, Quid magis Barbarum quàm rapto viuere, & omnem aequitatem, omnem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      religionem proculcare, quem Italicum morem eſſe videmus? that is, What is more barbarous then to liue by robberie, and to tread vnder feete all equitie and religion, which wee ſee to be the manner of Italy? Againe, Quod cum ſingulari moestitia referimus, ſtatuum omnium 
                  
                     Epiſt. 128. 
                  & ſexuum omnium religionem, fidem, & vrbanos mores in populo Christiano adeo à iustitiae tramite declinaſſe, quod diuinam non ceſſant irritare & prouocare vindictam: that is, The religion, faith, and ciuill manners of all eſtates and ſexes (which with great griefe I declare) is ſo declined from iuſtice, that they ceaſe not to prouoke the vengeance of God. Againe, Nulla inter nos concordia, nulla obedientia eſt, neque ſpirituali, neque temporali paremus capiti. Iacet ſpreta 
                  
                     Epist. 398. 
                  religio, iuſtitiae nullus honos, ſides pene incognita: that is, There

is neither concord nor obedience? Wee obey neither the ſpirituall, nor temporall head. Religion lieth deſpiſed, righteouſneſſe not honoured, faith is in a manner vnknowne. Platina who was the Popes Secretarie, and liued at the ſame time, in many places greatly complaineth of the horrible corruption of life, both in the Prieſts and people in thoſe daies: Quanta ſit auaritia ſacerdotum &c. 
                  
                     Platina in Mar
                        
                           •••
                        . 1. How great couetouſnes of Prieſts, and eſpecially of thoſe that be in thiefeſt authoritie, how great leacherie, how great ambition and pompe, how great pride and idlenes, how great ignorance both of themſelues, & of Chriſtian doctrine, how little religion, and the ſame rather fained then true, how corrupt manners to bee deteſted in prophane and ſecular men; I neede not declare, when they themſelues doe do openly ſinne, a
                     •
                   though they ſought praiſe thereby▪ beleeue me, the Turke
                     •
                   more cruell enemie of Chriſtianitie then Diocle
                        •
                     ian or Maximinian will come (I would I might be a falſe Prophet) and euen now knocketh at the gates of Italie. The like complaints hee hath in many other places in Dionyſio. 1. in Bonifacio 5. in Stephan. 3. in Gregorio 4. &c.
               
               
                  Petrus. de Aliaco a Cardinall of Rome, in his treatiſe concerning the reformation of the Church exhibited to 
                     Petr. de. Aliaco 
                           〈…〉
                         rerum expetend. ac fugiend. 
                           〈…〉
                         Anno 1535. fol. 207. the Councell of Conſtance Anno 1415. hath theſe words: Adhibendae eſſet correctio circamores eccleſiaſticorum qutiam nimis (pro
                        ••
                      dolor) ſunt corrupti ira, gula, luxuria, pompa prodigautate, otio, & alijs generibus, quod cedit in graue laicorum ſeandalum: that is, A reformation were to be had about the manners of Eccleſiaſticall perſons, who now (which is greatly to bedamented) be ſo much corrupted by anger, gluttonie, riot, or vncleannes, by pompe, prodigalitie, idlenes, and other kinds of vices, which redoundeth to the great ſcandall and offence of lay men. That noble and learned Earle of Mirandula, in his Oration to Pope Leo the tenth and the Councell of Laterane concerning the reformation of manners, hath theſe words: Apud plaeroſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   
                  
                     Ibidem 209. 
                  religionis noſtrae primores, ad quorum exemplum componi atque formari plebs ignara debuiſſet, aut nullus, aut certe exiguus
                  
                  Dei cultus, nulla bene viuendi ratio atque inſtitutio, nullus pudor, nulla modestia: iustitia vel in odium, vet in gratiam declinauit, pietas in ſuperstitionem pene procubuit; palam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnibus in hominum ordinibus peccatur, ſic vt ſaepenumero virtus probis viris vitio vertatur, vitia loco virtutum honorari ſolèant, &c. that is, With moſt of the chiefe of our religion, to whoſe example the ignorant people ſhould conforme their liues, there is either no worſhip of God or ſurely very little, no manner nor order of good life, no ſhamefaſtnes, no modeſtie: iuſtice is turned either into hatred or into fauour, godlines in a manner into ſuperſtition. All forts of men doe ſo openly ſinne, that oftentimes vertue is made a reproch in good men: and vices be honoured in place of vertues, &c. The learned reader may there reade of other horrible ſinnes that then raigned, which I am aſhamed to vtter. If I ſhould ſet downe many other complaints of the horrible and vniuerſall wickedneſſe that raigned in Poperie, I ſhould be too tedious, I will end it with the complaint of one Bredenbachius, who was Deane of the Church of Mentz in Germanie in ye time of Charles the 4. about Anno 1370 in theſe words: Receſſit lex à ſacerdotibus &c. 1. The law is departed from Prieſts; iuſtice Bredenbath. in ſuae peregrinationis hiſtoria. from Princes, counſell from the Elders, faithfulnes from the people, loue from parents, reuerence from ſubiects, charitie from Prelates, religion from Monkes, honeſtie from young man, diſtipline from Cl
                     •
                  rkes, learning from teachers, ſtudie from ſchollers, eqeitie from Iudges, concord from Citizens, feare from ſeruants, fellowſhip from Countrimen, truth from Marchants, vertue from Noblemen, chaſtitie from Virgins, humilitie from widowes, loue from the married, and patience from the poore: O times, O maners moſt troubleſome and miſerable times, reprobate and wicked maners both of the Clergie and of the people? Here by this man & others who ſo much accure our manners, & theſe times, may ſee what hath bin the eſtate of the Church, & manners both of the Prieſts & people heretofore when Poperie moſt floriſhed; & therby may diſcerne with whom diſſolution & looſenes of life do moſt raigne.
            
            
               
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants make God the author, of ſinne, the onely cauſe of ſinne, that man ſinneth not, that God is worſe then the Diuell. 5. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer defendeth that God commaundeth, perſwadeth, vrgeth, impelleth to ſinne, maketh God the cauſe of ſinne.
               
               
                  
                     Caluin. lib. 1. Inſtitu. cap. 17. §. 11. & cap. 18. §. 4. & lib. 3. cap. 23. §. 7. 8. 9. 
                  But all Proteſtants ſay that God commaundeth, perſwadeth, vrgeth, impelleth to ſinne: Ergo.
               
               
                  The Proteſtants make God the cauſe and author of ſinne.
               
               
                  The Maior I proue: for if God perſwade or impell men to ſinne, as for example: Iudas to ſell Chriſt, Saint Peter to deny Chriſt, the Iewes to crucifie Chriſt: queſtionles he intended the 
                  Quintius ſerm. de prouidentia Beza Aphoriſ. 
                  ſacriledge of Iudas, the negation of Peter, the murder of the Iewes: and this much more effectually then Iudas, Peter, or the Iewes. For who can reſiſt his impulſion? or who can fruſtrate his intention? Voluntati eius quis reſiſtet? Who is able to oppoſe himſelfe againſt his will? yet what man is he, that in conſcience were not bound to conforme his will vnto the will of God, who is the author of all good wills, and the firſt rule and ſquare of all regular wils. Iudas, Peter, and the Iewes, if they bad followed the motions of God, who could haue blamed them, for following him, who could not erre in impelling, nor ſinne in perſwading them?
               
               
                  But ſome will ſay, that God moued them for a good end: videlicet, the redemption of man, and they intended an ill end: to wit, Lucre, reuenge, or ſome other ſiniſter effect. Yet this ſhift will not ſalue the ſore, for euill may not be done, that good may follow. Non ſunt facienda mala vt inde veniant bona: For 
                  
                     Rom. 3. verſ. 8. 
                  otherwiſe a man might ſteale to giue almes, be drunke for a meriment, commit aduontrie to beget children.
               
               
                  Moreouer why might not Iudas, Peter or the Iewes, intend
                  
                  that good end which God intended, and yet haue ſould, denied, and crucified Chriſt conforming their intentions to his, they being inſtruments and he the firſt moouer?
               
               
                  Againe it cannot be ſaid: but that God indirectly, and moſt effectually intended their ſinnes; for he that intendeth any effect wherewith another effect is neceſſarily conioyned, conſequently intendeth it: as for example. He that intendeth to burne a ſhip in the midſt of the ſea, intendeth conſequently the death of all the men which be in her. In like manner, if God intended that Iudas ſhould ſell Chriſt, vnto which action ſinne was neceſſarily adioyned, conſequently God intended the ſinne as well as the ſelling.
               
               
                  The Minor is to too euident. For the Proteſtants deride Gods permiſſion, they ſay that all his actions are energeticall, or effectuall: they deſperately auer, that Paules conuerſion, and Dauids aduoutrie, were in like manner the workes of God: And as he elected ſome to glorie, before the preuiſion of workes; ſo he reiected ſome from glorie before the preuiſion of ſins. Here hence I infer that according to the Proteſtants principles, God is moſt properly the author of ſinne, becauſe he impelleth moſt effectually thereunto.
               
               
                  Next that he is the only author of ſinne, for that he inforceth men vpon neceſſitie to ſinne, and they as inſtruments follow the motion of their firſt cauſe.
               
               
                  Againe, that man ſinneth not; for where there is neceſſitie of ſinning, there is no ſinne, for ſinne is free or no ſinne: beſides, how can man ſinne in conforming his will with Gods will?
               
               
                  Finally, God is worſe then the diuell: for that the wickednes of the diuell, principally conſiſteth in moouing, perſwading, and inducing of men to ſinne: the which by the Protestants confeſſion, God performeth more effectually then the diuell, becauſe the motions of God are more forcible, and leſſe reſistable, then the illuſions or ſuggestions of the diuell.
               
               
                  Many ſinnes moreouer are acted without the temptations of the diuell, ſome of ignorance, ſome of paſſion, but none without the motions of God: ſo that God is worſe then the diuell, both in cauſing a greater multitude of ſinnes then the diuell, and in the
                  
                  forcible manner of cauſing ſinnes, which the diuell cannot attaine vnto. The which doctrine is as good a ground for Atheiſme as euer hell could deuiſe: for were it not much more reaſonable to ſay there were no God at all, then to beleeue there were ſuch a God, as commaundeth, perſwadeth, vrgeth, impelleth men to ſinne; and yet for the ſame ſinnes will torment them with the inexplicable paines of hell.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  THis man ſheweth himſelfe to be like to the vnrighteous iudge, who neither feared God, nor 
                     Luk. 18. 2. Apoeal. 12. 10. Iohn. 8. 44. reuerenced man; or rather like him that is a ſlaunderer of Gods Saints, and a lyar, and the father of lies. For the Minor or aſſumption of this ſyllogiſme, that all Proteſtants ſay, that God commaundeth, perſwadeth, vrgeth, and impelleth men to ſinne, is as true, as that is, that Catholikes in England be wrapped in beares skinnes, and caſt vnto dogges to be deuoured, which was publiſhed in Rome by a printed booke, and ſet out in tables, confirmed with Pope Gregorie the 13. priuiledge. The In a booke intituled Eccleſ. Anglicanae Trophea, printed in Rome 1584. which as all men know to be a falſe malitious ſlaunder, to diſcredit our gracious Queenes mercifull and good gouernment: ſo is this alſo to defame the teachers of Gods truth. For if this man or any of his partners can proue, that either all Proteſtants, or any learned Proteſtant doth ſay, that God commaundeth, perſwadeth, vrgeth, and impelleth to ſinne, then will I yeeld vnto him, not onely in this, but in all other matters of religion. If this cannot be ſhewed, as moſt certainly it cannot, what a ſhameles man is this, to vtter ſuch a groſſe and palpable lye, as euen a blind man may (as it were) feele it with his fingers: and in what miſerable eſtate be thoſe ſimple ignorant ſoules, which credit ſuch lying ſpirits. But this is the iuſt iudgement of God againſt them that receiue not the loue of 2. Theſ. 2. 10. the truth, that they might be ſaued, to ſend them ſtrong

deluſion, that they ſhould beleeue lies. As touching the matter, we beleeue with our hearts, and confeſſe with our mouthes, that God tempteth no man to euill and ſinne, 
                     Ianus 1. 13. but euery man is tempted, when he is drawne away by his owne concupiſcence, and is intiſed: and that euery good gift and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of lightes, with whom is no variablenes, neither ſhadow of turning. Whereby Saint Iames meaneth that God is in ſuch ſort good, and ſo the giuer and author of good things, that there is no change or alteration with him, and therefore is the giuer of all good gifts and graces, and neuer of any euill. And we ſay with the Prophet Dauid: Thou art not a God that loueth or 
                  
                     Pſahn. 5. 8. 
                  willeth wickednes, neither ſhall euill dwell with thee. And with Saint Iohn, God is light, and in him is no darkenes. And as 1. Iohn 1. 5. there is no darkenes, that is to ſay, ignorance and wickednes in God; ſo is he not the author thereof, neither doth he commaund, perſwade, vrge, or impell vnto it. Fulgentius ſaith: Iniquit as igitur quia in Deo non est, vtique ex Deo non 
                  
                     Lib. 1. ad Monimum.
                   
                  est: that is, Becauſe iniquitie is not in God, therefore it is not of God. Theſe blaſphemies we deny and deſie, neither doe Caluine or Beza in the places by him quoted, or any 
                     Beza Aphoriſ. 1 where elſe affirme them. What is it then that they ſay? They ſay, that there is nothing done by any, neither vniuerſally, nor particularly, but by the ordinance of God, no not thoſe things excepted, which be euill and to be deteſted, not in as much as they be ordained of God, who is alwaies good and iuſt: but in as much as they be done by the diuell, and other wicked inſtruments. So that we ſay, that the power and prouidence of God (who maketh the 2. Cor. 4. 6. light to ſhine out of darkeneſſe) doth ſo cooperate and worke with the euill actions of wicked men, and doth ſo direct them to the execution of his holy ordinance, and iuſt iudgements, that the ſame, as they be done and directed by God, be pure and holy; and as they be committed of man be wicked and abominable. Ioſephs brethren did wickedly, and of malice ſell him into Aegypt for a

ſlaue: yet Ioſeph ſaith: God ſent me before you to preſerue your posteritie in this land, and to ſaue you by a great deliuerance. 
                  
                     Gen. 45. 7. 
                  Now then you ſent not me hither, but God, who hath made me a father vnto Pharaoh. And againe, When ye thought euill against me, God diſpoſed it to good. Here God did neither 
                     Chap. 50. 20. commaund, perſwade, nor impell Ioſephs brethren to ſell and ſend him into Aegypt: yet his omnipotent hand was in that action to turne it vnto good. So when the Chaldeans and Sabeans tooke away Iobs Oxen and Camels, and ſlew his Seruants, they were vrged and impelled thereunto by the diuell: yet Iob ſaith; God hath giuen, 
                  
                     Iob. 1. 21. 
                  and God hath taken, bleſſed be the name of God. To this ſpoiling of Iobs goods, God did not commaund, perſwade, vrge, or impell the Chaldeans and Sabeans; yet the ſame was not done without his prouidence and ordinance, who turned the ſame to his glorie, in prouing and purging Iob in the furnace of affliction, in making him a paterne of patience to all poſteritie, and in teaching men thereby not to iudge of men by outward afflictions and aduerſities, whereunto both the faithfull and wicked he ſubiect. So in the examples here ſet downe, the diuell put into the heart of Iudas to betray Chriſt, and impelled the Iewes to crucifie him; yet he was deliuered to them by the determinate counſell and foreknowledge of God, to doe whatſoeuer 
                     Act. 2. 23. & 4. 28. the hand and counſell of God had determined before to heldone. Thus theſe things which were done againſt the will, of God, were not done (as Saint Augustine ſaith) 
                     Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 100. beſide or without the will of God, that is, they were done againſt the commaundement and will of God reuealed in his word; yet not without the eternall purpoſe, counſell, and decree of God. And the ſame being moſt wickedlie committed by man; God turned and directed them to the endleſſe praiſe of his mercie, and the eternall ſaluation of his elect. So Saint Augustine ſaith: Cum ergo & pater tradiderit 
                  
                     August. epist. 48. ad Ʋincent. pag. 109. 
                  filium ſuum, & ipſe Christus Corpus ſuum, & Iudas Dominum ſuum, cur in hac traditione Deus est pius, & homo reus, niſi in re vna quam fecerunt, cauſa non vna est ob quam
                  
                  fecerunt: that is, Whereas both the Father gaue his ſonne, and Chriſt gaue his owne bodie, and Iudas gaue or betrayed Chriſt, why in this giuing is God holy, and man guiltie, but that in one thing which they did, there was not one and the ſame cauſe wherefore they did it. This is not to doe euill that good may come of it: for all actions as they are of God are good and righteous. For if a good tree cannot bring forth euill fruite as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith; 
                     Matth. 7. 18. how much leſſe can God who is the author of all goodnes, and euen goodnes it ſelfe, bring forth euill actions. Neither doth God directly or effectually intend the ſins of men, nor their danation, but his own glorie, which ſhineth not onely in the manifeſtation of his mercie towards the faithfull and godly, but alſo in the declaration of his iuſtice againſt the wicked and reprobate. The ſimilitude of intending the burning of a ſhippe, and conſequently the death of them that be in it, will not here hold. For God (as I haue ſaid before) doth intend neither the ſinne nor perdition of man, but his owne glorie, and the execution of his iuſt iudgements. Your owne Angelicall Doctor Thomas Aquinas to the like ſimilitude of drowning a ſhip anſwereth thus: Ad tertium dicendum, quod ſubuer ſio nauis attributur 
                  
                     Thom. Aquin. part. 1. ſumma queſt. 49. 
                  nautae vt cauſae, ex eo quod non agit quod requiritur ad ſalutem nauis: ſed Deus non deficit ab agendo quodeſt neceſſarium ad ſalutem, inde non eſt ſimile. i. To the third wee ſay, that the drowning of a ſhip is attributed to the Marriner as the cauſe there of, becauſe he doth not that which is requiſite for the ſafetie of the ſhip: but God faileth not from doing that which is neceſſarie vnto ſaluation: whereupon this is not like. So in burning a ſhip, malice in man is the cauſe thereof: but there is no malice in God, neither doth he deſire the death of him that dieth, but the execution 
                     Ezech. 18. 32. of his iuſtice. Yet it is true which Augustine ſaith: Deus operatur in cord bus hominum ad inclinandas voluntates 
                  
                     Auguſt. de gratia & lib. arbitr. cap. 21. 
                  eorum quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vult ſiue ad bona pro ſua miſericordia, ſiue ad mala pro ipſorum meritis, iudicio vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, ſemper autem iuſto. i. God worketh in the

hearts of men to incline their wils to whatſoeuer he will, either to good things by his mercie, or to euill for their deſerts, by his iudgment, which ſometime is open, and ſometime ſecret, but alwaies iuſt. And which Fulgentius ſaith: Deus licet auctor non ſit malarum cogitationum, ordinator eſt tamen malarum voluntatum, & de malo opere cuiuſlibet mali, 
                  
                     Fulgentius ad Monimum lib. 1. 
                  non deſinit ipſe botum operari. 1. Although God be not the author of euill cogitations, yet is hee the orderer of euill wils: and of the euill worke of euery euill man, he ceaſeth not to worke a good worke. Therefore theſe wonderfull workes of God whoſe iudgements are vnſearchable, and 
                     Rom. 11. 33. waies paſt finding out, are not curiouſly to be diſcuſſed, but reuerently to be adored. For, O man what art thou that 
                  
                     Rom. 9. 20. 
                  pleadeſt againſt God? In the probation of his minor, he firſt vntruly (according to his cuſtome) ſaith, that wee deride Gods permiſſion, the which is falſe: for we neither deride, no deny Gods permiſſion. God ſaid to Abimelech: I kept thee alſo that thou ſhouldeſt not ſinne againſt me: Non permiſi 
                  
                     Geneſ. 20. 6. 
                  te vt tangeres eam: therefore I haue not permitted thee to touch her. Againe, God permitted him not to hurt me. But we ſay, firſt, that God permitteth not ſinne inuitus, againſt 
                     Ibid. cap. 31. 7. his will, but of his will: for els he were not omnipotent. Secondly, that he doth not onely permit ſinnes, but alſo by his infinite wiſedome, and almightie power, draweth good out of them, and directeth them to his glorie. So S. Auguſtine ſaith: Hoc quippe ipſo quod contra Dei voluntatem fecerunt, de ipſis facta eſt voluntas eius, &c. In that thing 
                     Auguſt. ad Lament. cap. 103. which they haue done againſt the will of God, the will of God is done in them. Therefore the workes of the Lord are great, and are to be ſought out of them that loue them. So that by a wonderfull and vnſpeakeable manner, that is 
                     Pſal. 111. 2. not done without his will, which is done againſt his will: becauſe it could not be done, vnleſſe he did permit it: nec vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nolens ſinit, ſed volens, neither doth he permit it againſt his will, but with his will. Neither would he being good, permit euill to be done, vnleſſe hee being omnipotent, could alſo of euill doe good. S. Hierome ſaith: Dicā quicquam
                  
                  ſine te fieri, ô Domine Deus, & te nolente tantum poſſe 
                  
                     Hieron. in Habac. cap. 1. 
                  impium? Hoc ſentire blaſphemum eſt. Quum itaque tu ſis vniuerſitatis rector & Dominus, tu neceſſe eſt facias, quod ſine te fieri non poteſt. i. Shall I ſay that any thing is done without thee O Lord God, and that the wicked can doe ſo much thou being vnwilling? To thinke this is blaſphemous. Seeing therefore thou art the ruler and Lord of the world, thou muſt needs doe that, which cannot be done without thee. Wee ſay indeede that Gods workes be energeticall and effectuall not onely in the faithfull, but alſo in the wicked and reprobate, whoſe 
                     Exod. 4. 21. Rom 9. 18. hearts he hardeneth, 
                     Iok. 12. 40. and eyes blindeth, 
                     Rom. 1. 28. whom he giueth vp to a reprobate minde, 2. Theſſ. 2. 11. and to whom hee ſendeth a ſtrong deluſion to beleeue lies. Theſe be Gods iuſt iudgements, wherby he puniſheth the wicked, who yet are not impelled or coacted of God to theſe ſinnes, but willingly harden their owne hearts by the deceit of ſinne, ſhut their eyes that they may not ſee, 
                     Rom. 6. 19. giue vp their members ſeruants to vncleannes and iniquitie, and delight in deluſions, and in beleeuing lies, as Papiſts now doe. We doe not deſperatly auerre, but you doe falſely and impudently affirme, that we teach, that Pauls conuerſion, and Dauids adulterie, were in like manner the workes of God. This ſhameleſſe ſaying you haue picked out of Campians reaſons, out of which you haue like a 
                     Ratione 8. goodly Rapſodiſt gleaned a great part of this lying Libel, but you cannot ſhew it in the writing of any Proteſtant. This is calumniari, & non ratiocinare, to ſlaunder, and not rightly to reaſon. But you know your friends and fauourers will beleeue you, though it be neuer ſo falſe. And you haue learned that leſſon, Audacter calumniare, ſemper aliquid adhaeret. We ſay that Pauls conuerſion was a worke of Gods mercie, agreeable to his will reuealed in his word: Dauids ſinne of adulterie was a work which he hateth and repugnant to his ſaid will. God wrought mightily in Paul by his holy ſpirit, in conuerting his heart, in drawing him out of darknes, and in making him of a perſecuter, a preacher of his Goſpell, and a miniſter of his mercie. God did

not ſo work at that time in Dauid, but left him to himſelfe, to be tempted, drawne away, and ouercome of his owne corrupt concupilcence: yet wee ſay, that God did draw good out of that ſinne of Dauid, in making him a patterne of true repentance, and example of Gods mercie in forgiuing his ſinnes, and thereby teaching vs to walke warily, and flee carnall ſecuritie. For if ſo excellent a man, that was according to Gods heart, did ſo fouly and fearefully, fall, what may fall vnto vs, if we walke not circumſpectly, and pray not feruently to God to vphold vs with his hand, and to guide vs with his holy ſpirit.
               Touching Gods permiſſion, you write as though you neither did know what we teach, nor regard what your ſelfe doe write. Doe we teach that God elected ſome to glorie before the preuiſion of workes, and reiected ſome from glorie before the preuiſion of ſinnes? You ſhall find this falſe aſſertion in our bookes, when you finde the former ſhameles ſlaunder. We do not teach that God elected any to glorie before he did foreſee their workes. For from euerlaſting, he (to whom all things be preſent) did foreſee both the good workes of his elect, and the wicked workes of the reprobate. But this we ſay, that the foundation and cauſe of Gods election and reprobation is not his preſcience, and foreſeeing of the good workes of the one, and the wicked workes of the other, but his owne purpoſe, will, and pleaſure, and that good workes be not cauſes of Gods election, but fruits and effects of it. Saint Paul ſaith: Before the Children were borne, and when they had neither 
                  
                     Rom. 9. 11. 
                  done good, nor euill, that the purpoſe of God might remaine according to election, not by workes, but by him that calleth, It was ſaid to her, The elder ſhall ſerue the younger: At it is written, I haue loued Iacob, and haue hated Eſau. Againe, As he hath choſen vs in Christ before the foundation of the world, 
                  
                     Ipheſ. 1. 4. 
                  that we ſhould be holy and without blame before him in loue: Who hath predestinate vs, to be adopted through Ieſus Christ 
                  5. 
                  in himſelfe, according to the good pleaſure of his will, in whom 
                  11. 
                  alſo we are choſen, when we were predestinate according to the
                  
                  purpoſe of him, which worketh all things after the counſell of his owne will. Againe, God hath ſaued vs, and called vs with an holy calling, not according to our workes, but according to his 
                  2. Timoth. 1. 9. 
                  owne purpoſe and grace, which was giuen to vs through Christ Ieſus before the world was. Where we may ſee that the foundation and cauſe of Gods election is his owne will, pleaſure, and purpoſe, and not the foreſeeing of our workes. Saint Augustine ſaith: Quod ſi futuros eorum mores dicitur 
                  
                     August. lib. de Praedestina. & gratia. cap. 7. 
                  diuinum diſcreuiſſe iudicium, profectò illud euacuabitur quod praemiſit Apostolus dicens, &c. i. But if it be ſaid, that the iudgement of God did diſcerne the manners of Eſau and Iac̄ob which afterward would be, then ſurely that which the Apoſtle ſaid before, ſhall be made fruſtrate and in vaine, Not of workes, but by him that calleth, it was ſaid, The elder ſhall ſerue the younger. For he ſaith not, by the workes paſt, but hauing ſaid generally, Not by workes, he would thereby haue vnderſtoode workes both paſt and to come: workes paſt, which were none; to come, which as yet were not. Iacob was predeſtinate a veſſell vnto honour, becauſe not by workes, but by him that calleth, it was ſaid, The elder ſhall ſerue the younger. Againe, Nam quid est quod ait Apostolus, ſicut elegit nos in ipſo, &c. i. For what is that which 
                     August. lib. 1. de praedestin. Sancto. cap. 17. the Apoſtle ſaith, As he hath choſen vs in him before the foundation of the world. The which if it be therefore ſaid, becauſe God did foreſee that they would afterward beleeue, and not that he would make them to beleeue, againſt this foreſeeing the ſonne ſpeaketh, ſaying, You haue not choſen me, but I haue choſen you. A little after he ſaith: Elegit ergo Deus fideles, ſed vt ſint, non quia iam erant: i. God hath choſen the faithfull, that they might be, & not becauſe they now were. Againe, Vt eſſemus ſancti & immaculati: Non ergo quia 
                  
                     Ibid. cap. 18. 
                  futuri eramus, ſed vt eſſemus: i. That we might be holy and without blame, therefore not becauſe we ſhould be, but that we might be. Againe, Quos elegit, &c. i. Whom hee 
                     August. libr. 6. contra Iulian. cap. 8. hath choſen before the foundation of the world, by the election of grace, not of workes, either paſt, or preſent, or to come: for then grace were no grace. Thus Saint Auguſtine
                  
ſheweth, that Gods election is not his preſcience and foreſeeing of workes to come, but his owne grace, good pleaſure and purpoſe.
               Now I come to your illations which vpon theſe falſe aſſertions you falſely inferre. To the firſt I anſwere, that God impelleth no man to ſinne, and therefore God is not the author of ſinne. Secondly, God inforceth not men vpon neceſſitie to ſinne, but they ſinne willingly, and by the inſtigation of the diuell, who worketh in the children of diſobedience: therefore God is not the author of ſinne. In your third inference, where you ſay, that ſinne is free, or no ſinne: belike you hold with Pighius, and ſome other Papiſts, that originall ſinne is no ſinne: for it is not free for vs to be without it. And whereas you aske, how man can ſinne, in conforming his will with Gods will: I anſwere, that they that ſinne, doe not conforme their will to Gods will, but doe diſobey it, and oppoſe themſelues vnto it. This is the will of God (ſaith Saint Paul,) your ſanctification, 1. Theſ 4. 3. and that ye ſhould abſtaine from fornication. Finally, for as much as you can neuer ſhew, that it is the Proteſtants confeſſion that God moueth, perſwadeth, and induceth men to ſinne, therefore you make a falſe and blaſphemous collection, for the which the Lord rebuke thee Satan. Laſtly, whereas you thus charge vs to hold, that God is the author of ſinne, I would deſire you to ſhew, where we doe write more hardly of this matter, then Iohn Fiſher Biſhop of Rocheſter hath written hereof, whoſe words be theſe: Neutrum ſane potest ſine Deo, nec ad bonum ſe parare, 
                  
                     Iohn. Roſſenſ. aſſerti. Luther. conſuta. artic. 36. pag. 339. 
                  neque malum opus facere. Neque enim adulter abſque generali fluxu Dei, potest adulterandi facinus committere: ſed neque postquam ipſum admiſit, ſine ſpeciali auxilio Dei conari valebit vt reſurgat: i. Man can doe neither without God, neither prepare himſelfe to good, nor doe that which is euill. For the adulterer can neither commit adulterie without the generall influence of God, nor after he hath committed it, can hee endeuour to riſe without the ſpeciall helpe of God. And againe: Nam quantum ad ſubſtant iam
                  
                  actus, etiam operibus malis cooperatur Deus. Neque tamen 
                  
                     Idem ibidem. pag. 340. 
                  recte quiſquam Deo peccatum imput abit, quia tametſi cooperetur Deus ad ſubstantiam actus, non tamen ipſam deficientiam operatur, ſed hoc agit ſola voluntas: i. As touching the ſubſtance of the acte, euen God doth cooperate or worke with euill workes: yet may not any man rightly impute ſinne vnto God, for although God doth cooperate to the ſubſtance of the deede, yet he doth not worke the defect of the deede, but onely mans will doth that. Either ſhew where we haue written more hardly hereof, or elſe condemne this Biſhop, and Martyr for the Popes cauſe with vs. I truſt you will not ſay, that hee taught Atheiſme, which is ſo rife in Rome, as I haue before ſhewed, &c.
            
            
               
                  The Pamphlet. That faith once had may be loſt. 6. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHoſoeuer leeſeth his charitie, leeſeth his faith.
               
               
                  But Dauid when he killed Vrias loſt his charitie.
               
               
                  Ergo, Dauid when he killed Vrias loſt his faith.
               
               
                  The Maior is a principle vndoubted of in the ſchooles of Proteſtants: for they peremptorily affirme that true faith (ſuch as was in Dauid one of Gods elected) can no more be ſeuered from charitie, then heate from fire, or light from the ſunne, and therefore if Dauid killing Vrias, loſt his charitie, no doubt but therewithall, he loſt his faith.
               
               
                  The Minor I proue: for whoſoeuer remaineth in death is without charitie: but Dauid when he killed Vrias remained in death: Ergo, Dauid when he killed Vrias was without charitie. If he was without that which once he had, no doubt but then he loſt it, for he was depriued thereof for his ſinne.
               
               
                  The Maior propoſition of this laſt Syllogiſme thus I proue:
                  
                  for charitie is the life of the ſoule, and it is as impoſſible for a man to haue charitie and remaine in death, as it is impoſſible to be dead in body, and yet indued with a reſonable ſoule.
               
               
                  The Minor cannot be denied (to wit that Dauid by killing Vrias remained in death:) for it is the expreſſe word of God. Qui non diligit manet in morte. He that loueth not his 
                  1. Ioh. 3. ver. 14. 
                  neighbour remaineth in death: but certaine it is, that Dauid loued not Vrias when he killed him: Ergo, likewiſe certaine it is, that Dauid remained in death.
               
               
                  The ſame poſition might eaſily be proued out of the eighteenth chapter of Ezech. verſ. twentie foure. Si autem aucrterit ſe iuſtus a iuſtitia ſua, &c.
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  I Deny the Minor or ſecond propoſition, that Dauid in procuring Vrias to be killed loſt his charitie. For although in this cōbat betweene the ſpirit and the fleſh in Dauid, the ſpirit retired, and the fleſh preuailed; the new man was foyled, and the old man ouercame: yet was not the ſpirit vtterly extinguiſhed, nor the new man cleane killed. In deede Dauids faith fainted, his charitie was cooled, and his other gifts and graces couered, yet not cleane quenched: but there remained ſparkes of Gods ſpirit, which afterwards being ſtirred vp, and blowne by Nathans bellowes kindled and flamed to Gods glorie, and Dauids eternall comfort and ſaluation. Shall we thinke that Dauid had loſt all loue of God, of his law and of man? was he cleane depriued of Gods ſpirit? it appeareth by his owne words that he was not. Who vpon Nathans preaching and reprouing of his ſinne, prayed and ſaid: Take not thy holy ſpirit from me. Whereupon I reaſon thus: He that 
                     Pſalm. 51. 11. was not cleane depriued of Gods ſpirit, had not wholy loſt faith and charitie: But Dauid was not cleane depriued of Gods ſpirit; therefore he had not wholy loſt faith and charitie.

The firſt propoſition is euident by the words of Dauid: the ſecond is manifeſt. For it is abſurd to ſay, that the ſpirit of God ſhould continue in him, that hath loſt all graces and gifts of the ſpirit. It is with Gods elect and choſen children, as it is with fire which in the night is ſo hid and couered, that none appeareth; and yet in the morning is ſtirred vp, and is made to burne and to flame: and as with a tree, which in the winter hath neither fruite nor leafe vpon it; yet it hath a ſappe fallen into the roote, which in the ſpring ſpringeth, and bringeth forth both leafe and fruite: So is it with Gods holy Saints, they be ſometimes ſo ouertaken and ouercome with temptations, that they ſeeme to be as trees without fruite, withered, and periſhed: yet there remaineth a ſappe of Gods ſpirit and grace in them, which afterward riſeth and buddeth forth good fruite. And therefore to the ſecond propoſition of your ſecōd Syllogiſme I ſay, that although Dauid by thoſe foule and fearefull offences deſerued eternall death: yet he did not remaine in death; and although God hated thoſe ſinnes, yet hee neuer hated Dauid. For whom God loueth, he loueth to the end, and the gi
                     •
                  ts and calling of 
                     Iohn. 13. 1. 
                  
                     Rom. 11. 29. God are without repentance. If we loue a man, and yet hate ſome ſinne that he committeth, might not God, who is loue it ſelfe, hate Dauids ſinne, and yet loue him, and keepe ſome ſparkes of his ſpirit and grace in him, and ſo preſerue as the externall life of the body, ſo the internall life of the ſoule in him? So that neither Dauid remained in death, neither was his loue, no not to Vrias altogether extinguiſhed in him. No doubt but he did loue him as his true and faithfull ſubiect, and might loue him, as the ſeruant of God: yet in that temptation his owne ſelfe loue, and deſire to couer his owne ſinne and ſhame, did preuaile againſt his loue to Vrias, and did draw him to doe an act, which was no fruite nor effect of loue and charitie, and yet did not wholy quench loue in him. The Maior of your latter Syllogiſme, which needeth no proofe, you ſeeke to proue by a falſe aſſertion, in barely ſaying. According to

your manner, but not by any place of Scripture prouing, that charitie is the life of the 
                     •
                  oule. I ſay that faith is the life of the ſoule, the which I proue by theſe two ſayings of the Scripture. The Prophet Habacuk ſaith. The iuſt ſhall liue 
                  
                     Habac. 1. 24. 
                  by his faith. Saint Paul ſaith: In that I now liue in the fleſh, 
                  
                     Rom. 1. 17. 
                  I liue by the faith in the ſonne of God: who hath loued me, and 
                  
                     Gal. 2. 20. 
                  giuen himſelfe for me. Let this man ſhew two ſuch plaine places of Scripture, to proue charitie to be the life of the ſoule. Properly Chriſt is the life of our ſoules. Saint Paul in the place before alledged ſaith, Chriſt liued in me. And when Chriſt which is our life ſhall appeare. And our Sauiour 
                     Col. 3. 4. himſelfe ſaith: I am the way, the truth, and the life. For 
                     Ioh. 14. 6. when wee were dead in ſinnes, hee hath quickned vs, and at he hath reſtored life vnto vs, ſo hee doth continually nouriſh and preſerue life in vs. But this is attributed to faith, becauſe by it Chriſt dwelleth in vs, and we by it be put into the poſſeſſion of Chriſt, and of all the benefits of his paſſion. Concerning the place of Ezechiel, becauſe you doe not vrge it, I will not ſtand vpon it. We doubt not, but men may and doe fall from God, and iuſt actions vnto wicked and vngodly deedes, and may haue a temporall faith, and fall away from the grace of God. But this we ſay, that true faith in Gods elect, which are ſealed with the ſpirit of adoption, and to whoſe ſpirit Gods ſpirit doth 
                     Rom. 8. beare witnes, that they are the ſonnes of God, is neuer wholy luſt in them, and the ſame ſpirit worketh by charitie, which in them may bee cooled, but neuer cleane quenched. But of the loſing of faith, and of the coniunction thereof with charitie, I haue before intreated.
               Now to returne this argument in ſome ſort vpon you, whereas the Papiſts auerre, that the Popes faith cannot faile, I reaſon thus: He that loſeth his charitie, may loſe his faith: the Pope may loſe his charitie: Ergo, the Pope may loſe his faith. The firſt propoſition I haue proued alreadie, and haue ſhewed that true faith is not ſeparated from charitie, but worketh by it. And moſt manifeſt it is by Saint Iames, that the faith which is without charitie, 
                     Iam. 2. 26.
                  
and good workes is dead: So that if the Pope be without Charitie, then hee hath but a dead faith. And a dead faith, is as much faith, as a dead man is a man. That the Pope may bee without charitie, I thinke they will not deny: and if they doe, it may be proued by many examples. 
                     Platina in Ioan 13. Blond. epito. decad. 2. lib. 2. pag. 200. Supplem. Chronicorum. in Iohan 12. Pope Iohn the twelft, or as Platina reckoneth the thirteenth, tooke two of his Cardinals, and cut off the noſe of the one, and the hand of the other, as witnes Platina, Blondus, and many others. 
                     Platina in Stephan. 6. Supple. Chron. in Stephan. 6. 
                  Stephanus the ſixt did take the bodie of Formoſus his predeceſſor out of the graue, after he was dead, put him out of his pontificall habite, and put on him a lay mans attire, cut off the two fingers of his right hand, where with he did conſecrate, and threw them into Tiber. 
                     Platina. in Serg 3. Supplement. Chron. in Serg. 3 Pope Sergius the third tooke vp againe the body of the ſame Formoſus, did cut off his head as if hee had been a liue, and threw the bodie into. Tiber, as vn worthie of buriall. 
                     Platina. in Bonifac. 7. Suppl. Chron.
                   
                  Boniface the ſeuenth tooke Iohn a Cardinall, and put out his eyes. 
                     Platina. in Vrban. 6. Bonfinius. Decad. 3. libr. 1. pag. 354. Supplem. Chron. fol. 221. 
                  Vrban the ſixt, of ſeuen of his Cardinals which hee apprehended at Nuceria, tooke fiue of them, put them in ſackes, and caſt them into the Sea. 
                     Platina. in Inno. 7. Supplementum Chronico. lib. 13 fol. 226. 
                  Innocentius the ſeuenth cauſed by Lewes his nephew certaine citizens of Rome, which ſought the reſtitution of their ancient liberties, and the reformation of the Commonwealth decayed by his euill gouernment, to be throwne out of windowes, and ſo killed. Alexander the ſixt cauſed both the right hand and tongue of Antonius Mancinellus to bee cut out, becauſe hee had written an eloquent oration againſt his wicked and filthie life. Many ſuch other pranckes of Popes might bee alleadged, which were no more fruites of charity, then was Dauids procuring of Vrias death by the ſword of the Ammonites. But notwithſtanding theſe and ſuch other tragicall and tyrannicall acts, theſe Popes faith neuer failed. For they neuer had any, but a falſe and dead faith, ſuch a faith as the Diuell hath.
            
            
               
               
                  The Pamphlet. The Proteſtants ſhall neuer haue life euerlaſting, becauſe they will haue no merits, for which euerlaſting life is giuen. 7. Article.
               
               
                  
                     WHatſoeuer is giuen as wages, is giuen for workes.
               
               
                  But the kingdome of Heauen is giuen as wages.
               
               
                  Ergo, the kingdome of Heauen is giuen for workes.
               
               
                  The Maior or firſt propoſition may bee declared after this manner: for example, her maieſtie may beſtow 1000. pounds by yeare vpon ſome ſuiter, either gratis, of meere liberalitie, and ſo it is called a gift, donum, a grace or fauour: or vpon condition, if he behaue himſelfe manfully in the warres of Ireland, and in this caſe the reuennew is called merces, wages, Remuneratio, ſtipendium, a reward, or paiment; and although her maieſtie did ſhew him a grace and fauour to promiſe ſuch a reward, for performing ſuch a worke, the which he was bound vpon his allegiance otherwiſe to performe, yet once hauing promiſed, and the worke being performed; her maieſtie is bound vpon her fidelitie and iuſtice to pay that ſhe promiſed. In like manner God may giue vs the kingdome of Heauen, without any reſpect or regard of workes, as he giueth it to little children which are baptiſed, and ſo it is a meere gift, and a pure grace. Or he may giue it with ſome reſpect vnto our workes, and ſo he giueth it to all them, who hauing vſe of diſcretion keepe his commaundements: and for this cauſe it is called wages merces, a reward 
                  
                     Ad Rom. 4. v. 5 
                  and thus the Maior muſt be vnderſtoode: to wit, that whatſoeuer God giueth as wages, is giuen for workes, and ſuch wages are called merits. Wages then and merits haue a mutuall relation: for what are wages, but a reward of merits? and what are merits, but a deſert of wages?
               
               
                  
                  The Minor is moſt plaine, and inculcated in Scriptures: Voca operarios & redde illis mercedem: Call the workmen, and 
                  
                     Matth. 20. 8. 
                  pay them their wages. Ecce venio & merces mea mecum eſt, reddere vnicuique ſecundum opera ſua. Loc I come, and my wages with me, to giue to euery one according to his workes. Vnuſquiſque 
                     Apoc. 21. 12. propriam mercedem accipiet, ſecundum ſuum laborem: Euery one ſhall receiue proper wages, according to his labour. The like we haue in twentie other places of Scripture, 
                  1. ad Cor. 3. 8. Matth. 5. 12. & cap. 6. verſ. 1. 1. ad Tim. 5. 18. 
                  all which infallibly proue, that the kingdome of heauen is giuen as wages for merits: and conſequently that Proteſtants, who are enemies to merits, ſhall neuer attaine to the kingdome of heauen, which is purchaſed by good workes and merits. And for ſuch men we may well ſay, that heauen was neuer made, no more then learning for him that will neuer ſtudie, nor vertue for him who deſpiſeth the exerciſe thereof.
               
            
            
               Anſwere.
               
                  A euerlaſting life is not in your beſtowing, ſo we want not merites, to obtaine it, to wit, Gods mercies, and Chriſts ſufferings for vs, with the which wee content our ſelues; and nothing doubt, but they be ſufficient to diſcharge vs of damnation, and to bring vs to ſaluation. Of theſe merits ſweetly ſaith Bernard: Meum proinde meritum miſeratio Domini, &c. My merit is Gods mercie. I am not cleane voide of merite, 
                     Bernard. in Cantic. ſerm. 61. as long as he is not voide of mercies. And if the mercies of the Lord be much, I am much in merits. What though I be guiltie to my ſelfe of many ſinnes? Surely where ſinne hath abounded, grace alſo hath ſuperabounded. And if the mercies of the Lord be from euerlaſting to euerlaſting, I will alſo from euerlaſting ſing the mercies of the Lord. Shall I ſing my owne iuſtice? O Lord I will remember thy iuſtice onely, for that is mine alſo, in that thou art of God made iuſtice to me. So Augustine ſaith: Meritis ſuis nihil tribuunt ſancti: totum non niſi miſericordiae tuae tribuunt ô 
                  
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 139.
                  
                  Deus. i. The Saints attribute nothing to their own merits, they attribute all O God onely to thy mercie. Hierome ſaith, Tunc ergo iuſti ſumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur, & 
                  
                     Hieron. lib. 1. aduerſ. Pelagi. ſol. 120. 
                  iustitia noſtra non ex proprio merito, ſed ex Det conſistit miſericordia. i. Then are wee iuſt, when wee acknowledge our ſelues to be ſinners, and our iuſtice or righteouſnes conſiſteth not in our merits, but in Gods mercie. S. Baſil ſaith: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c. i. Eternall reſt or life is propounded to them that ſtriue lawfully in this life, not 
                     Baſil in Pſalm. 114 Homil. 16. pag. 224. rendred according to the merite or deſert of workes, but according to the grace of the 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . magnificēt God beſtowed vpon them that truſt in him. But theſe counterfeit Catholicks not content therewith, nor thinking the ſame ſufficient, will put vnto them the merits of Saints departed, and of men liuing, and their owne workes and ſatisfactions, thereby fully to effect that, which Gods mercies, and Chriſts merits are not able perfectly to performe. This their doctrine appeareth both by their prayers in their Maſſe-bookes, and Porteiſes, and alſo by the forme of a Monkes abſolution in theſe words: Meritum paſſionis Domini nostri Ieſu Christi, & bonta Maria ſemper Virginis, & 
                  
                     Luther. in 2. cap. ad Galat. Tileman. de Heſuſius de 600. erroribus Papiſta. loc. 9. de poenitent. fol. 67. 
                  omnium ſanctorum. Meritum ordinis, grauamen religionis, &c. i. The merite of the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and of bleſſed Mary alwaies a Virgine, and of all Saints. The merite of thy order, the heauines of thy religion, the humilitie of thy confeſſion, the contrition of thy heart, the good workes that thou haſt done, and ſhalt doe, for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, be vnto thee for the forgiuenes of thy ſinnes, to the increaſe of merite and grace, and to the reward of eternall life. Thus theſe men by their doctrine make Ieſus Chriſt not a full, perfect, and ſufficient Sauiour, and ſo infringe the ſaying of S. Peter: There is not ſaluation in any other: for among men there is giuen none other 
                  
                     Act. 4. 12. 
                  name vnder heauen, whereby wee muſt be ſaued. What is this but to deny the Lord that hath bought vs, as Peter alſo 2. Pet. 1. 1. ſaith? Whether this doctrine be agreeable to the word of God, let the Chriſtian reader by theſe places diſcerne and

iudge. Chriſt came to giue his life 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a raunſome for many. 
                  
                     Matth. 20. 28. Ioh. 1. 29. 
                  He is that lambe of God which taketh away the ſinne of the world. In him we haue redemption through his blood, that is, the 
                  
                     Coloſſ. 1. 14. 
                  forgiuenes of ſins. He hath made peace by the blood of his croſſe, 
                  20. 
                  and hath reconciled vs in the bodie of his fleſh through death. 
                  22. 
                  We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as ſiluer and gold, 
                  1. Pet. 1. 18. 
                  from our vaine conuerſation receiued by the traditions of the Fathers, but with the precious blood of Chriſt, as of a lambe vndefiled and without ſpot. He himſelfe bare our ſinnes in his bodie 
                  
                     Ibid. cap. 2. 24. 
                  on the tree, that wee being dead to ſinne, ſhould liue in righteouſnes, by whoſe ſtripes we are healed. The blood of Ieſus Chriſt 
                  1. Ioh. 1. 7. 
                  his ſonne clenſeth vs from all ſinne. Hee hath loued vs, and 
                  
                     Apocal 1. 5. 
                  waſhed vs from our ſinnes in his blood, and made vs Kings and Prieſts vnto God his father. As theſe places attribute our iuſtification and ſaluation onely to Ieſus Chriſt and his merits: ſo others doe detract and take the ſame from our workes and deſeruings. To him that worketh not, but beleeueth 
                  
                     Rom. 4 5. 
                  in him that iuſtifieth the vngodly, his faith is counted for righteouſnes. If it be of grace, it is no more of workes: or elſe 
                  
                     Rom. 11. 6. 
                  were grace no more grace: but if it be of workes, it is no more grace: or elſe were worke no more worke: By grace ye are ſaued, 
                  
                     Epheſ. 2. 8. 
                  through faith, and that not of your ſelues: It is the gift of God, not of workes, leaſt any man ſhould glorie. Who hath ſaued vs, 
                  2. Timoth. 1. 9. 
                  and called vs with an holy calling, not according to our workes, but according to his purſpoſe and grace, &c. Not by the workes 
                  
                     Tit. 3. 5. 
                  of righteouſnes, which we had done, but according to his mercie he ſaued vs. Although this which I haue ſaid may ſeeme ſufficient to anſwere this article, yet I will ſay ſomething to this ſyllogiſme.
               To the Maior or firſt propoſition I anſwere, that with men wages is giuen for workes: but with God (whoſe thoughts are not as our thoughts: nor waies as our waies) it is 
                     Iſai. 55. 8. otherwaies. Man may do labour and ſeruice to man, which may merit and deſerue by equitie and iuſtice wages and reward. For that there may be a proportion betweene the ſeruice and reward, and alſo a benefit and commoditie commeth to him to whom the ſeruice is done. As in this

example here alleaged, the Lord Deputie, or ſome other may doe ſome ſuch ſingular ſeruice in Ireland, that if her Maieſtie ſhould beſtow vpon him 1000. pound a yeere, he might in ſome proportion deſerue it, and her Maieſtie may receiue double benefit by it. But can wee doe any workes, that can either merit and deſerue the kingdome of God, or bring any benefit vnto God? Dauid ſaith, My weldoing extendeth not to thee. And as S. Paul ſaith, that all 
                     Pſal. 16. 2. Rom. 8. 18. the afflictions of this preſent life, are not worthie of the glorie that ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs: ſo may I ſay, that all our imperfect and ſtained workes are not worthie of the kingdome of God, which we haue not deſerued, but Ieſus Chriſt by his death and paſſion hath purchaſed for vs. Can a bond ſeruant by any ſeruices looke to deſerue an earthly kingdome? and can we which are bond ſeruants to God, in reſpect both of creation, and of redemption, looke to deſerue the kingdome of God? Chriſt our Sauiour ſaith: Doth he thanke that ſeruant, becauſe hee did that which was commaunded vnto him? I trow not. So 
                     Luk. 17. 9. likewiſe ye, when ye haue done all things which are commaunded you, ſay we are vnprofitable ſeruants: we haue done that which was our dutie to doe. If he that hath done all things which were commaunded, muſt confeſſe himſelfe to be an vnprofitable ſeruant, how much more muſt wee confeſſe our ſelues to be vnprofitable ſeruants, who haue both omitted many things commaunded, and committed many great and grieuous ſinnes prohibited? So ſaith Hierome: Si inutilis eſt qui fecit omnia, quid de illo dicendum 
                  Hieron. ad Cieſiphont. aduerſ. Pelagian. 
                  eſt qui explere non potuit? .i. If hee be vnprofitable that hath done all, what is to be ſaid of him, that could not fulfill all? Therefore wee are not to truſt in our owne merits, but in Gods mercie, which importeth our miſerie, and not worthines.
               But for the proofe of your Minor, you alleage the ſaying of our Sauiour Chriſt: Call the labourers, and giue them 
                  
                     Matth. 20. 8. 
                  their wages. I graunt that God doth giue to them that labour in his vineyard, a reward which is called wages, becauſe 

it followeth pietie and good workes, as outward wages followeth labour. But that this heauenly wages is not deſerued by our workes, as that other is by our labour, it euidently appeareth by that parable, where they that had wrought but one houre, receiued as much as they did which had borne the burden and heate of the day. Which ſheweth, that this reward came of grace, and not of merit, and ſo S. Ambroſe doth expound it: Non labori praemium 
                  
                     Ambroſ. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. 
                  ſoluens, ſed diuitias bonitatis ſuae in eos quos ſine operibus eligit, effundens, vt etiam hij qui in multo labore ſudarunt, nec amplius quam nouiſſimi acceperunt, intelligant, donum ſe gratiae, non operum accepiſſe mercedem. i. Not paying a reward vnto our labour, but powring foorth the riches, of his goodnes vpō them, whom he hath choſen without works, that they alſo which in great labour haue toyled, and haue receiued no more then the laſt, may know, that they haue receiued a gift of grace, and not a wages of workes.
               To your other places Apocal. 20. 12. and 1. Cor. 3. 8. I ſay with S. Paul, that God will reward euery man according to his workes, but not for the merite and deſert of their workes. To them that continuing in well doing ſeeke 
                  
                     Rom. 2. 6. 7. 
                  glorie, honour, and immortalitie, hee will giue euerlaſting life: and vnto them that are contentious, and diſobey the truth, and obey vnrighteouſneſſe, ſhall be indignation and wrath, tribulation, and anguiſh vpon the ſoule of euery man that doth euill. But you will ſay, why is not euerlaſting life the wages of good workes, as euerlaſting death is of euill workes and ſinnes. I anſwere, that our euill workes be ſimply euill, and being tranſgreſſions of Gods righteous law, offend his infinit maieſtie, prouoke his infinit wrath, and deſerue infinit paine and puniſhment. But our workes are not ſimply and perfectly good, but be imperfect, and are ſtained with the corruption of our finfull nature (as I haue before declared) and therefore cannot ſatisfie Gods infinit iuſtice, nor pacifie his infinit anger, nor deſerue his infinit glorie, but rather require Gods great mercie, as hath been ſhewed. And therefore Saint Paul in the ſixt to the Romanes hauing ſaid, that

the wages of ſinne is death, doth not ſay (which had been moſt meete to haue been ſaid, if this phariſaicall doctrine 
                     Rom. 6. 23. were true) the wages of good workes is eternall life: but hee ſaith: the gift of God is eternall life, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, as alſo Oecumenius doth wel obſerue.
               You confidently affirme, that the Proteſtants who are enemies to merits, ſhall neuer attaine to the kingdome of Heauen, which is purchaſed by good workes and merits. Where firſt I would aduiſe you to take heede, that you be not brethren to thoſe old heretikes called Hieraclitae, to whom Saint Auguſtine doth aſcribe this as an hereſie, that they denied infants to appertaine to the kingdome of Heauen, becauſe they had no merits. His words bee theſe: Hieraclitae ad regnum coelorum non pertinere paruulos 
                  
                     Auguſt. in catal. Haereſ. Haereſ. 47. 
                  dicunt, quia non ſunt eis vlla merita certaminis, quo vitia ſuperentur. i. The Hieraclites ſay, that infants belong not to the kingdome of Heauen, becauſe they haue no merits of ſtrife, whereby to ouercome vices. How neere you iumpe with theſe old Heretikes, as you doe in many matters with many others, let the Chriſtian reader indifferently iudge. Secondly, I ſay, that we are enemies neither to thoſe true merits of Gods mercies, and Chriſts ſufferings before mentioned, nor to mans good workes, but to the merit of them, and vaine confidence put in them. We ſay with Saint Auguſtine: Si vis alienus eſſe à gratia, iacta meritatua. i. 
                  
                     Auguſt. praefati. in Pſal 31. If thou wilt be voyde of grace, boaſt thine owne merits. Thirdly, wee beleeue that the kingdome of Heauen commeth to vs by inheritance, and not by the purchaſe of our workes and merits. Chriſt ſaith: Come ye bleſſed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, 
                  
                     Matth. 25. 34. 
                  from the foundation of the world. Saint Paul ſaith: If we be children, we are alſo heires, euen the heires of God, and heires 
                  
                     Rom. 8. 17. 
                  annexed with Chriſt. Thus the kingdome of Heauen is ours, in that we be coheires with Chriſt. By whoſe bloudie and bleſſed merits it is purchaſed to vs: and not by the workes and deſerts of vs vnprofitable ſeruants, and prodigall children, who haue alwayes neede to pray and ſay: Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, for in thy ſight ſhall no man 
                  
                     Pſal. 143. 2.
                  
                  that liueth be iuſtified: and if thou O Lord ſtraightly markeſt 
                  
                     Pſal. 130. 3. 
                  iniquitie, O Lord who ſhall be able to ſtand?
               
               To conclude, you that ſo ſeuerely cenſure vs, looke to your ſelues, and take heed you be not like that proud Phariſee, who gloried of his workes, and diſdained the ſinfull 
                     Luk. 18. Apoc. 3. 17. Publicane: and that you be not like the Angell of the Church of Laodicea, who ſaid that he was rich, increaſed 
                  
                     Athaneus lib. 12. 
                  with goods, and had need of nothing, and did not know that he was wretched, miſerable, poore, blind, and naked. And that you be not like that mad man of Athens, called Thraſelaus, who comming in his madnes to the hauen named Pyreum, did vainely imagine, that all the ſhippes and riches there, were his owne: but being cured, and brought to good vnderſtanding, he ſaw his pouertie, and perceiued that he ſcarce had a penny in his purſe. Euen ſo if you were throughly cured of this phrenſie of Poperie, you would acknowledge your owne miſerie, and hunger for Gods mercie: confeſſe your owne pouertie, that Chriſt may inrich you: your owne nakednes, that he may with the robe of his righteouſneſſe couer you: your owne guiltines, that he may acquite and iuſtifie you; and finally humble your ſelfe, that hee may exhalt you. For it is hee that filleth the hungrie with good things, and ſendeth the 
                     Luk. 1. 53. rich emptie away. I would you would ioyne with your owne Cardinall Poole in this poynt, who miſliking of Oſorius booke de iustitia dedicated to him, for attributing too much to mans iuſtice and righteouſneſſe, did adde this worthie ſaying, and worthie by al meanes to be receiued, That we can neuer attribute too much to the mercie and righteouſneſſe of God: nor too much take from the righteouſneſſe of man. This is written not only by Doctor Haddon in his booke againſt Oſorius: but alſo by Pruilus his Secretarie in his life, as that excellent Antiquarie, and learned man my good friend Maſter Camden did tell me. To conclude, bee not like the froward Iewes, who hauing 
                     Rom. 10. 2. 3. a zeale towards God, but not according to knowledge, being ignorant of the righteouſneſſe of God, and going about to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſneſſe, haue not

ſubmitted themſelues to the righteouſneſſe of God. For Chriſt is the end of the lawe for righteouſneſſe vnto euery one that beleeueth, but obey the counſell and calling of God: Ho, euery one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and yee that haue no ſiluer, come, buye and eate: Come I ſay, buye 
                  
                     Iſai. 55. 1. 
                  wine and milke without ſiluer and without money. Wherefore doe yee lay out ſiluer, and not for bread? and your labour without 
                  As buyers of Popes Pardons, Maſſes, &c. doc. 
                  being ſatisfied? Hearken diligently vnto me, and eate that which is good, and let your ſoule delight in fatnes. Encline your eares and come vnto me: heare and your ſoule ſhall liue, and I will make an euerlasting couenant with you, euen the ſure mercies of Dauid. The which ſweete and hid Manna of Gods mercies they that refuſe to eate, but had rather feede on the draffe of their owne muddie merits, ſhall neuer inherit heauen, but ſhall be caſt into the lake of fire and brimſtone, where the beaſt and falſe prophet are, and ſhall be 
                     Apocal. 20. 10. tormented day and night for euermore.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Faults eſcaped.
            Pag. 5. lin. 34. reade merita. p. 6. l. 16. quote Rom. 1. 2. p. 33. l. 9. r. ſcribitur. Ibid. l. 24. r. accommodant. p. 36. l. 14. in marg. r. Theophil. in Ioan. 14. p 43. l. 23. r. Hiueum. p. 45. l. 5. r. Sanctes. p. 48. l. 1. r. Guiues. p. 50. l. 32. r. omnium. p. 63. l. 31. r. they. p. 70. l. 19. r. one Pope. p. 100. l. 30. r. are waies. p. 120. l. 3. r. after this matter, a full point. p. 126. l. 22. put out, that is.
            
         
      
   