
      
         
            
            
            A
SVRVEY OF THE
POPES SVPREMACIE.
            
               VVherein is a triall of his title, and a proofe of his
practiſes: and in it are examined the chiefe arguments
that M. BELLARMINE hath, for defence
of the ſaid ſupremacie, in his bookes
of the biſhop of Rome.
            By FRANCIS BVNNY ſometime fellow
of Magdalene Colledge in Oxford.
            Hoſ. 8. 4.
            They haue ſet vp a king, but not by me, they haue made princes but I
knew it not.
            AT LONDON,
Printed by Ʋalentine Simmes for
Ralfe Iacſon dwelling in Paules
Churchyard at the ſigne of
the white Swan.
1595.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable his
very good Lord, HENRY Earle of
Huntingdon, Baron of Haſtings, lord Hungerford, Buttrois,
and Molleignes, Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the
Garter, L. Preſident of the Council at Yorke, & lord Lieutenant
in theſe North parts vnder her Maieſtie FRANCIS
BVNNY wiſheth increaſe of all graces
here, and euerlaſting life elſe-where.
            
               COnſidering with my ſelfe (right
Honourable) how many that
haue ſome deſire to wake in
right wayes and perfect paths,
are ſeduced and miſſe-led, and
that willingly, hauing this perſwaſion
once ſetled in their
hearts, that the biſhop of Rome
is their head here vpon earth, whom they ought to obey:
Seeing alſo on the other ſide, not a fewe, that
cloke and colour many their trecheries and treaſons,
when they ſuffer as euil doers for their wicked purpoſes
and practiſes, as if for their conſcience ſake they
were thus delt withall; I thought I could not beſtow
time better, then if by any means poſſible, I might by
my paine & trauel, light the candle of trueth to them
that are in darkneſſe and ignorance, and diſcouer the
hypocriſie of the other ſort, who vnder pretence of

conſcience, doe againſt all conſcience and duetie.
Both which partes, my deſire hath bene to performe
in this treatiſe. For if by triall of the Popes title, and
examining his euidence I prooue that he maketh an
vniuſt claime, to the ſupremacie ouer the whole
Church of Chriſt: and if in view of his doings, and
proofe of his practiſe it may plainlie appeare,Iohn 10. 1, 10. that as
he like a thiefe entred into that honor that now he inioyeth,
ſo in the ſame he plaieth the thiefe in deed, &
doeth nothing els but rob and ſteale, and kill: I hope
then the ſimple, and ſo the better ſort of the two, will
not ſo readilie as they haue done reſt vpon him, in
whom they ſhall ſee neither warrant, power to haue
his fulneſſe of power, nor any Chriſtian-like moderation
to vſe the ſame: And as for the other ſort, they
will finde no cauſe for them to crake of their conſcience,
when it ſhal appeare to the world, that it is not
vpon any ſure ground, neither ſtaied vpon any good
foundation. For doubtleſſe, if a good conſcience doe
giue vnto Caeſar that that is Caeſars or belongeth to
him,Mat. 22. 21 whether obedience, tribute, or any thing elſe, as
Chriſt commaundeth: If it make ſubiects to ſubiect
their very ſoules to the higher powers, as S. Paul biddeth,Rom. 13. 1.
and frameth vs to ſubmit our ſelues to all maner
ordinance of man for the Lordes ſake, as Saint Peter
willeth:1. Pet. 2. 13. And if theſe dueties of inferiours towardes
their ſuperiours, muſt bee performed for conſcience
ſake, as the ſame Apoſtle exhorteth vs, and S. Paul alſo,
Rom. 13. 5. I pray you what conſcience can there
bee in denying their obedience to their Soueraigne,
and giuing it to another? or in preferring him whom
their ſelues haue made their prince and king, that Romiſh
prieſt, before ſuch as God hath ſet ouer vs?

doubtleſſe, if in conſcience wee bee bound to obey
God, then can no man haue ſo much as a ſhewe of
conſcience, ſo to robbe Gods magiſtrates of that authoritie
that he giueth them, as doeth the church of
Rome. Men ſometime will make conſcience where
none is, as theſe men do, in tying themſelues to keep
other lawes then God hath giuen them. And if their
ſinne were no greater then ſo, yet ſhould they haue
no more thankes at Gods hand, then the Iewes had
for ſuch will-worſhippings, who when they looked
to merite by ſuch works,Eſa. 1. 12. it was ſaid vnto them, Who
hath required theſe things at your hands? But ſeeing
the iudgement wherein we and our workes muſt bee
tried,Rom. 2. 16. ſhall bee according to the Goſpel: that muſt
bee the touch ſtone, the rule and the ſquare to
prooue vs, not our good intentions, deuotions, or the
doctrines of men whatſoeuer.Mat
                     •
                  . 23. The Phariſes made
conſcience in waſhing before meate, and many ſuch
like things: but they are reproued of Chriſt, becauſe
they were ſo carefull to keepe thoſe their owne traditions,
ſo little regarding Gods commaundements;
and yet their clenſings might ſeeme to be ſome imitation
of Gods law. But with what forehead can the
church of Rome pretend any conſcience in doing
that which is expreſſely againſt that honour which
God commaundeth to bee giuen to magiſtrates, and
contrary to the humble duetie that good biſhops of
the purer age did alwayes performe? It is not therefore
conſcience carefully ſetled on Gods word, that
any of them doeth ſuffer for: but for their doings that
are expreſly againſt the ſame. For howſoeuer the anſwer
to the Engliſh Iuſtice (as alſo other their words
and writings) would ſeeme to iuſtifie that Catholike

crew,Anſwere to the Engliſh Iuſtice. cap. 1. as if they dealt nothing in matters of 
                  〈…〉
               
the euidence that hath bene ſufficiently and plentifully
giuen, and proued againſt them, do plainely declare
their vnnatural treaſons. Yea and that reconciling
which themſelues confeſſe to be the principal
worke of their Prieſt among vs, and whereof the writer
of the forenamed anſwere, ſayeth that it can nothing
at all, touch or trouble the quiet of our Countrey:
yet becauſe it is a vniting (of them that are reconciled)
vnto the Pope: (who is not onely a ſpeciall
enemie to our moſt gratious Soueraigne, but alſo a
tirannous tormentour of all ſuch as will not holde
their kingdomes of him, as many Stories doe proue)
it is therefore a withdrawing of them, from their dutie
and obedience towards her Maieſtie, whenſoeuer
the Pope ſhall ſo commaund. Yea one whom themſelues
truſt in great matters (called Bruiſe I ſuppoſe,Among the letters taken with Car the Hiſpauioliſed Scot.
for the booke I haue not by mee) writing to the Duke
of Parma, and reporting of the labours of ſuch Seminarie
Prieſtes as were among them in Scotland, ſheweth
that as they conuert the ſoules of ſuch as they
deale withall ſo euen then in the ſame inſtant they
doe affectionate them to the Catholicke King. What
plainer words can there be to ſhew to what end this
reconciling tendeth? You ſee Poperie and treaſon
muſt bee taught together, they muſt bee as twinnes,
they muſt grow together, and go together, foote by
ſoote. Yea now a dayes it is not right Popery, vnleſſe
it bring forth ſome treacherie. What hath their Catholicke
K. (a gulfe that wil neuer be ſatiſfied) to doe,
with them that are ſubiects to the King of Scots?
yea I would ſaine knowe what Allen himſelfe and his
brother Parſons doe meane by theſe words (vntil that

Day?) For in a letter of father Will.
               William Allen his letter. 
               Allens, which I
haue to ſhew (written I ſuppoſe with his owne hand)
to father D. P. Rectour of the Engliſh Colledge in
Rome, hee reporteth that M. George Gilbert came into
Fraunce, by the reuerend father Robert (Parſons) and other,
to k
                  •
               epe himſelfe vntill that Day. What meane
they by that Day? What meaneth Allen to write it
in great letters, as a thing that ſhould bee eſpecially
noted, and did perchaunce good to him and ſuch other
viperlike traitours, to thinke of it? It was doubtleſſe
no other day then that, which they hoped, the
rebellion in England, the troubles in Ireland, the
Spaniſh fleete ſo long looked for, and ſo much ſpoken
of, ſhould haue brought vnto them. Againſt ſuch
dayes of miſchiefe they ſeeke to praepare men before
by their reconciling, as that letter of Bruiſe before
mentioned, and many other vnanſwerable proofes
doe teach vs. And therefore ſeeing that vnder praetence
of reconciling men to God, they doe in deede
by all meanes poſſible deuote and tye them to ſerue
the Pope, and that inſatiable tirant, who haue a long
time, by many wicked and Popelike practiſes, ſhewed
themſelues vtter enemies to our eſtate and Prince:
what reaſon can be yeelded, why Princes may not by
moſt ſeuere puniſhments, preuent the perillous purpoſes
of ſuch ſecret conſpiratours, and knowen enemies?
May Popes vſe pollicies to get authoritie,
which by no right they can claime, and to keepe it
when they haue obtained it, (as in this treatiſe it will
appeare they did:) and may not Princes prouide for
the ſafetie of their perſons, the eſtabliſhing of their
kingdomes, and the maintenance of their ancient
and lawfull dominions? May vſurpers keepe that

which wickedly they haue gotten, and may not lawfull
Kings and Queenes defend their true and right
inheritance? Or muſt they ſuffer ſuch ſerpents within
their kingdomes, ſuch ſnakes as it were in their boſomes.
Wee cannot let ſuch fugitiue traitours, as
ſeeke the ruine of their natiue countrey, to wiſh alſo
that ſuch ready meanes to effect their deſires, might
not be hindred. No we cannot hinder their attempting
of the ſame, by their ſeditious pamphlets. But
wee hope that all Chriſtian princes, that knowe theſe
their lewd practiſes, not truſting the ſongs of thoſe
Syrens, will before it be too late, ſeeke to preuent the
meanes that they vſe to bring them to paſſe. Neither
need they who cal themſelues (though vntruely)
Catholikes, and maintaine the Romiſh religion within
their Dominions,Cap. 4. feare ſo to doe. For Allen himſelfe
(if that bee his anſwere to the Engliſh Iuſtice)
dare not ſay it is a matter yet defined, but diſputable
onely, whether the Pope may excommunicate or depriue
a Prince in caſe of haereſie or apoſtacie, and
conſequently to abſolue his ſubiects from their othe
and obedience to him. If this be a caſe yet not ouerruled
in the Popes Conſiſtorie, or at the leaſt in any
general Council; then euen Popiſh princes need not
bee afraide to withſtand by all meanes that they can,
ſuch dangerous deceiuers as come in ſheepes clothing,
making ſhewe of Religion, but are in deede rauening
wolues, ſecretly working treaſon. In ſo much as
they who fauour but too well the Romiſh Religion,
beginne now to know and deteſt theſe rouing runnagates,
whoſe counſels are miſchieuous, whoſe doings
are treacherous. And becauſe the very ground of
this their brag, that they ſuffer for conſcience ſake,

is this ſupremacie of the B. of Rome, and his power ouer
all, not Biſhops only, but Princes alſo: which they
would haue to be an article of religion, & ſo to touch
the conſcience, whereas it is in trueth, but a matter
of Popiſh pride and ambition: for this cauſe haue I
indeuoured in this treatiſe, to proue that it hath no
warrant in the word, or in the writings of the approued
and auncient fathers. Neither can al the Ieſuites
and Seminary prieſtes in Rome and Rheimes, bee able to
ſhew the article of the Popes ſupremacie, to be a Catholique
doctrine, and therefore it is not to be receiued
by their own rules. And becauſe it bringeth not
a litle light vnto the trueth, to know by what practiſes
they are become ſo great, and to what ends they haue
bent, or how they haue imployed their power which
they haue gotten by craft and ſhifts: I haue therefore
pointed vnto ſuch meanes as they haue vſed to aduance
their ſeat, and to ſome of their doings. whereby
it doeth moſt plainly appeare, that their only care
hath bin to make themſelues great and rich, nothing
at al regarding the glory of God, or ye good of Chriſts
flocke, which they ſay is committed to them. And
this I haue done by ancient or their owne hiſtories,
ſeldome ſtanding vpon the credit onely of our owne
writers, vnleſſe it bee in report of the actes of the later
Popes, which cannot be reported by any but ſuch as
were in, or after their dayes. But if I had more relied
then I doe, vpon the reportes of Proteſtant writers, I
ſhould haue the example of our aduerſaries for my
defence. This treatiſe I ſet forth vnder the defence
of your honours name, to whom I acknowledge my
ſelfe eſpecially bound in many reſpects. Which to
do I am the rather moued, that to that inward witnes

of a good conſcience, whereby I knowe your L. is incited
with a continual care, and vigilant eye, to preuent
the perilous practiſes of thoſe buſie brokers for
that Catholique king (as they call him) & other enemies
to this Common wealth, might alſo bee added
that outwarde teſtimonie of trueth, confirmed by
proofe and practiſe of the purer times, to incourage
you with a conſtant increaſe in godly zeale, to diſcharge
ſtil the duetie, that God (who hath called you
to that honour) hath layde vpon you, and requireth
of you, to the ſeruice of her Maieſtie, and ſafetie of
her ſubiectes. Moſt humbly I craue you to take in
good part this ſimple token of a ſincere affection,
and ſlender pledge of my vnfained heart. And thus
committing the happie ſucceſſe of this my traueile
to Gods good bleſſing, to whoſe direction and defence
I alſo leaue your Lordſhip in all your doings,
I humbly take my leaue at my houſe at Ryton
in the Biſhopricke of Durham.
[❀]
         
         
            
            
               ❧To ſuch as are learned among our
aduerſaries, who ſeeme in ſingleneſſe of
ſoule to ſeeke after the trueth.
            
               THE Lord is my witneſſe whome I
ſerue in my ſpirite, and to whoſe
gaine I am deſirous to bestowe my
talent, and whoſe glory I ſtudie to
aduance, by all ſuch meanes as of his
mercy he hath affoorded me, that I
haue not written this, or any other
treatiſe, becauſe I am deſirous to
contend, for we haue no ſuch cuſtome, nor the Churches of
God: much leſſe to purchaſe prayſe of learning, wherein vnfainedly
I acknowledge my want and weakneſſe: but onely
for defence of the trueth, which in this countrey of ours, is
quite forſaken of many, by reaſon of ignorance in all ſortes,
which hath poſſeſſed men through their owne negligence
and careleſse ſecuritie of their owne ſoules health, and is
cheriſhed and increaſed, through ſoftneſſe and ſufferance of
ſome ſuperiors. For if ſuch gifts of knowledge or vtterance,
as God lendeth vs, be they great or little, be giuen vs to edifie
and doe good vnto others: then let vs vſe the ſame to his
greatest glory and gaine, for feare of his heauie diſpleaſure,
if when hee call vs to a reckoning, we bee found not to haue
occupied to our maſters profite, becauſe he will be angry with
ſuch as hide their talent in their napkin.Matth. 25. 26. But if wee abuſe

theſe his good graces, to darken therewith the light of the
trueth, and to encreaſe the mistes of errour, how fierce ſhall
be his wrath? how hard ſhall be our iudgement? For if to be
negligent to maintaine the trueth, be blame-worthie: how
great then is their ſinne that impugne the ſame, and that
with thoſe weapons that God hath bestowed vpon them to
defend it withall? Let vs therefore, my wandring brethren
from the plaine pathes, let vs I ſay remember for what we
ſtriue. Is it not for the trueth? where may it be found? In
Gods eternall and vndoubted word. VVhat is this word? we
truely affirme it with many of the Fathers to bee contained
in the Scriptures of the old and new Teſtament. But of your
vnwritten verities, you haue iuſt cauſe to doubt. If therefore
there be in you any loue to this trueth, for the which you
ſay you ſtriue, any care of Gods glory, any regard of the ignorant
who are (the Lord knoweth, ſoone led the wrong way)
any due reſpect to your owne ſoules health,Philip 3. 16 or any feare of
Gods iuſt wrath: let vs proceed by one rule, that wee may
minde one thing. Folow not I pray you, thoſe falſe apostles,
thoſe craftie workemen that can tranſforme themſelues into
Angels of light.2. Cor. 11. 13. Deale plainly and truely in Gods cauſe,
yea, let vs on both ſides waigh the goodnes of the proofes not
cauilling about words, the trueth of the matter, not the maner
of handling of it. If we ſpeake of antiquitie, let it be moſt
ancient. For that is trueſt, but by and by came in hereſies: ſo
that that onely which was first, can bee true, as vpon good
ground Tertullian affirmeth.De praeſcript. If wee bring the Fathers, let
them be of the ſoundeſt, and thoſe not maimed nor mangled.
Neither must we reſt vpon any of their doctrines, but ſuch
as haue their warrant in the worde, and being taught of
them by a generall conſent, doe iuſtly obtaine the name of
Catholique. And for ſundry points of your religion, I can
neuer be perſwaded, but ſuch among you as haue any vnfained

deſire to attaine to true godlineſse, doe euen within your
ſelues confeſse and acknowledge, that many things which
are commended to the ſimple, as holy and helpfull for the ſauing
of their ſoules, whatſoeuer ſhewe of godlines they may
ſeeme to haue, are yet farre from the power thereof. For it
cannot be, that any man or woman that maketh due account
of the price of our redemption, the ranſome for our ſinnes,
the precious bloud of that lambe without ſpot Christ Ieſus,1. Pet. 1. 19.
can euer become ſo ſottiſh as to thinke, that obſeruing of
dayes, abſtaining from ſome meates, buying of buls, pardons,
halowed graines, and Agnus deis, offering to Saintes, pilgrimages,
going barefoote, with haire-cloth next the skin, croſſings,
or any ſuch like bodily and trifling exerciſes or works,
may euer be thought of woorth, to make any recompence for
our offences. If without ſheading of bloud there could bee no
remiſſion,Heb. 9. 22. Heb. 9. 12. & 10. 14. (and that the bloud of Chriſt) by which wee are
freed for euer, from the danger of ſinne, and haue eternall
redemption, what can theſe trifling toyes helpe vs therein?
yea, what blaſphemie is it to match them in this worke, with
that ineſtimable and peereleſse price? Nowe therefore as
Ambaſſadours from Christ,2. Cor. 5. 20. as though God did beſeech you
through vs, we pray you in Chriſtes ſtead, not onely to be reconciled
to God (whom you haue grieuouſly offended:) but
alſo that you will deale plainly with Gods people, and ſoundly
and ſincerely in matters of religion: returne from whence
you haue ſtraied ſo long, and ſo farre, yeeld to the truth, giue
glory to God. Lead them not any longer into the pit of error,
whom Christ hath bought with ſo rich a ranſome. Hide not
the trueth from them henceforth with thoſe falſe viſardes
of antiquitie and vniuerſalitie, which can neuer be prooued
to be in the Romiſh religion. And ſeeing your ſelues, if you
haue any conſciences, must confeſſe that many things are amiſſe
in that you teach: bee content to follow the godly and

wiſe counſel which Cyprian giueth, that we ſhould goe backe
to the head,Ad Pompeium contra epistolam Stephan. if any thing bee wrong in religion, and ſo try
where the fault is. As if the water faile, we will begin at the
conduit, and ſo from thence ſearch where it ſtoppeth: ſo we
must ſaieth he, come to that was taught in the beginning by
Chriſt and his Apoſtles. And this he ſaieth, is the readieſt
way to leaue errors, and to find out the trueth. Let vs then I
pray you walke in that way, let vs vſe that man, to reforme
religion. But if you haue ſold your tongues & pennes to ſerue
the Pope, and as much as in you lieth to maintaine ſuperſtition:
you ſhall find vs by Gods grace ready at all times, to anſwere
whatſoeuer you ſhalbe able to ſay. And although I bee
not worthy to cary the bookes of many among vs, that are accounted
and knowen to be learned: yet will I (encouraged
by the goodneſſe of the cauſe) apply my time and ſtudie, and
ſlender abilitie to that end, knowing thoſe howers to be moſt
happily ſpent, that are imploied to the glory of God, the benefit
of the Church, and the furtherance of the Goſpel. VVherein
that you may ioine with vs, I pray God if it bee his good
will, to turne your hearts, & open your eies to ſee & know
that which now you ſtriue againſt. As for your ſecret
practiſes against God and his people, the Lord for
Christ his ſake confound them, and bring
them to naught. So be it.
(*)
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt part of the
Suruey of the Popes Supremacie,
wherein is a
triall of his Title.
            
               ALthough there is not (in mine opinion)Leaſt neceſſary to ſaluation. any
one Article in controuerſie by knowledge
whereof leſſe benefit redoundeth to
the church of Chriſt, or leſſe comfort to
the afflicted conſcience of the ſorrowfull
ſinner, than this of the ſupremacie of the
Biſhop of Rome: yet (if I be not deceiued)
there is not any one point more conuenient
to be handled,Moſt neceſſary in ſome other reſpects. or more neceſſarie to be intreated vpon, of
ſuch as ſincerely loue the trueth of God, or hearty obedience vnto
ſoueraigne magiſtrates, than is the ſame. Firſt, for the iuſtifying
of the godly, and more than needefull lawes of chriſtian Princes,
which they are forced to make,The popes ſupremacie an enemie to all princes. to baniſh and abandon all forraine
power that themſelues may ſit faſter in that ſeate, and the
more quietly and ſafely inioy that ſoueraigntie, wherein God hath
placed them, which is much hazarded and endangered by this ſubtile,
but falſe perſwaſion, which wholly poſſeſſeth the heartes of
many, that if they will be ſaued, and auoide the danger of damnation,
they muſt ſtedfaſtly beleeue, that the Biſhop of Rome is the
vniuerſall Biſhop, hauing authoritie ouer all, that he is the head
of the church, and the generall ſhepheard of Chriſt his flocke. For
that man of ſinne, hauing ſo bewitched the hearts of his fauorites,
that they are once perſuaded, that it is good religion ſo to beleeue,

and that to defend this his pride, is chriſtian conſtancie: what
ſhameleſſe villanies will not they thinke to be lawfull practiſes?
what cruell murders will not they account to be commendable attempts?
what vnnaturall deuiſes and drifts wil not they eſteeme
moſt godly and catholike vertues? I neede not ſtand long in dilating
this point. Our natiue ſoile hath too much and too lamentable
experience of ſuch vnkindly ſlips. Who when they did, and
do owe to their countrey wherein they were bred and brought vp,
the ſweete fruit of loue to her, and ſacred obedience to her lawes,
bring forth almoſt nothing elſe, but the ſowre grapes of treaſons
and treacheries. Which all ſpring out of this bad roote, that they
falſly perſwade themſelues, that they owe their chiefe obedience to
the Biſhop of Rome, whoſe commaundements if they obey, and
follow his directions, and hearken to his perſwaſions, then muſt
they ſuffer no princes, with qnietneſſe to enioy their ancient and
vndoubted inheritance, and rightfull crownes, but ſuch as will be
tenants at will, to their lawleſſe maſter. Which, the more I doe
thinke of it, the more (I feare) we haue no great hope as yet to be
free from ſuch villainous practiſes, as may bring danger vnto her
Maieſtie, and ruine to this realme: becauſe I ſee that ſtubburne
Recuſants (who if they haue any conſcience in religion, it is very
ſtrange, for many of them ſhew little conſcience in any thing elſe)
wilfull Papiſts (I ſay) are not in ſome reaſonable maner forced in
this point, to ſhew their obedient and dutiful hearts, but may freely
without controlment, profeſſe themſelues enemies to the truth
that we acknowledge. For how can there be any certainety to this
eſtate, that is ſo peſtered with a great number of falſe hearted ſubiects,
whoſe very religion,The religion of Papiſts. is to be deuoted to him and to the maintainance
of his kingdome, that is grieued at nothing more than at
our happineſſe, neither ſeeketh any thing ſo much as our deſtruction?
            To plucke away therefore this viſard of Religion, from this
their diſobedient and diſſolute affection, I thinke it to be the duetie
of euery good chriſtian, according to our calling and talents wholy
to indeuour our ſelues. And as this dutifull affection of chriſtian
obedience ſhould effectually moue vs vnto this attempt, ſo the
very ruine of religion, and the decay of all true deuotion which foloweth
that perſwaſion, ſhould for
                  •
               e vs to make haſte to take this
ſtumbling blocke out of the way of the ſimple, leſt at vnwares running

thereupon, they ſhould make ſhipwracke of their faith. For
the Biſhop of Rome by this his pretended priuiledge,The popes ſupr
                     •
                  
                  macie the decay of true religiòn. doeth take
vpon him to make lawes to binde the conſcience, to adde to Gods
word, to diſpence againſt the ſame, to chop and change religion it
ſelfe, as ſeemeth good to him, to doe and vndoe at his owne pleaſure.
And do he neuer ſo much hurt in the church of Chriſt, yet no
man muſt ſay,Diſt. 40. cap. 51. Papa. Sir, why do you ſo? And thus hauing gotten by
this prowd name, his fulnes of power, he hath filled all chriſtendome
with horrible ſuperſtitions. I ſpeake not heere of the prophane,
or rather blaſphemous praiſes,The Popes flatt
                     •
                  
                  re
                     •
                  s. which the flatterers of this
vniuerſall Biſhop do giue to him, to make the world, not ſo much
to reuerence him as a B. as to honour him rather almoſt as a god.
Which if it had bin done onely by his Canoniſts, who liued in the
dayes of darkeneſſe, and ſaw not ſo much as men now do, yet the
fault and folly had bin very great. But that maſter Bellarmine, a
man doubtleſſe learned, in ſo cleare light of the trueth as now ſhineth,
ſhould ſo farre ouerſhoote himſelfe as he doeth in this point,
in his Preface to his bookes of the biſhop of Rome:Praefat. in lib. d
                     •
                   Rom. pontif. it maketh me
not a little to wonder at his groſſe folly, and to deteſt his irreligious
flattery. But of this more ſhall be ſaid hereafter if God permit.
            Seeing therefore the truth of this doctrine is ſo neceſſary, both
for the ſinceritie of religion, and alſo for the quietneſſe of common
wealths: my deſire & purpoſe is, if God giue good ſucceſſe thereunto,
to ſhew and proue that the Biſhop of Rome maketh herein
an vniuſt claime,The Popes claim vniuſt. and hath poſſeſſed himſelfe of an vntrue Title.
To come therefore to the point in controuerſie.The Church. The holy catholike
church, the ſpiritual houſe of God, the myſtical body of Chriſt,
comprehendeth two ſortes of members.Triumphant. Some that are triumphing
in heauen:Militant. others that are here trauelling vpon the earth: ſome
profiting (as ſaint Auguſtine ſaith) in this life, others perfited in
an other.The queſtion. Now the queſtion is, whether this part of the catholike
church that is here wandering in this vale of miſery, which is called
militant (for here is the place of ſtriuing, elſe-where the place
of crowning) muſt needes haue the Biſhop of Rome to bee the
head thereof? This is it that they vntruly, and without any good
warrant do affirme. This is it which iuſtly, and vpon good ground
(as I truſt it ſhall appeare) we deny. Maſter Bellarmine laboureth
very much to prooue, that the gouernement of one ouer all, is

the beſt,Whether monarchicall gouernement be beſt. M. Bellarmines firſt argument to proue there muſt be one viſible head. indeuouring thereby to prooue, that if it be beſt in ciuill
regiment, it ſhould alſo be the beſt gouernment in the church, as it
appeareth in his Bookes of the biſhop of Rome. Howſoeuer the
monarchicall regiment within euery kingdome or country is liked
of: yet that vniuerſal rule of one ouer al hath not bin thought good
of at any time,Lib. de pontif. Rom. 1. cap. 5. That is not of neceſsitie be 
                     •
                   gouernment for the Church that is beſt for other kingdomes. as may appeare by thoſe great monarchies ſo commended
vnto vs in hiſtories. To whoſe ſubiection kingdomes and
nations did not ſubiect themſelues willingly, but were ſubdued to
them by might. Neither is it neceſſary, that that kind of gouernement,
which is thought beſt for worldly kingdomes, whoſe Lawmakers
are men, and whoſe lawes are alwayes new to be made,
as new inconueniences do ariſe in the common-wealth: and to be
ſhort, whoſe glory is here in this world, ſhould alſo be moſt conuenient
for the church of God, whoſe kingdome is not worldly,
whoſe beauty is not outward or external. But to knit vp this point
with one argument, thus I reaſon. That kind of gouernement is
fitteſt for the church, that bringeth moſt profit to them that are gouerned,
but maſter Bellarmine confeſſeth,De pontif. Rom. li
                     •
                  . 1. cap. 3. that the mixed gouernement
is moſt profitable, therefore it is fitteſt.
            But becauſe it pleaſeth maſter Bellarmine ſo well, that one
ſhould beare rule ouer the whole church, let him and his fellowes
ſubmit hemſelfe to Chriſt that King of kings and Lord of lords,Chriſt king in his Church. Reuel. 19. 16. Epheſ. 1. 22. Dan. 7. 14. Pſal. 72. 8.
whom God hath appointed to be the head of the church, of whoſe
kingdome there ſhall be no end, whoſe dominion ſhall be from ſea
to ſea, and from the riuer to the ends of the land: ſo that no continuance
of time, no diſtance of place, ſhall hinder his gouernment;
An inuiſible head of an inuiſible body.A paſtour in particular churches a particular head. Or elſe in particular
churches let him behold a viſible paſtor, ouer a viſible flocke,
which is alſo a kinde of Monarchy. But this one head which is
Chriſt, cannot content the church of Rome, although notwithſtanding
his abſence from vs in the fleſh, there is no want either
in his will or might, but that he is able and readie, at all times to
direct and defend his flocke.
                  
                     •
                  . S
                     •
                  m. 8. 7, 10. But as the children of Iſrael, not
contenting themſelues with that forme of gouernment whereby
God gouerned them, would needes haue a king as other nations
had: euen ſo will the papiſts haue a viſible monarche, one ruler
of the whole church, as one King is ruler ouer a whole Kingdome.
And if we tell them that it is a monſter in nature, that the
church which is but one,Two heades. ſhould haue two heades, that is to ſay

Chriſt, whome we all acknowledg to be the head thereof, and the
pope, whom they make their viſible and miniſteriall head: then
they reply, that in that Chriſt is head of the church, it doth no
more hinder the ſupremacie of the biſhop of Rome, then it taketh
away the biſhop and miniſters out of the church.Bellar. lib. 1. de pontif. Rom. c. 9. For ſo maſter
Bellarmine affirme
                  •
               , as if biſhops and miniſters were vniuerſall
heads, as the pope would be. And can maſter Bellarmine ſee no
difference, betweene the calling of paſtors and teachers, and of
the pope? Is hee ſo blinde or bleareied, in beholding the brightneſſe
of their glorious Biſhoppe, that hee can ſee no difference betweene
theſe two:Paſtors appointed of God. paſtors we are ſure are ordained of God, euen
of him that apointed Chriſt to be head of the church.The pope not of God. But that the
biſhop of Rome is head of the church by Gods word, maſter Belarmine
himſelfe denieth.De pontif. Rom. lib. 2. cap. 12. Secondly the paſtor contenteth himſelfe
with the miniſtrie of the word and ſacraments, and ſuch eccleſiaſticall
cenſures as the word affordeth him.The Popes pride. But the biſhop of
Rome deſpiſeth all power, abuſeth all magiſtrates, yea almoſt
treadeth vnder foote the maieſtie of the mightieſt monarches. As
for the ſword of the word either he thinkes it not ſharp enough,His contempt of the ſword of Gods word. or
elſe he is too proude to drawe it (for preaching is too baſe a thing
for ſo proude a prelate) but with his temporall ſword he floriſheth
luſtily. Againe, the paſtor hath his flock in a litle compaſſe, ſo
that he may in ſome meaſure diſcharge his dutie amongſt them, he
may feede with the bread of life the hungrie ſoules, he may ſtrengthen
the feeble, comfort the weake, ſeeke the loſt, and bring whom
the wandring ſheep.The Popes charge infinit. But the biſhop of Rome in chalenging authoritie
ouer all places and perſons, and ſeeking to bee head ouer
all churches, doth both meddle with other mens charges, and laieth
vpon his owne ſhoulders an importable burthen. Thus I
truſt it appeareth, that this argument ſtandeth ſtill vnanſwered
Chriſt is the head of his church, Chriſt I ſay whom God the father
appointed to that office, and who is able to vndergoe this
charge,Tertull. de praeſcientia haeretic. becauſe he hath the holy ghoſt to be his Houſband man,
to dreſſe his vine, his Vicar or leieutenant to looke to his charge:
the pope therefore, who is neither appointed to it, nor able to doe
it, is not.M. Bellar. his ſecond argument. Now for that which maſter Bellarmine affirmeth of the
heauenly hoſt, that they haue in heauen another head beſides
Chriſt, and therefore that the church vpon earth ought ſo to haue:
his proofe is more vncertaine, and hard to be knowen, then that he

ſhould ſeeke thereupon to ground any argument. But the church
in the old Teſtament had one high prieſt,Argument 3. therefore ſaith maſter
Bellarmine the church of Chriſt muſt haue ſo. For that church
was a figure of Chriſts church.Anſwere. If maſter Bellarmine his argument
ſhall goe for currant, wee muſt alſo haue but one Temple,
for they might not haue any moe, they might offer but in one place,
and many ſuch things were commaunded vnto them, vnto which
it were abſurd to tie chriſtians. Whereby we may ſee that in all
things that church was not a figure of ours. Then alſo the leuiticall
prieſt was a figure not of any miniſteriall head of Chriſts
church but of Chriſt himſelfe as the apoſtle to the Hebrews doth
proue in ſondrie chapters.Hebr. 8. 9, 10. And here maſter Bellarmine ſheweth
rather a deſire to maintain his errors, then to yeld to the truth.
For without all reaſon hee affirmeth, that Aaron was not onely
a figure of Chriſt, but of Peter alſo, and his ſucceſſors, ſauing
that to auouch his vntruth, hee ſetteth downe another; namely
that the leuiticall ſacrifices, were figurs not of Chriſt onely, but
alſo of that which they call the ſacrifice of the maſſe, which how
vntrue it is I haue ſhewed elſewhere. But if it were true, that
thoſe ſacrifices were figures of both, muſt it needs follow, that
Aaron alſo muſt be the figure of Chriſt and Peter.
               Aaron no figure of Peter. It hath no
neceſſitie. And moreouer to anſwere both this and his fifth argument.
            The church was at that time contained within the bonds of
Iewry, or at the leaſt hee was but hie prieſt vnto them that were
circumciſed. As alſo in Chriſt his time the church conſiſted but of
a few perſons and therefore it cannot be neceſſarily concluded, that
if the church then was gouerned by one, when it was in a ſmall
corner of the world, it ſhould now be ſo likewiſe, when it is ſcattered
in many places, vpon the earth. But what if I ſhould denie
to Bellarmine, that this was the gouernment of the church before
Chriſt,The church not ſubiect to one hie prieſt. De miſſa li. 1. c. 2 or that they were not at that time all vnder one hie prieſt?
For more then 2500. yeares the church was not gouerned by one
hie prieſt, which maſter Bellarmine himſelfe doth not greatly denie
in this place, eſpecially limiting this hie prieſt vnto that time
when there was ſome forme of gouernment eſtabliſhed amongſt
them, after they were come out of Egypt: For vntill that time as
himſelfe confeſſeth, the heads of their houſes were prieſts. And
although there were many good men at one time as Seth, Enoſh,
               
and others, yet maſter Bellarmine cannot ſhew, that there was amongſt
them, a hie prieſt, but euery one was chiefe in his owne
familie. But what if it appeare that then when there was a hie
prieſt, yet al Gods people were not bound to be vnder him? The
widow of Sarepta as appeareth by her ſtory,1. Kin. 17. had a ſure faith in
God, ſo that wee may ſay ſhee might well be accounted the child
of God. Naaman alſo the ſyrian did belong to the church of God.
And no doubt but God had many people among the Niniuites,
who repented at the preaching of Ionah.
               Ionah 3. And yet none of theſe
were commaunded to be vnder the ſubiection of the hie prieſt.
Which thing being well cooſidered of, wee may conclude, that
if the gouernment of one ouer the whole church, were not thought
neceſſarie for any people, before ſuch time as Moyſes had deliuered
ſuch laws to the Iſraelits from God, after they were come
out of Egypt, neither yet afterward for any but only for the Iews
as by the examples alleadged may appeare, out of this I ſay wee
may gather, that neither then was the whole church commaunded
to be vnder the gouernment of one, and alſo that it was not a pattern
of gouernment for the church nowe, but onely a figure of
Chriſt to them, to whome all things almoſt were deliuered in figures
and ſhadowes.Arg. 4. Bellarm. But maſter Bellarmines fourth argument
hath yet leſſe weight then any of the reſt. The church ſaith hee is
compared to an Armie, to Mans body, or a beutifull woman, to
a kingdome, a Sſheepfold, a houſe, Noahs arke, but no armie
without a generall, no body without a head, no wife without a
huſband, no kingdome without a king, no ſhipfold without a
ſheapheard, no houſe without a ſteward, no ſhip but hath a maſter.
We grant all this,Anſwere. and as Saint Auguſtine ſaith of the head ſo
we may ſay of all theſe ſimilitudes for Chriſt can not be called a
head,Praefat. in pſ. 139 if there be no body whereof he ſhould be head. And theſe
names are beſtowed vpon the church, and belong vnto her no otherwiſe
then as we haue reſpect vnto Chriſt, that is our general,
head, huſband, king, ſheapheard, houſeholder, and ſhipmaſter.
And I cannot but muſe at the great ignorance or wilfulneſſe that
maſter Bellarmine ſheweth in this argument, who knowing the
nature of relatiues to be ſuch as that the one of them dependeth
on the other, ſo that the one cannot be without the other: & knowing
alſo that the wife is ſo called in reſpect of her huſband, and the
huſbād ſo called in reſpect that he hath a wife: yet he ſhames not to

affirme, that the church here vpon earth may well be compared to
a wife, not hauing reſpect to Chriſt her huſband. It may be his
meaning is, to rake again out of the chenel, that filthy & blaſphemous
cannon,De Immunit. m. 6. e Quoniam. wherein the pope maketh claime to be the huſbaud
of the church, which title the ſcriptures aſcribe to Chriſt onely.
To his fifth argument and his third I anſwered together: his ſixth
argument is this.Bell. arg. 6. Biſhops are well ſet to haue authoritie ouer
Miniſters, Archbiſhops ouer Biſhops, therefore alſo there muſt
be one ouer all others.Anſwere. But this proueth not that which fame hee
would proue, that by Gods word one muſt haue rule ouer al. Seuenthly
(ſaith maſter Bellarmine) the church muſt ſtill increaſe,Bell. arg. 7.
but it can not increaſe vnleſſe one man bee aboue the reſt to take
this care, therefore one muſt be chiefe aboue all other. And cannot
the church increaſe except one be among the reſt to commaund
all others?Anſwer. Who commaunded Saint Paul to preach as he did
in many places? Not Peter. But they will ſay he was extraordinarily
called. And they that are extraordinarily called muſt now
by the popes lawes be allowed by the pope.
            But to let this paſſe,Ruffin. hiſt. eccl. lib. 1. cap. 9. 
               Parthia to Thomas, Aethiopia to Matthew,
India to Bartholomew were appointed to preach in, not at
Peters commandement but by lot. Not Peter, but Thomas moued
thereunto by God ſent Thadde vnto Edeſſa. So that we ſee
Maiſter Bellarmines minor propoſition to be very falſe. For the
kingdome of Chriſt may well be increaſed without the Popes ſupremacie.
As then it was, ſo now I ſay it may be, yea and is increaſed
mightely, although the Pope doe not onely grieue at it,
but alſo ſtriue againſt it.Bellar. arg. 8. Laſtly there muſt be vnity in faith (ſaieth
Maiſter Bellarmine) but that cannot be, vnleſſe all be vnder one,
therefore one muſt haue the rule ouer all.Anſwere. In deede it cannot be denied,
but that one man being of authority in the church of God,
may manie times doe much good, either to confirme the godly, or
daunt the courage of the contentious. But if this authority bee
beſtowed vppon the vngodly, it doeth much hurt, and it is then
found true that the wiſeman ſaieth.Prouer. 29. 2. When the wicked beare rule
the people ſigh. Neither can we haue a better example of this, then
in the Biſhops of Rome that haue beene theſe many hundred of
yeares, who to get the ſoueraignty aboue all authority, omitte no
practiſes, ſhame not of anie treacheries, ſpare not anie ſhedding of
bloud, but forget all dutie, all nature, all humani
                  •
               ie, all chriſtianitie,

ſo that they may haue the commaunding of all the world. And
for their vnitie in faith,Popiſh vnitie. it is a kinde of vnitie, but in hypocriſie not
in veritie. Againſt Gods vndoubted word, againſt Chriſt and his
office,Pſal. 2. 2. Vnitie without ſupremacie. his merit and ſatiſfaction, euen ſuch a vnitie as Dauid ſpeaketh
of, againſt the Lord and againſt his anointed. But can there be
no vnity in faith, but where there is ſupremacie in authoritie? Yes,
if wee marke the hiſtories wee ſhall finde, that there was neuer ſo
good conſent in ſound doctrine, as when this ſupremacie was not
hatched. A queſtion concerning circumciſion, fell among the chriſtians,
in the Apoſtles time.Act. 15. 
                     •
                  . The matter was referred vnto the Apoſtles.
The Apoſtles and elders came together to looke to this
matter. After much diſputation Peter gaue his iudgement of gods
goodnes towardes the Gentiles. To that end alſo Paul and Barnabas
told howe wonderfullie God had wrought among the Gentiles
by them. And laſt of all Iames concluded, according to whoſe
direction the matter was defined. Now what ſupremacie was in
this counſell. The Papiſts tell vs that Peter was chiefe here, but
this is but a bold aſſertion, vow of all proofe. For firſt the wordes
doe not ſhew that Peter called them together but the contrary rather
Which Saint Luke would not haue omitted, if Peter by anie
ſuperiour authoritie that he had ouer them, had called them. Neither
did Peter ſpeake firſt. For before he ſpake there was much
diſputation, neither did he giue definitiue ſentence in the counſell,
but Saint Iames, as doth eaſily appeare to them that 
                  •
               ompare the
words that he did ſpeake, with the Epiſtle that they did write, concerning
the matter in controuerſie. So that if there were then anie
chiefe it was Saint Iames, and not Saint Peter. The like alſo I
might ſhew out of ſome other of the firſt counſels following. Of
which becauſe I ſhall haue better occaſion after to intreat, I truſt
this may ſuffice, to ſhewe that without ſupremacie, vnitie in faith
may be maintained, and therefore that the minor propoſition in this
argument is falſe. And thus haue I briefly r
                  ••
               ne ouer the arguments,
that are alleadged by Maiſter Bellarmine to proue this ſoueraigne
Monarchy,De Rom pontif. lib. 1. cap. 9. which he ſaith muſt be in Gods church, rather
pointing to them, then proſecuting anie of them. Againſt all which
I wilt oppoſe one onelie argument, which I would deſire Maiſter
Bellarmine or ſome friend of his,An argument againſt the viſible head ouer the whole church. at their good leiſure to anſwere.
No inuiſible body, can haue a viſible head, for that were a monſter
in nature. But the vniuerſall or catholike church is an inuiſible bodie,

for things that are vniuerſall are not ſeene with the eie, but
conceaued in the minde and vnderſtanding. Therefore the catholike
church muſt not haue a viſible head. But all this that Maiſter Bellarmine
hath hitherto ſpoken, of the neceſſity of hauing one ſupreme
gouernour of the whole church, is rather an inducement, to
make men thinke that they haue ſome reaſon for this ſupremacie in
the church, then any ſtrong argument, whereby they thinke to cary
away the weight of the matter. But the very ſtrength and ſtaie of
this their doctrine is contained in this one ſyliogiſme whatſoeuerThe Papiſts argument for the ſupremacie.
iuriſdiction Chriſt gaue to Peter and not to the reſt of the Apoſtles,
all that belongeth to the church of Rome: but Chriſt gaue
vnto Peter iuriſdiction, ouer the vniuerſall church and not to the
reſt of the Apoſtles: therefore the Biſhop or church of Rome hath
iuriſdiction ouer all churches, or ouer the vniuerſall church. And
in this argument is contained, not onely all that Maiſter Bellarmine
can ſay, but all that they all can alleadge for this matter, and
therefore it is the more diligently to be examined. And to beginne
with the minor, wherein is affirmed what iuriſdiction or power ouer
others Peter had, Maiſter Bellarmine doth confidently and
plainely affirme,De pontif. Rom. lib. 1. cap 10. Whether Chriſt haue reſigned his place. 
               That Saint Peter is appointed of Chriſt himſelfe,
in Chriſt his place, the head and prince of the church, or
theſe are his verie words. What, is Chriſt wearie of his office?
hath hee giuen ouer his intereſt, hath he reſigned his right vnto
Saint Peter? If hee haue ſo done, it is more then Saint Paul
knew, who after that Chriſt had left the world, yet ſtill he tooke
Chriſt for the head of the church, as appeareth by his epiſtle to the
Epheſians and to the Colosſians.
               Epheſ. 1. 22 and 4. 15. and 5. 23. Coloſs. 1. 18. Yea Saint Peter himſelfe, ſeemeth
not to know ſo much. For when hee calleth him the head
corner ſtone,Acts 4. 11. he meaneth doubtleſſe in the building of Gods ſpirituall
houſe, which is the church. And yet maſter Bellarmine ſeemeth
to tell vs 
                  〈◊〉
                when hee telleth vs that Saint Peter is
head in Chriſts place: For Chriſt muſt leaue his place before S.
Peter can be in his place.
                  
                     •
                  ad Popes. A meaner place would very well haue
contented Saint Peter. As for many of them who in our fathers
dayes and ours, haue bragged that they are Peters ſucceſſors, deſerue
not to bee dog-driuers out of a poore pariſh church wherein
godly chriſtians are aſſembled much leſſe to be vniuerſall biſhops
ouer the whole world. Neither ſtandeth the church of Chriſt now
in neede of any ſuch lieutenant, ſeeing Chriſt is much more effectually

with his church now, then hee was with the people of
the Iewes, when he was conuerſant vpon the earth. For he that
promiſed that hee would be with vs alwaies,Mat. 28. 25. Ioh 14. 16, 17. euen vnto the end
of the world, and that hee would pray the father, and he ſhould
giue vs another comforter, which ſhould abide with vs for euer,
enen the ſpirit of truth he I ſay by the ſame ſpirit whom he hath
made his vicar generall,De praeſcript. haeretie. as before I aleaged out of Tertullian,
doth huſband the earth of our hearts to make them fruitfull, and
is Chriſts vicar in all places, with all perſons, to ſupply all
their wants. So that hee which in reſpect of his bodily preſence
could at no time be but in one place, by the piercing power of his
ſpirit, is at once euery where. And therefore is he much more
preſent now in the ſpirit, then before in the fleſh, becauſe before
he could be at once but with a few of the faithfull, whereas
now he is withal at one inſtant. It is therefore ouermuch boldnes
in maſter Bellarmine, either to thruſt Chriſt out of his office,
to lay the ſame vpon Peter, or elſe to imagine that Chriſt is
not better able by his ſpirit, then by the pope, to execute the ſame.
His iudgement is alſo very hard, wherein he pronounceth that
to ſay, that ſaint Peters ſupremacy is not inſtituted by Chriſt,
it is not a ſimple errour, but a deteſtable hereſie. This I am
ſure of,De ſimplie. prel. that not onely ſome priuat men as Cyprian haue
thought all the Apoſtles, to be of as great honour and power as
was Peter, but euer ſome councils haue thought, that the B. of
Rome, who thinketh by ſucceſſion from Peter, he hath as good
right thereto as Peter had, yet had not from Chriſt any right to
the ſupremacy.Concil. Carth. 6. For the ſixt council of Carthage where Fauſtinus
and others were legats from the pope, would not yeld that
ſouerainty to the biſhop of Rome, although his legats did moſt
earneſtly ſeeke it, not onely by their diligent indeuour, but alſo
by aleaging falſe canons of the Nicen councill, thinking thereby
to haue deceiued them. And although this were a great foile
to the church of Rome, yet their ambitious and aſpiring minds
would not ſuffer them to be quiet, but within a little time after,
they attempt the like in the counſell of Chalcedon.Galced. Concil. Act. 16. 
               Paſchaſinus
and Lucentius being the popes legates, Paſchaſinus alleaged a
decree, as if it had beene out of the Nicen councill, That the
the church of Rome always had the ſupremacie, but the councell

finding, that there was not there anie ſuch decree, did ordaine
that the biſhop of Conſtantinople, ſhould haue as great, euen
ſuch like priuiledges as the biſhop of Rome had. Which had
beene more wickedlie ordained of them, if Rome by Chriſt had
the ſupremacie, then wee maie imagine ſo manie godlie fathers
aſſembled togither would haue done. Yea that we maie knowe,
that at that time if biſhops of Rome, had anie priuiledge aboue
other biſhops, they did not thinke it was ſo by Chriſts inſtitution,
they ſet downe the reaſon, why the church of Rome was more
honoured then the reſt. Euen becauſe it was the imperiall citie
as alſo Ireny long before them did teſtifie.
            And this made the fathers of the councell of Chalcedon theLib. 
                     •
                  . cap. 3.
bolder, to yeeld to Conſtantinople (which they called newe
Rome) ſuch priuiledges, becauſe it was now become alſo
an imperiall citie. Thus wee ſee theſe learned writers Ireny
and Ciprian, and all the fathers of theſe two councels, learned
and manie did not thinke, nor would confeſſe, that this ſuprem
                  •
               
               cie
was Chriſtes inſtitution, and yet maſter Bellarmines ſharpe
penne hath prickt them all with one daſh as guiltie not of ſimple
errour, but of peſtilent hereſie. Nowe wee muſt needes imagine,
that he would neuer burſt out into theſe exceſſiue ſpeeches,
as if hee were rauiſhed, and beſides himſelfe (as in theſe
two pointes mentioned it maie appeare) vnleſſe his opinion reſted
vpon a ſure ground. Let vs therefore examine his proofes,
and trie the waight of his reaſons.
            This moſt neceſſarie controuerſie,Barenes of proofe for the ſupremacie. as the church of Rome eſteemeth
it, hath not in all the ſcriptures anie good warrant, euen
in maſter Bellarmines owne opinion, but in one place. For as
concerning thoſe prerogatiues which after he ſpeaketh off, they
are rather motiues to drawe vs, or probable coniectures to perſwade
vs, then ſtrong argumentes to prooue, or ſufficient reaſons
to conuince and force vs to beleeue. I ſaie they haue but
one authority of Scripture that they reſt vpon, becauſe that place
out of the ſixteenth of Saint Matthewes goſpel,De pontif. Rom. li. 1. cap. 12. is but a promiſe
as maſter Bellarmine himſelfe confeſſeth, of that which was afterwardes
giuen, when Chriſt commaunded him to feede his
ſheepe, ſo that one is not perfect without the other. But let
vs ſee what iuriſdiction is promiſed in the one, and then alſo

what is giuen in the other vnto Peter.
               Mat. 16. 13. Our Sauiour Chriſt
inquiring of his diſciples what opinion other men had of him,
they anſwered, ſome ſaie that thou art Iohn Baptiſt, ſome Elias,
ſome Ieremias, or one of the Prophetes, and aſking of them
what they thought of him, Simon Peter anſwered thou art
Chriſt the ſonne of the liuing God. And Ieſus anſwered and
ſaide vnto him, happie art thou Simon the ſonne of Iona, for
fleſh and bloud hath not opened that vnto thee, but my father
which is in heauen. And I ſay alſo vnto thee that thou art Peter,
and vpon this rocke I will build my church, and the gates of hell
ſhall not preuaile againſt it. And I will giue vnto thee the
keies of the kingdome of heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt bind
in earth, ſhall be bound in heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt
looſe in earth, ſhall bee looſed in heauen. Theſe are the wordes
that muſt ſtrengthen and ſtay this ſtately building of the popes
ſupremacie, or elſe it is like to fall. Out of which maſter Bellarmine
draweth two argumentes. Firſt that Saint Peter is
the foundation, ſecondly that hee is the key carier of the church,
and therefore that hee muſt bee the ſupreme head of the church.
The firſt is taken out of theſe wordes, Thou art Peter and vpon
this rocke I will build my church. The plaine meaning of
which words I take to be this. When firſt I tooke thee to be an
Apoſtle, I ſaid thou ſhouldeſt bee called Cephas which is by interpretation
a ſtone.Iohn. 1. 42. Thou ſhalt ſhew thy ſelfe ſo to be indeede,
and that I haue named thee ſo truly, for in this confeſſion that
thou haſt made of me thou ſhalt hereafter continue ſo cōſtant that
thou ſhalt die in it. And therefore becauſe thou ſhalt bee ſo conſtant
thou art Peter or Cephas indeede. As for this confeſſion
that thou haſt made, all my faithfull people ſhall ſettle and ſtaie
themſelues thereupon, in all conflictes of conſcience, ſo that no
terrour of hell ſhall bee able to diſcourage or diſamaie
them.
            But maſter Bellarmine out of this doth gather that the church
is built vpon Peter, as vpon a foundation. Yet I truſt hee will
not deny, that Chriſt is ſuch a foundation, as there is no other, becauſe
S. Paul telleth vs,1. Cor. 3. 11. that other foundation can no mā lay, thē
that is laid▪ which is Ieſus Chriſt Of this foundation God ſpeaketh
by his prophet Eſay,
               Eſy. 28. 16. behold I wil lay in Sion a ſtone, a tried

ſtone, a pretious corner ſtone, a ſure foundation. Then this
being graunted that Chriſt is this ſpeciall foundation, and the
onely ſure ground-worke in this building, I truſt it will be the
eaſier to know, what place belongeth to Peter but the later of
theſe two places by mee alleaged,Bellarm, maketh the Popethis ſtone, or Peter praefat. i
                     •
                   lib. de pontif, Rom. which is onely verified of
Chriſt, and of him onely meant, moſt prophanely doth maſter
Bellarmine apply to ſaint Peter, and ſo to the church of Rome,
& that very particularly: making it theſtone tried with perſecutions,
with hereſies which the pride of the Greeke church, with
ſtiffeneſſe of ſome emperors, with ſchiſmes, with wicked popes,
The corner ſtone that ioyneth into one church, the Iewes and
the Gentils, The pretious ſtone becauſe ſhe is rich in ceremonies,
and ſacramentes, in pardons, in councils, in interpretation.
of ſcriptures and ſuch like: And laſt of all the ſure foundation.
But here maſter Bellarmine is forced to graunt, that Peter is
but a ſecondary foundation and not the principall foundation, for
that Chriſt onely is. This diſcourſe of his, maketh me remember
frier Toittis,
               Acts and Monument. otherwiſe called frier Paternoſter, who vpon
a great controuerſie that aroſe in Scotland concerning the lords
prayer, whether it might be ſaid vnto the Saints or not, beeing
intreated (as a man belike moſt ſufficient) to deale in the matter,
comming into the pulpit at Saint Andrews where this
controuerſie was, began in particular to ſhew how euery petition
might be made vnto the ſaints, vntil he came to the fourth
petition, wherein hee was faine to confeſſe, that the ſaints cannot
giue vs our daily bread, and ſo with ſhame bewrayed his
owne folly, and the feebleneſſe, or rather the falſnes of his cauſe.
Euen ſo maſter Bellarmine, robbing Chriſt of his ornaments
that hee may decke therewith, that whoriſh ſynagogue, which
vntrewly he callet Peters ſeate, hauing beſides all learning,
nay contrarie to the ſinceritie of a chriſtian diuine, moſt blaſphemouſly,
applied vnto that Romiſh ſeate, that which belongeth
vnto Chriſt onely, and is one of his moſt eſpeciall and peculiar
markes whereby hee is ſet foorth as the promiſed ſauiour,
that he ſhould be the corner ſtone, tried, and precious: Yet is he
in the end forced to confeſſe, that the ſure foundation cannot be
found but in Chriſt, although he would ſeeme to apply that title,
to that ſeate alſo. I would hardly haue thought that, a

man ſo learned as maſter Bellarmine in theſe our dayes, wherein
knowledge aboundeth,Chriſt only the ſtone. Mat. 21 42. Rom. 9. 33. Epheſ. 2. 14, 15, 16, 10. Act. 4 12. 1 pet. 2. 6. would euer haue abuſed Gods ſacred
word in ſuch ſort. That this is only true in Chriſt, our Sauior
Chriſt himſelfe, out of the Prophet Dauid teacheth. S. Paul agreeth
to the ſame, not only writing to the Ronanes, but alſo to
the Epheſians, ſhewing how he onely can be as a corner ſtone,
gathering and knitting together the Iewes and Gentiles. S.
Peter alſo himſelfe maketh Chriſt to be this ſtone. It is not a
ſufficient excuſe for maſter Bellarmine, that he acknowledgeth,
that the prophet Eſay ſpeaketh eſpecially of Chriſt, and then to
apply it vnto the church of Rome. For ſeeing the ſcriptures
with ſo great conſent, do acknowlege Chriſt to be that tried and
and precious corner ſtone,Epheſ. 2. 14. and therefore doe call him the corner
ſtone, becauſe he hath made of Iew and Gentile one, breaking
downe the ſtop of the partition wall. In whom all the building
coupled together, groweth to a holy temple in the Lord,21. which
is a thing that not one but Chriſt can performe, let vs knowe,
that to giue this title to any other, is to rob Chriſt of his glory.
And yet as though maſter Bellarmine had not powred out already
blaſphemies ynow, he proſecuteth wickedly, that which
abſurdly he hath begun,Bellarmines blaſphemies, Eſay 8. 14. Matt. 21. 44. adding, that this their Romiſh church
is the ſtone of offence, and ſtumbling blocke, vpon which ſtone
he that falleth ſhall be broken, but on whomſoeuer it ſhall fall, it
ſhall grinde him to powder. But howſoeuer it pleaſeth maſter
Bellarmine, to bragge of the might and maieſty of the church of
Rome, we ſee that the hath loſt many kingdomes, that ſometime
ſerued her. And where her power is greateſt, we ſee that
many fall 
                  •
               ayly from her: and that ſuch as doe ſo, haue no
cauſe to repent it, but that God aideth them with his wonderfull
and mercifull hand, and proſecuteth them with many bleſſings.
            But to returne vnto maſter Bellarmines argument againe:
Vpon this rocke I will build my church. The foundation of a
houſe hath two reſpects: Firſt, it holdeth vp the whole building,
which being coupled together in it, groweth to be an houſe,
as before I haue ſhewed out of ſaint Paules epiſtle to the Epheſians,
and thus Chriſt onely is the foundation of his church,
as hee is alſo the head, whereof all the bodie furniſhed and knit

together with ioints and bands, increaſeth with the increaſing
of God.Coloſs. 2. 19. This foundation or head none can be but Chriſt.
Secondly the fonndation is as it were a direction and rule,
for the building of the reſt of the houſe. For it muſt be made, according
to the length and breadth of the foundation. In which
reſpect the Apoſtles are called foundations in the reuelation,
foundations I ſay in this church of God.Apocal. 21. 14. Epheſ. 2. 20. And ſo doth the apoſtle
ſay that the church is built vpon the fonndation of the Apoſtles
and prophets, Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe beeing the chiefe corner
ſtone.How the Apoſtles are foundations. And whether they be called foundations in reſpect of
their doctrine as Saint Ambroſe thinketh, or becauſe they
were firſt layed in the building, as Theophilact ſeemeth to
affirme:Amb. on theſe words Epheſ. 2. Theoph. Eph. 2. yet are they not ſuch foundations as can hold vp this
building: but ſuch onely as by their doctrine and fayth, muſt
be a patterne and platforme, for all other builders to builde by,
that they goe not out of that rule and ſquare, which is moſt
fit for Gods houſe. And thus we confeſſe that Saint Peter is
a foundation as alſo all the Apoſtles are.Chryſoſt. in Eph. 
                     〈◊〉
                   6. And that which
Chryſoſtome writeth vpon this place, is in my iudgement
a ſtrong argument, againſt this ſecondarie foundation, which
they ſay Peter is, becauſe he will haue the building ſo coupled
wit
                  •
                t
                  •
               e foundation, as that there ſhalbe nothing between them.
But moſt plainely in his commentaries vpon the epiſtle to the
Corinthians he will haue nothing betweene vs and Chriſt, no
diſtance betweene the head and the bodie.Hom. 8. As he proueth by examples
of the head and the bodie, the branch and the tree, the
building and the foundation. For if the head be from the body,
but the thickneſſe of a ſword it dieth. If the branch be cut from
the tree, neuer ſo litle, it withereth. If the houſe be not ioyned
vpon the foundation, it falleth. Howe then can we haue any
ſecondary foundation in the church of God, without the ruine of
the whole church.
            The Apoſtles therefore may well bee foundations (as I
haue before ſaide, either becauſe that they are (as it were) the
firſt ſtones that are layed, vpon Chriſt, in this building, or
becauſe of their doctrine whereupon our faith is grounded, but
otherwiſe, we can not admitte them all, or any one of them,
whether Peter, or any other, to be a foundation, in this building.

So that al the paines that maſter Bellarmine taketh, to proue,
that this rocke muſt needs ſignifie Peter himſelfe, is more than
needeth: for we wil confeſſe, that he and the reſt of the Apoſtles,
are foundations in the church. But if after ſome more peculiar
ſort, he wil haue him a foundation, neither hath he prooued it by
that which he vrgeth out theſe words, vpon this rocke, neither
yet by that vniuerſall conſent of the church that he braggeth of.
For the fathers do in ſundry ſorts expound theſe words, ſom by
this rocke vnderſtand Peter as he was an apoſtle, and teacher
of the word of God. And ſo may the fathers be vnderſtoode
that are in this chapter alleaged by maſter Bellarmine. For he
can not reaſon thus: He is called a foundation, therefore he is
a foundation after ſome other manner than the other Apoſtles.
Some by this rocke vnderſtand Chriſt whom Peter confeſſed.
So doth ſaint Auguſtine,
               In Ioh Tract. 124. & Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21. vpon this rocke which thou haſt confeſſed
(ſaith he) I will build my church: now the rocke that hee
confeſſed was Chriſt. There are alſo ſundry that by this rocke
vnderſtand the confeſſion that Peter made, as Hillarie, Ambroſe,
Chryſoſtome and Cyril. But none of theſe interpretations
can pleaſe our Romiſh rabbies, but that only that makes
Peter the foundation in Chriſts place, which can not out of any
of theſe expoſitions be gathered. S. Auguſtine, maſter Bellarmine
ſaith, was deceiued, becauſe he knew not the Hebrew
tongue: but yet ſaint Auguſtines words teach vs, that in his
time this place was not by conſent of the godly, ſo expounded as
now the Papiſts expound it, but only that there were ſundry expoſitions
of ſundry men: and that ſaint Auguſtine liked this of
his beſt. How happeneth it then that maiſter Bellarmine with
a great cracke ſaieth hee hath the conſent of the whole church?
Where is their catholike doctrine euen in this point, that which
now the church of Rome teacheth, was not in ſaint Auguſtines
dayes catholike. But to to proue this doctrine to be catholike,
he ſaith,De pontif. Rom. lib. 1. cap. 10 De locis Theolog. lib. 6. The Papiſts belie the Chalcedon councell. 
               The whole Councell of Chalcedon wherein were
630. fathers call Peter the Rocke and Bancke of the church
ſo alſo ſaith Melchior Canus. But both of them by ſhameleſſe
lies do ſeeke to abuſe the ſimplicity of the ignorant. Paſchaſinus
or Paſchaſius he only ſaid ſo, who was Legat there for Leo,
biſhop of Rome, and ſought by all meanes poſſible, to aduance

that ſeat aboue all others, as may appeare in that place, eſpecially
in the ſixteenth action of that council,Act. 3. Act. 16. and yet theſe men doe
not ſhame to ſay that the whole council ſaid ſo. As for that other
ſence of thoſe words receiued by Hillary,
               The papiſts doe ſhift oft the fathers. 
               Ambroſe, Chryſoſtome
and Ciril, which take Peters confeſſion to be that rocke,
maſter Bellarmine would ſhift that off with this anſwere, that
they only ſpeak of that faith, that Peter as a paſtor of the church
had, not of the faith without reſpect of Peters perſon. And yet
Hillary ſaith not,De trinit. lib. 6. vpon the rocke of this paſtours confeſſion, but
Vpon this rocke of confeſsion. And alſo not this mans faith,
but This faith is the foundation of the Church, by reaſon of
this faith, the gates of hell can do nothing againſt it, this faith
hath the keies of the kingdome of heauen.
               Ambroſ. in Lu
                     •
                  . lib. 6. cap. 9. Saint Ambroſe
in the words alleadged by maſter Bellarmine, ſpeaketh alſo of
faith abſolutely, without hauing reſpect to Peter, as alſo he doth
in ſundry other places of that booke. Yea he telleth vs there, that
whoſoeuer ouercommeth the fleſh, is a foundation in the church,
and ſpeaking of this rocke, he would that euerie one ſhould haue
within himſelfe this rocke, which cannot be vnderſtood of this
confeſſion as it hath reſpect to Peter. The like alſo may bee
ſaid for Chriſoſtome and Cirill, but this I truſt is ſufficient to
ſhew the vanity of his anſwere, which is ſo flatte againſt the
words of thoſe fathers. For they ſpeake of that faith, becauſe
it hath reſpect vnto Chriſt, and maſter Bellarmine would haue
it imagined that they commend this faith as it commeth from
Peter and becauſe it is his. And that maſter Bellarmine
would ſeeme out of Hillary to confirme,Bellarmine dealeth ſubtelly out of 
                     •
                  iillary. wherein yet hee
ſheweth no plaine dealing. For whereas Hillary ſaith after,
by the confeſſion of his happie faith, hee deſerued a high place,
or rather as the older copies doe read exceeding glorie, maſter
Bellarmine doth not only out of this doubtfull reading gather
the ſtrength of his argument, preferring the new reading before
the olde coppie, in that paint diſclaiming from antiquity; but
alſo to better his bad cauſe, whereas Hillary himſelfe ſheweth
in plaine wordes, that this exceeding glorie is this, that he thriſe
heard theſe wordes, feede my ſheepe, yet hee woulde make vs
beleeue, that it conſiſteth in this that Peter is the head, foundation
and key carier. Fie vpon poperie, that euer it ſhoulde ſo

ſtiflie bee maintained, and yet cannot bee defended, but by lying
and falſifying.
            And thus hauing anſwered, the moſt forcible proofes that maſter
Bellarmine bringeth, to proue that the church muſt bee built
vpon Peter: I would on the other ſide wiſh him to conſider how
weake a foundation he and his fellowes doe builde vpon. For
Peter did not only by euill councell,The weakenes of Peter to be a foundation. Matth. 16. 23. ſeeke to hinder his maſter
Chriſt in the worke of our redemption, for which hee was bitterly
reprooued, go behinde me Sathan, thou art (ſaith Chriſt)
an offence vnto me, becauſe thou vnderſtandeſt not the thinges
that are of God, but the thinges that are of men, but alſo afterwardes
denie his maſter Chriſt,Matth. 26. 74. and that with curſing and
ſwearing: but hauing receiued the ſpirit of God, and beeing
inabled as much as euer he was, to the worke of the Lord, yet
by Peters fault, Barnabas and other were brought into diſſimulation,
ſo that they walked not the right waie,Gal. 2. 13, 14. to the truth
of the goſpell. And therefore he was withſtood euen to his face
by Paule, becauſe hee was worthie to bee blamed. So that
euen then, if there had beene no better or ſurer foundation, to
haue builded the church vpon then Peter, the building might
well haue runne to one ſide. But thankes bee vnto God that
we haue a ſurer rocke.Peter not the foundation. But what will he and his fellowes ſaie,
to that moſt groſſe abſurditie that followeth this their doctrine?
For if Peter be the foundation of the church, what anſwere will
they make to them, that thinke the time was when the church
was only in the virgin Mary? Vpon what foundation was the
church then builded? Yea what foundation of the church was,
before Peter was borne or thought of in the time of the law? Yea
what foundation in all the time before the lawe, when there was
not ſo much as a high prieſt among the people. Then was
there a church as all men confeſſe, and therefore it muſt needes
alſo then haue a foundation, but it could not be Peter. For hee
had theſe wordes ſpoken vnto him almoſt 4000. yeares after the
church began. And could it ſtand and floriſh ſo manie yeares,
builded only vpon Chriſt the ſure foundation, and ſhall
we nowe thinke that this foundation beginneth to ſhrinke, or
is leſſe able to vphold this building, ſo that it muſt needes haue
Saint Peter to helpe to holde it vppe, for feare of falling?

God forbid that euer chriſtians ſhould haue ſo fooliſh thoughts,
and yet theſe and ſuch like abſurdities muſt folow this doctrine.
But to conclude this point I reaſon thus.That is now that alwaies was the foundation. That only muſt be the
foundation of the church now, which was in the time of the lawe
and before the law, but then there was no other foundation but
Chriſt, therefore now there muſt be no other. I meane no other
eſpecial or particular foundation. My maior or firſt propoſition
is grounded vpon Maiſter Bellarmines wordes.De Pontif. Rom. 
                     •
                  . 1. cap. 9. Rat. 5. For going about
to proue that the monarchy muſt be in the church, he yeeldeth
this reaſon, becauſe in Chriſts time it was gouerned by one,
and if now it be not ſo gouerned, then it is not the ſame church,
or the ſame citty of God.
            Now thus I reaſon for proofe of my maior. If the not hauing
of that outward forme of gouernement can make that it is
not the ſame church, how much more if any thing be added to the
foundation, but ſaith he, the not hauing of the ſame outward gouernment,
doth make it to be not the ſame church, therfore much
more if it be altered in the foundation. And to ſaie that the church
now in the time of grace is not all one with that church that was
before Chriſt, or that then there was anie other foundation beſides
Chriſt, is nothing els then to deny Chriſt to be a corner
ſtone, that ioyneth together both ſides of the houſe, making of
both one. By which the minor of my argument is verified. Thus
I truſt to the indifferent reader it may appeare, that as this interpretation
of theſe wordes vpon this rocke I will builde my
church, that is vpon Peter, is not catholike, ſo the doctrine that
followeth therupon is abſurd. Let vs now conſider what weight
there is in his ſecond argument whith hee wringeth out of the
word of building.De Pontif. Rom. lib. 1. cap. 11. Bellar. his 2. Arg. to build is to rule. Wherein he affirmeth, (and in truth doth but
affirme, for he can proue nothing at all) that to builde is to rule.
Indeede he alleadgeth three fathers which ſay Peter was Paſtor
of the church, or ruled all the church, but is this a good argument,
Peter did rule the whole church,Anſwere. therefore to builde is to
rule? Such a ſhew of proofe, may perchance ſeeme glorious in
the eies of them that haue no loue to the truth, but they are too
too fooliſh that will be caught with ſuch baites. That to build is
not to rule I proue thus.
            A man buildeth to haue a houſe, that he may rule, and he cannot

rule, but that firſt the houſe muſt be made. So that indeede
building in the houſe ceaſeth, when ruling beginneth, when the
houſe is made, then is it ruled. With much like dexterity he will
proue that the foundation doth rule the houſe. In the ende if you
will heare him, he will make you beleeue, that the houſe ruleth
the maiſter, not the maiſter the houſe. But let vs grant Maiſter
Bellarmine this which ſo earneſtly he ſeeketh for. Let vs yeelde
that to builde is to rule, what is then out of theſe wordes to be
gathered? Vpon this rocke I will build, that is I will rule my
church. This we ſee, Chriſt is the ruler (and not Peter) of the
church. Then let vs go forwarde, that we may ſee what help vnto
this popiſh ſupremacy, the wordes following do bring: vnto
thee will I giue (ſaith Chriſt) the keies of the kingdome of heauen
&c. Here Maiſter Bellarmine is very earneſt to proue, that theſe
keies were deliuered to Peter:
               Lib. 1. cap. 1
                     •
                  . but that we deny not. But it is
Maiſter Bellarmines bad hap, many times to take great paines
fortify, where y• enimy aſſaulteth him not, & to prooue that which
no body denieth. That we may ioine in ſome iſſue, we will eaſily
confeſſe that the keies were deliuered to Peter. What then?
Were they deliuered to him alone?To whom the keies were giuen. No Maiſter Bellarmine
himſelfe confeſſeth and that oftentimes, neither can he deny it if
he would, the fathers doe ſo generally affirme it, that this great
authority was committed to all the Apoſtles. Wherein then do
we diſſent? Forſooth Maiſter Bellarmine telleth vs that the other
Apoſtles had this authority,Ibidem. The keies by commiſsion. but as Chriſtes legates, or by
eſpeciall commiſſion, but to be vnder Peter. Whereas Peter
had it as his ordinary iuriſdiction.By ordinary iuriſdiction. Now this he ſhould proue,
but he leaueth it with a bare affirmation, ſo that you are not
bound to beleeue him. But we ſee that which here is promiſed
vnto Peter alone, whether becauſe he alone tooke vpon him to
anſwere Chriſtes queſtion, or that Chriſt therein would ſignifie
the vnity of the church, as ſome of the fathers affirme, or becauſe
he was a figure of the church,In Ioh. Tract. 124. as Saint Auguſtine ſaith, that I
ſay which is here promiſed to him alone is in Matthewe xviii.
promiſed to all, and that Maiſter Bellarmine himſelfe cannot
deny,Matth. 18. 18. lib. 1. cap. 12. although he affirme it to be in all but Peter, a legantine,
in him an ordinary power.
            And this promiſe is perfourmed to all Iohn the xx. in theſe

words receiue the holy ghoſt,Iohn 20 23. That the promiſe M
                     •
                  t 16. belongeth, to all the Apoſtles. whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer ye remit, they
are remitted, and whoſe ſinnes yee retaine, they are retained.
And Theophilact doth expound theſe wordes of Matthew the
ſixteenth (which here I haue in hand) by this place of ſaint Iohn
ſaying, that in that place of ſaint Mathew that is promiſed, that
is here giuen, and that this power belongeth vnto all. What
can be more plaine to prooue, that although Chriſt ſpake vnto
Peter onely in that firſt place, to thee will I giue the keies, yet
they were giuen to all? Why ſhould we then truſt the bare aſſertions
of maiſter Bellarmine, or any other, that the keies are
not in like maner giuen to all, when wee ſee, that Gods worde
maketh no difference betweene them. But maſter Bellarmine,
becauſe we goe about trewly with Theophilact to expound
this promiſe to thee I wil giue the keies, by that of Iohn whoſe
ſinnes ſo euer ye remit they are remitted, &c. would faine make
vs beleeue if we will truſt him of his bare word, that Theophilact
and we are deceiued, and that Chriſt in theſe words of ſaint
Iohn, doth onely giue power of order, whereas in Mathew
he promiſeth power of Iuriſdiction. And the better to perſwade
vs,Power of Order Iuriſdiction he telleth vs, that to keepe a mans ſinnes, is not
a matter of ſo great power, as to bind a mans ſinnes. And
yet ſaint Ambroſe, whoſe credit is far aboue maiſter Belarmines,
doth vſe the words of remitting & looſing, retaining
and binding indifferently the one for the other. And therefore
this is but a blinde cauill, to keepe the light of the truth vnder
a buſhell.
            If we prooue out of Cyprian,
               To binde and retaine ſin is al one 
                     •
                  e poenitentia lib 1, cap. 2. Bellar. his ſhifts. De ſimpl prel. that all the Apoſtles were
of like honour and power. They were (ſaith he) alike in their
apoſtleſhip, and had all one authoritie ouer chriſtian people,
but were not alike among themſelues. The wordes of Cyprian
haue no limitation, but maketh all of like power, and of
like honour. But maiſter Bellarmine like falſe mates that doe
waſh and clippe the coyne, whereby they make it of leſſe value
ſo doeth hee by ſuch ſ
                  •
               eights ſeeke to diminiſh the force of ſuch
authorities as are brought againſt him But what reaſon hath
hee ſo to expound Saint Cyprian? Becauſe hee ſaieth in that
Booke, that beginning proceedeth from a vnity to ſhew, that
the church is one. Thus then doeth hee reaſon. The Church

proceedeth from one or from vnitie: Therefore Peter is aboue
all the Apoſtles.Bellar. argument hath no neceſſa
                  
                     •
                  y co
                     •
                  ſequence. Let other iudge of his argument, I ſee not
out of this how he can prooue, that Peter hath ſuch ſuperioritie
ouer the Apoſtles, as that hee may exerciſe iuriſdiction ouer
them, which is that the church of Rome muſt prooue, if Peters
ſupremacie ſhal do them good.
            Seeing therefore it appeareth by that which hath beene ſpoken,
that not Peter onely, but all the apoſtles in like manner receiued
the keies,Cont. Iouin. li. 
                     •
                  
                as Saint Hierome teſtifieth that is power to
retaine or remit, to binde and looſe, although it were ſaide to
Peter, To thee I will giue the keies, yet it is manifeſt that for
his ſake onely it was not ſpoken, or the vſe of the keies, to him
onlie was not promiſed, but in and by him, Chriſt ſpake to all,
without giuing leſſe power to them or more to him. And thus
much concerning this queſtion to whom the keies were giuen.
Nowe muſt we ſee what theſe keies are,What theſe ke
                     ••
                   are. that ſo we may examine,
what that is which they ſay is giuen to Peter in this promiſe.
            Maiſter Bellarmine affirmeth,De pontif. Rom. li. 1. cap. 13. Beliarmines 1. argument to proue the keis to ſignifie rule ouer the whole church. Eſay 22. 22. that they all vnderſtande by
the keies, the ſoueraigne or chiefe pnwer ouer the whole church.
And that it muſt ſo be he proueth thus. In the Prophet Eſay
is deſcribed the depoſing of one high prieſt, and placing of an
other by the deliuering of the keies. And the keies of the houſe
of Dauid will I lay vpon his ſhoulder, and hee ſhall open and
none ſhall ſhut,Bellarm. falſifieth the ſcripture. and he ſhall ſhut, and no man ſhall open. Sincere
dealing would become all men, eſpecially in Gods cauſe,
which is farre from maiſter Bellarmine, as in many other places,
ſo heere alſo. For Eliachim of whom the promiſe was
made in this place,2. Chron. 31. 10. was not hie prieſt. Indeede Azariah was
high prieſt in the dayes of Ezechiah. Neither yet was there euer
any ſuch high prieſt as Shebnah, whome God threateneth
in that place. Whoſoeuer marketh either the pedigree of prieſts
in the ſcriptures, or in Ioſephus, hee ſhall finde it to bee moſt
falſe and vntrue, that heere maiſter Bellarmine ſo boldly affirmeth.
            But this Eliachim was one of the princes whome Ezechiah,
ſent to Rabſache,
               2. Kings 18. 18. whome in that place the Septuagint do call
the Ruler of the houſe, as alſo in the ſeuen and thirtieth verſe

of that chapter. And the prophet Eſay in the ſix and thirtie chapter
and two and twentieth verſe, they call him the Maiſter
of the houſholde. And indeede the Hebrew words do teach him
to be one that was ouer the houſe, as alſo Saint Hierome
yea and their owne old tranſlation doe tranſlate thoſe words
of Eſay. And Saint Hierome in his commentaries vppon
that place calleth him maiſter or ouerſeer of the houſe.Antiq. li. 10. ca. 1. And ſo
Ioſephus alſo doth witnes that he was one of Ezechias eſpecially
frends (as it may alſo appeare in that he ſent him to Rabſache)
and his lieutenant or vicegerent, or doer for him, let the
indifferent reader now iudge, whether this be good dealing in
maſter Bellarmine, thus to abuſe the ſimplicitie of his reader,
and the credulitie of his frends, who hee hopeth wil not examine
that he writeth, whether it haue weight or not, but will take all
for gold, that hee giueth, if it looke yelow. Thus againſt all
truth to affirme Eliachim to be hie prieſt is too bad. And to offer
by ſuch proofe as could not but be vncertain euen to himſelfe, to
proue ſo waighty a matter, whereupon ſo great controuerſie in
religion hangeth, doth not onely proclaime that all may heare
it, the weakneſſe of his cauſe, but alſo that his indeuour is, to
keepe vnder the truth, that it appeare not. And thus much to
lay open his falſhood in his firſt reaſon: Now let vs ſee the
weakeneſſe of his ſecond.
            To binde and looſe (ſaieth hee) is to commaunde,Bellarm. 
                     •
                  . arg. and to
puniſh, and to diſpence, and to remitte. But Peter coulde
binde and looſe. What nowe will Maiſter Bellarmine conclude.
Therefore (ſaith hee) hee is iudge and prince of all that
are in the church, we will not much ſtand with him in his maior,
although it might haue beene vttered in plainer termes.Anſwere. For
this authoritie of binding and looſing is ſo committed vnto the
church, that the power to do it, is tied not to the man but to the
miniſterie, not to the materiall church, but to the word. And
therefore wee cannot ſimply ſay that to bind and looſe, is to
commaund or puniſh, but to commaund according to the word,
and to puniſh according to the direction of it. For wee muſt not
imagine, that God muſt be the executioner of our owne decrees,
or tyed to allowe of our iudgements, but that wee are the
proclaimers of his iudgements, and muſt pronounce what God

in his reueiled word hath already ſet downe. And alſo the word
of diſpenſing, though it may perchaunce haue a good vnderſtanding,
as if thereby we meane the meane the ordering and beſtowing of
the word,1. Cor. 4. 1. in reſpect whereof, the miniſters are called ſtewards or
diſpoſers of the ſecrets of God: ſo muſt we take heede, that
thereby we giue not to any man, ſaint Peter or any other, libertie
to diſpenſe at their pleaſure, and to order as they will the
people of God. For as magiſtrates if they do not gouerne according
to law, abuſe their authoritie and doe degenerate into
tyrants: ſo miniſters of the word, if they ſwarue from the word,
are but ſeducers. The maior I ſay beeing rightly vnderſtood
wee doe yeld vnto, and the minor is alſo true, that Peter could
binde and looſe. But maſter Bellarmines concluſion doth not agree
with theſe propoſitions neither can it folow, if they be
graunted.Daniel 2. It hangeth no better together then Daniels image
of ſundrie mettalles, that could not long hold together. But
this muſt be maſter Bellarmines concluſion to bind and looſe, is
to commannd, puniſh, diſpenſe, and remit, in ſuch ſort as I
haue alreadie ſhewed, but ſaint Peter could binde and looſe,
therefore ſaint Peter might commaund, puniſh, diſpenſe and remit,
as hath beene ſhewed. This muſt be maſter Bellarmines
concluſion, but this will not ſerue maſter Bellarmines turne:
For euery miniſter ſhould ſo doe, and not Peter onely. And
all this is doone by the miniſtery of the word in euery paſtours
ſeuerall charge, if the miniſter be faithfull in his office. Seeing
his ſecond argument concludeth nothing againſt vs, what doth
his third and laſt argument?Bellarm. 3. argument out of the Fathers. He promiſeth by the fathers to
proue, that theſe keis are a ſoueraigne and chiefe authoritie ouer
the whole church. What, will he bring vs a catholike erpoſition,
receaued by all or moſt of the godly learned, at all times, in
all places, agreed vpon with one conſent? For otherwiſe it is
not catholike. No. But hee telleth vs of two of the fathers
onely. And the one of them being himſelfe a pope, and in ſuch
times as that before his dayes this ſuperioritie ouer all, had
bin ſundrie wayes ſought for by the Biſhop of Rome: his
credit is in this point not much worth againſt vs.
            As for Chriſoſtom who is the other witnes that muſt prooue

that by the keies Chriſt meaneth this vinuerſal iuriſdiction:Chryſoſtome examined. In Mat, hom. 55. Firſt
he reaſoneth in that very place where theſe words are, againſt
the Arrians or ſome ſuch heretikes, as made Chriſt not equall
to the father, aud inſulteth againſt them by occaſion of this place.
The father (ſaith hee) gaue vnto Peter the reuelation of the
ſonne. But the ſonne gaue vnto him partly that hee might
ſowe through the whole earth, this reuelation both of the father
and of the ſonne: partly that he being a mortall man, ſhould be
indued with heauenly power, and haue the keis of the kingdome
of heauen. And it foloweth there in Chriſoſtom, how then is he
leſſe, that wrought this in Peter? So then to proue Chriſt to
be equall vnto the father in power, he ſheweth that he wrought,
if not more mightely, yet as powerfull in Peter as the father
did.
            And vpon this occaſion he thus amplifieth this excellency of
Peter, as alſo he doth a litle before in reſpect of that vniuerſall
church that Chriſt committed to him, which charge the reſt alſo
had. For all the apoſtles were generall Preachers, whereſoeuer
God called them.Ibidem, And therefore Chriſoſtom doth ſay of them
all, not of Peter only, that they were the teachers of the world.
And in another place that there were two paires of the apoſtles
that held this headſhip.In Matt. hom. 38 And yet Peter might better then any of
the reſt, be called the paſtour or head of the church, that were of
the twelue, becauſe the charge of the Iewes whereſoeuer they
were in any place, were cōmitted to him without any limitation
of nation or countrie wherein they liued. Seeing therefore his
proofes whereby he indeuoureth to proue theſe keis to ſignifie
that vniuerſall and ſoueraigne authoritie ouer the whole church,
are either ſo falſe or faultie that they are not worth alleaging, as
are his two reaſons taken out of ſcripture, or ſo feeble that they
can haue no ſtrength, as this out of Chriſoſtome: I ſee no
reaſon why we ſhould yeld either to ſcripturs, ſo falſly or fooliſhly
applyed, or much leſſe to the ſayings of men, ſo hardly conſtrued.
            For as before I haue admoniſhed, it is one thing to haue an
excellency or ſuperioritie among others in ſome reſpects of other
mens yeldings: another thing to haue iuriſdiction, of his owne

right and intereſt, ouer all other. The firſt we confeſſe was in
Peter, but that wil nothing at all helpe the Pope, or the iuriſdiction
of the church of Rome.An argument againſt this expoſition of the Papiſts. Againſt the interpretation of the
popiſh church thus I reaſon. If theſe keis belong to all them,
that haue ovtained that grace of God, to be called to the function
of a biſhop, (I ſpeake not of the hononr, but of the office) then
is no chiefe authoritie ſignifieth thereby, (for where many are equall
there is no man chiefe) But theſe keies belong vnto all
ſuch as Theaphilact doth teſtifie,Theoph, in Mat. 16. therefore no ſuch chiefe authoritie
is ſignified thereby. For my minor propoſition that euery
biſhop or paſtour hath ſuch authoritie, or ſuch keis, beſides
the teſtimonie of Theophilact, we haue moſt plaine proofe out
of Gods word.Mat. 16. 18. An argument to proue my minor. Iohn 20, 23. Whatſoeuer is promiſed Mathew the ſixteenth
chapter in theſe words, I will giue thee the keis, is performed
Iohn the twentieth chapter, in theſe words, whoſe ſinnes ye remit
they are remitted, and whoſe ſinnes ye retaine they are retained:
but in Saint Iohn, no chiefe power is giuen, but ſuch as is
generall and common to all the apoſtles, therefore in Saint
Mathew there is not promiſed any chiefe power, but ſuch as is
common to them all,De Pontif. Rom, lib. 1. cap. 12. 13. and ſo to all paſtours in them. My minor
needeth no proofe for it is confeſſed by maſter Bellarmine. But
maſter Bellarmine denieth my maior,A reply againſt Bellarmines anſwer to the maior, and yet hath no ground
of his deniall, but this onely, that he taketh it not be all one to
binde and to retaine ſinnes or ſinners, and to looſe or remit.
Which ſubtil difference the fathers did not ſee. And therefore
Theophilact doth not onely expound this place of Matthew
the ſixteenth chapter by that place out of Saint Iohn the twentieth
chapter, making this later to bee a perfourmance of that
promiſe, I will giue thee the keies, but alſo hee flattely there
oppoſeth remitting to binding, whereas by maſter Bellarmines
doctrine, if hee had beene brought vp in his ſchoole, he ſhould
haue ſet remitting againſt retaining,Bellarm. cap. 12 & 13. lib. 1. 
                     •
                  epoenitentia lib. 1. cap. 2. and not againſt binding.
For (ſaith hee) it is a greater matter to binde, then to retaine,
to looſe then to remit. Saint Ambroſe alſo maketh to
binde and to retaine, to remitte, and to looſe all one. For,
whileſt the puritie of doctrine in ſome meaſure remayned,
this ſubtile Sophiſtirie was vnknowen in Gods church. But

nowe for defence of popery, ſuch ſtuffe muſt ſerue the turne,
when they haue no better. And heere I cannot but maruell at
maſter Bellarmine his anſwere vnto this argument out of the
centuries.Cent. 2. lib. 1. ca. 7. col. 526. The argument out of the Centuries againſt ſupremacie. For they that wrote thoſe bookes reaſon thus, if in
theſe wordes, to thee will I giue the keies &c. there were promiſed
any ſupremacie, the Apoſtlles could not haue doubted which
of them ſhould haue beene chiefe, but they doubted of this, therefore
there was not in thoſe wordes any ſuch ſupremacie promiſed.Bellarmines anſwere co it examined.
Maiſter Bellarmine maketh no queſtion but that they
doubted of it, for there was among them ſome contention about
that matter, but for the maior hee anſwereth, that the apoſtles
did not vnderſtande plainelie that there was anie promiſe
made to Peter, vntill after that Chriſt roſe againe, but then they
ſuſpected ſome ſuch matter and that made them ſtriue. Is it
not great boldnes in maſter Bellarmine, in ſo waightie matters,
to bring no other warrant but his fooliſh fancie? Or to anſwere
ſuch an vnanſwerable argument, by ſuch ſilly ſhiftes? They
knewe not ſaith maſter Bellarmine that Chriſt made ſuch promiſe
to Peter vntill after Chriſt was riſen againe. But if it
had beene an article of ſuch importance as now it is made, why
ſhoulde they not haue knowne it? They heard what Chriſt ſaid
to Peter, they heard the promiſe of the keies, and this is aſmuch
as our Romiſh Rabbines can nowe bring for their proofe.
If they vnderſtoode it not ſo, as maſter Bellarmine heere confeſſeth
they did not, what newe reuelation haue our newe Romiſh
teachers, to aſſure this to be the meaning of thoſe wordes?
But they ſeeme to be whelpes of one haire, with thoſe hereticks
whome Tertullian reprooueth,De preſcription, aduerlus haerer. Heretickes and Papiſtes charge thopoſtles with ignorance. Artic. 18. becauſe they ſaide the apoſtles
knewe not all thinges, that if their doctrine were not agreeable
to that which the Apoſtles taught, they might the leſſe bee condemned.
As Biſhoppe Fiſher, not knowing better howe to
excuſe their additions vnto the auncient doctrine,Againſt Luther. which the
church of Rome hath brought in, ſaith that later wits knowe
thinges better then before they did.
            Well, maſter Bellarmine you ſee confeſſeth, that the apoſtles
vnderſtoode not then, that promiſe as nowe the papiſtles
doe. When did they reforme their iudgement? Where, in

what place doe they ſhew any ſignification, that they euer vnderſtood
it otherwiſe? If they neither vnderſtood it ſo before Chriſts
reſurrection, neither yet gaue anie ſignification afterwardes,
by woorde or deede, by their writings or examples, that
their knowledge was in this pointe reformed, howe can wee
ſaie, that they euer tooke that to bee Chriſtes meaning? But
the firſt of theſe is confeſſed (as before is ſhewed) by Maiſter
Bellarmine, the latter they cannot ſhewe. Therefore
it maie be gathered that the apoſtles neuer vnderſtood the words
of Chriſt as the papiſtes doe.Thapoſtles ſtroue not for ſupremacie after Chriſtes reſurrection. And howe doeth hee prooue that
which hee boldlie affirmeth, that then they ſuſpected ſuch a
thing? Or that after Chriſtes reſurrection they did ſtriue. It
is mentioned in the ſtorie of the goſpell,Matth. 18. 1. Mark. 9. 34. Luke. 9. 46. Luk. 22. 24. Iohn. 13. 13. Matth. 20. 24. Mark. 10. 41. that twiſe they did
ſtriue who ſhoulde be chiefe.
            Of both which times the three Euangeliſtes doe make report.
And Saint Iohn alſo in his goſpell, ſeemeth to pointe
vnto the latter ſtrife, when hauing waſhed his Apoſtles feete,
Chriſt giueth them good leſſons of humilitie. But that after
Chriſtes reſurrection they did conſende for this, it cannot bee
prooued. For both theſe times were before his death. And
therefore I cannot but maruell, that Maiſter Bellarmine will
bring ſuch proofeleſſe ſtuffe to open light, as though hee imagined,
that his counterfaite coyne, muſt goe for currant.
And whereas afterwardes hee alleadgeth out of Origen,
Chryſoſtóme and Hierome, that the apoſtles did ſtriue amongſt
themſelues, becauſe they ſuſpected this ſupremacie of
Peter, himſelfe doeth not in this, giue credite to theſe fathers.
            For if it bee true that maiſter Bellarmine ſaide before, that
this ſuſpition was not vntill Chriſt was riſen, then howe is
this true that they affirme that they ſuſpected thus much, when
they did ſtriue firſt of all. Which was at the leaſt about a yeare
and a halfe, before Chriſt roſe againe. Neither doe theſe fathers
heerein deſerue to bee beleeued.Matth. 17. 12. For the grounde of
this their conceite, is that they imagined the paying of the tribute
money to haue beene before this contention. For they
ſurmiſe that becauſe Chriſt ſaid paie for mee and thee, therefore

the reſt of the apoſtles, ſuſpected that Peter ſhoulde haue ſome
ſuperiority ouer them, and grudged at it. But this their imagination,
as it is farre from the thought of the apoſtles (for any
thing that may be gathered) ſo is it flatly confuted by the ſcripture.
For this contention was before the tribute money was
demaunded, namely, in the way before they came to Capernaum,
as is moſt plaine in the euangeliſt ſaint Markes goſpel,
the ninth chapter, and three and thirtie and foure and thirtie verſes.
And the tribute was not demaunded before they were entred
into Capernaum,
               They contended not becauſe they ſuſpected Peters ſupremacie. and into a houſe there, Matthew the ſeuenteenth
chapter and xxv. verſe. Therefore that ſuſpition of ſupremacie
was not the cauſe of their contention, which maiſter
Bellarmine woulde prooue out of theſe fathers. But perchance
rather that ambitious affection that was in Iames and Iohn the
ſonnes of Zebedee,
               Math. 10. 37. which afterwardes they ſhewed more
plainely,41 in aſking that one might ſit at his right hand, and
the other on his left hand, was cauſe of their ſtrife. And indeed
the euangeliſt concerning this ſaith, that the other tenne diſdained
at them for it. But the other contention that was among
the apoſtles is not ſaide to be againſt Peter, as this is ſaid to be
againſt Iames and Iohn. But it ſeemeth that euery one would
be aboue other, and no ſuſpition then, that Peter ſhoulde be aboue
all.
            And whereas they that wrote thoſe Bookes called the
Centuries, alleadge, that if there had beene in Peter any ſuch
Supremacy, Chriſt woulde haue ſaide to them when they did
ſtriue, contend no more, for I haue made Peter chiefe amongſt
you: but (ſay they) hee ſpake no ſuch wordes: Now maſter
Bellarmine will prooue, that Chriſt tolde them, that Peter
was appointed to bee chiefe.Luk. 22. 26. Bellar, argument to prooue Chriſt to haue told Peter he ſhould be chiefe. And howe? He that is greateſt
among you (ſaieth Chriſt) let him bee as the leaſt, and the
chiefe as he that ſerueth. Therefore (ſaieth Maiſter Bellarmine)
it is plaine, that one is called chiefe. If hee had
meant that the trueth ſhould appeare, hee woulde, by comparing
this place with others where the ſame thing or ſtorie is
reported, haue ſette downe the true meaning of the wordes,
and not take aduantage, to peruert the true meaning, and deceiue

the ſimple Reader. For Matthew in his twentieth chapter
and twentie ſixe and twentie ſeuen verſes, and Marke in his
tenth chapter, and fortie three and fortie foure verſes reporting
this ſtorie, doe plainely teach, that Chriſt doeth not ſpeake of
any chiefeneſſe that was among them, but that they woulde
haue, or deſired. For they ſay not, if any be, but if any would
be chiefe, ſo reproouing their ambitious affection, and teacheth
them rather to indeuour to be humble.In Math. how, 66 Becauſe, as Chroyſoſtome
ſaieth, hee that ſeeketh Supremacie ſhameth himſelfe.
And therefore neuer any I ſuppoſe before Maiſter Bellarmine
out of theſe wordes of Chriſt, hath gathered this proclaiming
of Peters ſuperioritie.
            Hitherto wee haue ſeene, howe little hee can prooue by the
firſt of his two places of ſcripture. Now let vs trie what weight
the other teſtimonie hath.Bellann. depontif. Ro. li 3. c. 34. Iohn 21. And this is drawen alſo out of the
wordes of our ſauiour Chriſt to Peter, who when he had thrice
aſked of him,Bellarm, 2. argument our of ſcripture anſwered. whether hee loued Chriſt, and ſtil he anſwered,
that hee did loue him, hee willeth him to feede his ſheepe.
Now theſe wordes (ſaieth maiſter Bellarmine) are ſpoken to
Peter onely.Anſwere. It is true. But that Leſſon is not giuen to
Peter onely. For, to all the apoſtles it belongeth, to feede
Chriſts ſheepe,Li, 1, cap. 12. and therefore are all Paſtours and Sheepeheards.
            Yea, it is confeſſed by maiſter Bellarmine in his anſwere
to an authoritie alleadged out of Cyprian, that all the apoſtles
were like in apoſtolike power, and had euen the ſame
authoritie ouer chriſtian people. If they had the ſelfe ſame authoritie
ouer chriſtians that Peter had, which here he confeſſeth,
then to the reſt as well as to Peter,
               De paſtorib u
                     •
                   cap. 13. was this charge of feeding
Chriſts ſheepe committed. And therefore Saint Auguſtine
will haue Chriſt to be the onely good ſheepheard, and that all other
are good in him, and are equall in this their worke, for he
maketh no difference. But Chriſt feedeth, they alſo feede, yea
enen when they feede hee feedeth, and Chriſt ſaith that then he
feedeth in them, becauſe his voice is in them, and his loue is in
them.
            But what ſhould I ſtand vpon this point? It is more plaine,

then that maiſter Bellarmine himſelfe can deny it, although he
would blinde the eies of the ſimple with this diſtinction,The charge of feeding belongeth to all alike. that it
is principallie ſpoken to Peter, but in ſome ſort to all. What,
was Peter bound to feede more diligently then the reſt of the Apoſtles,
Chriſtes ſheepe? None may be negligent in this office.
And he that doth the worke of the Lord,Ier. 48. 10. (eſpecially this worke)
negligently, is accurſed by Gods owne mouth. We muſt all
doe it to the vttermoſt of our power. And Saint Paul was not
afraid to ſaie,1. Cor. 15. 10. that he laboured more aboundantly then all the Apoſtles
meaning in the preaching of the word. So that it ſeemeth
that this office was not eſpecially committed to Peter,
               Theoph. in Ioh. cap. 21. but
that I may ſay with Theophilact vpon theſe wordes. Let Biſhops
and preachers heare, what is commended vnto them.
            Feede (ſaith Chriſt) my ſheepe, bring with thee thy miniſterie,
if thou wile ſet foorth thy loue to the great ſheepehearde.
Then alſo maiſter Bellarmine will proue out of theſe wordes
and that eaſilie as he ſaieth,De pontifi Rom. lib. 1. cap. 15. that Peter hereby hath the chiefe
power.To rule and to haue chiefe rule not all one. But indeede he onely prooueth that to feede is to rule,
whereas he promiſeth to proue with eaſe, that to feed is to haue
the chiefe rule.
            But you muſt heare with him, the brightneſſe of Peters
chaire at Rome hath ſo daſeled his eies, that he cannot eſpie ſo
ſmall a miſſe. But the weight of all conſiſteth in the laſt point
that he handleth concevning this place,Lib. 1. cap 16. and therefore about it he
beſtoweth ſome more labour. And firſt he affirmeth that he
is ſure and certaine, that euen all chriſtians, yea euen the Apoſtles
themſelues, are as ſheepe committed to Peter. For his
trifling coniectures of the difference betweene lambes and ſheep,
they are not worth ſpeaking of. But let vs ſee what force is in
his notable reaſon, for himſelfe ſo calleth it, he ſo well liketh of
it.Bellar his Arg. to proue Peter to be a vniuerſall paſt. Chriſt moſt manifeſtly (ſaieth he) committeth to Peter
all thoſe ſheepe, of which he may ſay they are mine, but he may
ſaie ſo of all chriſtians, therefore all chriſtians are Peters ſheep.
If maiſter Bellarmine had good ſtore of ſtrong reaſons to proue
his aſſertion, he would neuer make ſo much of ſo blunt a weapon.
For he can neuer proue his maior.
            Chriſt ſaide not feede all my ſheepe,Anſwere. for he knewe that he

could not doe, but onely feede my ſheepe. Now this is as the
Logicians doe tearme it an Indeſtuite propoſition. Which
hath no limitation, but may be vnderſtoode as occaſion ſerueth,
ſo that to make it more particular or generall, we muſt haue regarde
to the circumſtances of the place. And is it not verie
ſtrange, that he which here will make a vniuerſall propoſition
of that that is not ſo,Lib. 2. cap. 8. to force out of it an argument, where in
truth there is none, will be as bolde at another time to make of
a vniuerſall propoſition a particular.2. Tim. 4. 16. No man ſaith Saint Paul
aſſiſted mee, all men forſooke mee, that is ſaieth he none of
them that ſhould haue helped me with the Emperour. And ſo
he applieth perchance to one or two, that the apoſtle ſpeaketh
doubtleſſe of all that profeſſed religion then at Rome, as though
he were euen the creatour of Lodgicke, and would haue it as his
creature, to frame it ſelfe, to ſerue his turne.
            But to come to the point. As he affirmeth all euen the apoſtles
by theſe wordes to be committed to Peter: ſo I doe confidently
pronounce,This charge feed my ſheepe hath a limitation. that out of theſe wordes, and ſome other
circumſtances, great reaſons may be gathered, to ſhewe Peters
authority in theſe wordes to haue a limitation. And firſt this
worde my ſheepe, which maiſter Bellarmine maketh the chiefe
ſtrength of his argument, doth make much for that interpretation,
which I take to be the true and natui all ſence of the place.
When the meaning of our ſauiour Chriſt, is to ſpeake of that
generall charge ouer all, then he vttereth it in other wordes, Go
teach all nations,Matth. 28. 19
                     •
                   Mark, 16. 15. and againe going into the whole world, preach
the goſpell vnto euery creature. But here is no ſuch generall
charge but onely feede my ſheepe.Chriſtes peculiar ſheepe. What are theſe ſheepe that
Chriſt calleth my ſheepe? We knowe that Chriſt after a ſpeciall
meaning, calleth the Iewes his people and his ſheepe.
He ſaieth he is not ſent,Matth. 15. 24. but to the loſt ſheepe of the houſe of
Iſraell.
            And as though in compariſon of the Iewes, he made no account
of the gentiles, he ſaith it is not meete to take the childrens
bread, (meaning the ſaluation that was ſent to the Iſraelites)
and caſt it to the dogges. Therefore Chriſt by this worde
my ſheepe meaneth (as it ſhould ſeeme) the people to whome
he eſpecially was ſent, amongſt whom he was borne, to whom

hee preached,Lib. 1. cap. 16. (as alſo Maiſter Bellarmine for that preferreth
Poters miniſterie among the Iewes) and amongſt whom hee
died, that is the Iewes.
            And beſides the manner of ſending of his Apoſtles vnto their
generall charge, (whereof I haue already ſpoken) which is farre
differing from this, the very office that we know was laide vpon
Peter,
               Gal. 2. 7. doeth much confirme this interpretation. For Saint
Paule ſaith that the goſpell ouer the circumciſion was committed
to him, as the goſpell ouer the vncircumciſion was committed
to Peter. Wee ſee therefore that Peter had a peculiar
charge and calling, to bee the apoſtle of the Iewes. Which is
proofe ſtrong enough, to prooue that Chriſt neuer meant, to
commit anie ſuch generall charge ouer all the world vnto him,
vnleſſe we will imagine, that Chriſt did firſt he knew not what,
and afterwardes reuoked his former commiſſion. I ſaie this limitation
of Peter, eſpeciallie, although not onlie, to one peculiar
people, is as it were a reuocation, of his former vniuerſall calling,
if any ſuch had beene, or rather becauſe indeed none ſuch
was, it is inſteede of a commentarie vpon theſe wordes, feede
my ſheepe, to teach vs how to vnderſtand them. Feed my ſheep,
that is the Iewes, whom I haue eſpecially committed to thee,
as I alſo tooke paines almoſt wholy and only among them.
            Furthermore alſo when Saint Paule telleth vs that the goſpell
ouer the vncircumciſion, was committed to him, as vnto Peter
the goſpell was committed ouer the circumciſion, his meaning
is to tell vs, that Chriſt hath as well placed him ouer the
Gentiles, as Peter ouer the Iewes. And therefore of himſelfe
he ſaith that he was ſeperated vnto the goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt,Rom. 1. 1. Actes. 13. 2.
becauſe God commanded them, to ſeperate vnto him Paule and
Barnabas, to the worke whereunto hee had called them. And
what this worke is,Act. 22. 21. is another place declared, depart for I will
ſend thee, farre hence vnto the Gentiles. Which his calling to
the Gentiles,Gal. 1. 16. hee alſo ſpeaketh of vnto the Galathians, aſſuring
himſelfe that God called him to that office.
            But now for Peter, we muſt not doubt, but that hee alſo
was called of God. For they are not to be heard, that woulde
make vs beleeue that it was but a couenant among themſelues,
that Peter ſhould preach to the Iewes; Paule to the Gentiles,

but Paule doth aſſure himſelfe of his calling in that he that was
mightie in Peter, was mightie in him alſo. Saint Hierom on
the Galathians lib. 1. cap. 2. very well writeth, One and the
ſelfeſame (Chriſt) committed to mee the goſpell of the vncircumciſion,
(ſpeaking in the perſon of Paule) who committed
to Peter the goſpell of the circumciſion. If then Peter was by
Chriſt called to this apoſtleſhippe, where was it, when, in
what woordes? In all the Scripture there is not auie one
place but this, wherein he is called by Chriſt to this miniſterie
ouer the Iewes. And therefore Chriſtes ſheepe, are rather
that peculiar people that were (as no man denieth) committed
to Peter, then the whole world, whereof in Scripture, they
haue no probable coniecture. And this interpretation, I maruell
that Maiſter Bellarmine hath not ſought to confute, ſeeing
it is about two hundreth and ſeuentie yeare olde. Perchaunce
hee thought it reſted vppon ſtronger reaſon, then
hee was able to conuince or confute, and therefore hee let it
alone.
            Other argumentes are alſo alleadged to diſprooue this ſupremacie
of Peter ouer all,Arguments againſt Peters ſupremacy. and to ſhew that theſe words feede
my ſheepe, cannot giue vnto him anie ſuch ſoueraignty. Saint
Paule acknowledged no ſuch ſubiection to him,Gal. 2. when hee doth
not only pronounce, that hee learned nothing of them that ſeemed
to be chiefe, but alſo withſtoode Peter in the face becauſe
he was worthy to be reproued.
            Out of which wordes howe lightlie ſo euer Maiſter Bellarmine
woulde caſt them off, with this diſtinction that they
were fellowes in preaching, but not in gouerning (as though
the preaching of the woorde, and the practiſe or gouernement
according to the ſame were then ſeperated) yet Saint Ambroſe
and Theophilact vpon this place doe teach, that there
was no inequality betweene them, and that Paule was nothing
inferiour to Peter.
            
            And marke howe abſurdly he woulde daube vppe the matter,
it is nothing to me ſaith S. Paule to the Galath. 2. 6. what
ones they were once that ſeemed to be ſomewhat. Which he expoūdeth
as if he had ſaide, howe vile ſoeuer they were in time
paſt, what was that to mee? I conferred with them, for now they

are great apoſtles. If Saint Paule had ſo meant, he woulde
not haue ſaid that they ſeeme to be ſomewhat, but that they indeede
are ſomewhat. And thus maſter Bellarmine, rather than
he will ſay nothing, will peruert the very ſenſe of ſcripture: for
theſe wordes, no doubt, are expounded, by thoſe that followe in
that verſe, they that ſeemed to bee ſomewhat gaue nothing to
me.
            Saint Paule alſo without aſking leaue of Peter.
               Argument. 2. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 1. Cor. 7. 25. 1. Cor. 11. &c. 14. did exerciſe
iuriſdiction among the Corinthians, againſt an inceſtuous perſon,
he giueth counſell concerning virgins, he did ſet order among
them concerning prayer and the euchariſt. And hee called
to Miletum the elders of Epheſus to giue them commaundement
or aduiſe concerning the church there. And yet maſter
Bellarmine would make vs beleeue, that the iuriſdiction was
in Peter onely, authoritie to preach in the reſt together with
him.Argument. 3. Act. 6. 2. Bellarmine his reply. Anſwere. Againe the apoſtles I ſay the twelue (not Peter) did call
together the chriſtians to appoint deacons. We muſt beleeue
(ſaith maſter Bellarmine) that Peter deuiſed this or agreed to
it. And why muſt we beleeue that Peter was author of that act,
ſeeing there is not one word to warrant it? Why ſhould we
imagine, that rather of him then of another? As for conſenting
we are ſure he conſented, for it was done by a generall conſent.
Peter and Iohn were ſent by the reſt to Samaria,
               Act. 8. 14. Argument. 4. to inſtruct
them how happened it that they would ſend him, if hee might
commaund them all? Had the Apoſtles authoritie to ſend him?
Then was not he aboue them. Had they no authority? Then
did they abuſe him, which is not to be thought of ſo godly men
as they were. And howſoeuer maiſter Bellarmine would ſalue
the matter, in telling vs that ſending doth not import alwaies a
ſubiection in him that is ſent:Bellarm. reply, yet if he had beene their ſuperior,
it is to be thought they would rather haue deſired him to take order
for them of Samaria,
               Anſwere. then haue ſent him. But I am ſure
the pope now would not take in good part, that his colledge of
Cardinals ſhould ſend him about any ſuch buſineſſe. Neither
is that argument brought to prooue a ſubiection in him vnto
them, but that hee is not their ruler, or that they owe him no
ſubiection. And therefore Maiſter Bellarmine his anſwere that
ſending doth not alwaies ſignifie ſubiection is nothing.
            
               
But I am wearie in ſpending time about his trifling cauils,
who though he cannot ſoundly refell the argumentes that are againſt
their doctrine, yet will hee not confeſſe the truth, and
ſo giue glorie vnto God.
            Hauing thus examined I truſt ſufficiently, the chiefeſt
thinges alleadged by Maiſter Bellarmine, concerning theſe two
places of Scripture, which eſpecially they reſt vpon: I muſt
alſo brieflie examine his ſecond ſort of proofes which hee promiſed
to vſe,Lib. 1. cap. 10. Bellarmine his ſecond ſort of argument from Peters prerogatiue. and that is grounded vpon the prerogatiues that are
aſcribed to Peter. Wherein I ſhall bee the ſhorter, becauſe
many of them, are rather to make a ſhewe of proofe, then
worth alleadging. The changing of his name from Simon to
Peter,
               De Rom. pontif. lib. 1. cap. 17. 18. &c. when hee was firſt called, prooueth not that hee was
made head of the Church. For hee had that name about three
yeares and a halfe,Iohn. 1. 42. before they aſcribe vnto him this headſhippe.
Likewiſe that he is commonlie named firſt, is a weake proofe.
For if that ſhoulde ſignifie his headſhip, then ſhoulde it neuer
haue beene placed otherwiſe then firſt, but Saint Paule who
knew well enough what place he ſhould giue to Peter,
               Galath. 2. 9. nameth
Iames before him. He walked on the waters. It is true, but
what is out of that concluded? Is hee therefore the head of the
church? Not ſo. Fourthlie hee firſt of all knew the hie miſteries
of our faith ſay they: if he did, can that make him heade of
the church? It cannot. Fiftlie it is ſaide the gates of hell ſhall
not preuaile againſt it. That is the church as the fathers teach
almoſt with one conſent, and therefore that is the catholicke expoſition.
But that which out of Origen hee alleadgeth, becauſe
it is contrarie to the text, and teſtimonie of the moſt of the
godlie, is iuſtlie reiected.
            And for that they woulde prooue the ſupremacie becauſe
Chriſt ſaide to Peter pay for mee and thee, is anſwered page
thirty-ſixe. That hee praide for Peter it is not ſingular, for
hee praieth for all that the father hath giuen him.Iohn. 17. If hee will
confirme his brethen, it is no maruell, becauſe hee that had
more experience then others of his owne weakeneſſe, is fitteſt
to make others ſeeke for true ſtrength and not to truſt to their
owne, that will deceiue them. But hee firſt of all the Apoſtles
ſaw Chriſt, after his reſurrection, what then? If that maie

giue the headſhip of the church,Marke 16. Iohn 20. 
               Marie Magdalene ſhoulde
bee the head, for ſhee ſawe Chriſt firſt, yea although Peter
and Iohn did runne to ſeeke for him, yet hee woulde not appeare
firſt vnto Peter, to take away the very ſtrength of this
their argument. If Chriſt waſhed the feete of Peter firſt (if
I ſay, for it may iuſtly bee doubted of) muſt that giue him
the ſupremacy?
            The like argument may be gathered out of that that Chriſt
foretelleth Peter of his death, Actes the firſt chapter and thirteenth
verſe.
            And for the twelfth prerogatiue, where he maketh Peter
as the good man of the houſe, to gather together into one place
the companie of Diſciples, it is grounded vpon a fiction. For,
there is not one word, that hee gathered them: But there is
ſomewhat to bee gathered againſt Peters Supremacy. For,
although hee mooued them to appoint one in Iudas his roome,
yet hee appointed not one, as the Pope woulde very readily
haue chalenged that priuiledge. Not Peter, but they, appointed
two.Verſe 23. Verſe 24. They prayed. They alſo gaue them lots not Peter.
            
            If maiſter Bellarmine would reply that theſe actions yet
muſt be performed by one, and by likelihoode this one ſhoulde
be Peter, wee will not ſticke to graunt him ſo much. But if
Peter had beene ſupreame head of the church, heere had beene
good occaſion to haue named him as direttor in theſe actions,
which wee ſee is not done.
            The thirteenth prerogatiue Peter firſt preached after the
receiuing of the holieghoſt.Act. 2. This maketh not him Supreame
head.
            And herein the Popes can not claime to bee Peters ſucceſſours.
Hee wrought the firſt myracle,Act. 3. but the text ioyneth
Iohn with Peter, which ſhoulde not haue beene doone,
if it had beene any argument for Peters ſupremacie,Act. 5. to haue it
thought, that hee wrought the firſt miracle.
            For the fifteenth prerogatiue commeth the deſtruction of
Ananias and Saphira, which was by that power that GOD
gaue, not to Peter onely, but to them all, Marke the ſixeteenth
chapter, and ſeuenteenth and eighteenth verſes: yea, and

alſo vnto Saint Paul although hee were not one of the twelue.Act. 16. 18.
For euen by the ſame power Paule caſt out of a maide a ſpirite
of diuination,Act. 28. 8. and healed the father of Publius, that lay ſicke
of a feuer and a flixe and ſtrooke Elymas with blindeneſſe, healed
one borne Iame at Lyſtra.
            
            The ſixteenth prerogatiue is taken out of the ninth chapter
of the Actes of the Apoſtles,Act. 13. 11. Act. 14. 
                     •
                  . Act. 9. 32. where Peters diligence in
preaching is commended, in that hee trauelled, throughout
all quarters. Which the Popes friends for very ſhame ſhould
neuer haue ſpoken of. For, if ſo bee that his diligence be an argument
of his ſupremacie, as they faine would make it, then
why is not the Popes ſupine negligence in that function, as
ſtrong an argument againſt this Supremacie?
            Wee will admit (although it iuſtly may be doubted of)
that which is the ground of this ſeuenteenth prerogatiue,Act. 1
                     •
                  . that
Peter firſt did preach vnto the Gentiles. And muſt that needs
prooue that hee is therefore head of the church? I am ſure that
maſter Bellarmine himſelfe will confeſſe, that it is no neceſſarie
argument. But prayer was made without ceaſing vnto
God for him.
            It is a token that the Church (ſeeing the perſecution
that nowe beganne againſt the godly, and that Peter alſo a
woorthy miniſter of the worde, and a great apoſtle was in danger)
was very carefull for his preſeruation. But this doeth
not prooue him to be the head of the church,Act. 12. 5. no more then the
care that the godly had ouer Saint Paule, Actes the ſeuenteenth
chapter and tenth verſe, in ſending him away to Berea,
by night, for his better ſafety, or letting him downe
by a windowe in a baſket,2. Cor. 11. 33. when hee was in great danger in
Damaſcus, doth prooue Paule to hee the head of the church.
            Of the nineteenth I haue ſpoken before, pag. 10. The twenteenth
prerogatiue, Paule went to Hieruſalem to ſee Peter.
What,Galat. 1. 18. muſt he therefore needes be head of the church? Belike
then for the three yeares wherein he ſawe him not,Verſe 14. but went
(preaching) into Arabia and to Damaſcus he confeſſed him not
to be head, but as if he had forgoten himſelfe all this while, hee
now at the laſt, yeldeth him ſeme reuerence. But if he had done
it in any ſuch reſpect, he would and ſhould at 
                  〈…〉
               , before he

had taken his office vpon him haue had Peters alowance. And
thus much concerning Peters priuileges or prerogatiues which
they alleage out of Gods booke. Which although many of them
are euident arguments of excellent graces, that God had beſtowed
vpon him, and great mercies which God ſhewed to him,
yet if maſter Bellarmine or any other, will out of them conclude
Peters ſupremacie, the weakneſſe of his argument will be
ſeene of very children. But yet becauſe before he made Peters
prerogatiues his ſecond proofe of this his ſupremacie, I haue
thought it neceſſarie to reckon them, (for other confutation of
them needeth not) that all may ſee what weak proofes they doe
bring, for this their chiefe point of doctrine. As for the other
eight prerogatiues, they are not worth ſpeaking of: Both becauſe
we may iuſtly doubt of the truth of many of them, as being
proued but by fabulous writings: and alſo becauſe if they were
true, it were not matteriall for the point in queſtion. And therefore
letting them alone as rotten propes which will fall in pieces
of themſelues, if any weight be layed vpon them, I haſten to his
third proofe that hee promiſed. And that is out of the fathers.
And herein it is needles to examine euerie particular teſtimony.Lib. 1. cap. 10. How the fathers aſcribe much vnto Peter.
Onely I will ſet downe in what ſenſe the fathers truly may,
and often doe, aſcribe vnto Saint Peter many excellent titles,
that thereby examining the fathers, and finding them to keepe
within the bounds of gods word, we may with reuerēce receiue
them. But if they paſſe thoſe liſts, I truſt maſter Bellarmine
and al his friends will beare with vs, if we reiect the doctrine of
men, as himſelfe in this very booke before, refuſeth the iudgement
of Origene and Theophilact,
               Cap. 12. and of others in other
places. Firſt therefore this word in latine primatus which wee
now call Supremacie, but indeede doth ſignifie (that I may
make ſuch a word) Firſtneſſe, is aſcribed vnto Peter of the fathers
in reſpect of time as in the place alleaged here out of Ciprian,
               Firſt, in time. De pontit. Rom. lib. 1. cap. 25.
neither Peter (ſaith Ciprian) whom the Lord choſe firſt,
and vpon whom he did build his church, whereas Paul did afterward
reaſon of circumciſion,Cypr ad Quintinum vel Quintum. did boaſt himſelfe, or did take vpon
him any thing inſolently or proudly, ſaying he had the primacy,
and that new ones, and aftercommers ſhall rather obay him.
him.
            
               
This place is alleadged by maſter Bellarmine often, to proue
Peters ſupremacy or iuriſdiction ouer others. But the wordes
are very plaine that Cyprian ſpeaketh, of his being firſt, not in
dignity, but in tune, as appeareth not onely in that he ſaith he
was firſt choſen, but alſo, by the wordes of newe ones or aftercommers.
But maiſter Bellarmine wil ſay,Iob. 1. 39. 40. that Andrew was
choſen before him to be an apoſtle, and therefore, that Cyprian
was deceiued, if ſo he meant. It may ſo be. For men may erre.
But the queſtion is not nowe, whether Cyprians iudgement
herein be true or not, but vpon what occaſion, or in what reſpect
Cyprian giueth Peter the primacy, which is moſt plainly in
this place ſet downe to be in reſpect of time. And ſo may other
of the fathers in this reſpect vſe this word, and giue him this title.
And ſometime this title of primacy is giuen vnto him in regarde
of ſome excellent thinges that he was indued withall,Firſt in reſpect of ſome execllent graces. by
reaſon whereof, his fellowes and brethren amongſt themſelues,
and the fathers after, might giue vnto him ſome kinde of reuerence,
in name or otherwiſe. But this wil do no good for proofe
of popiſh ſupremacy. For they doe hold, that Peter in his owne
right, and by that iuriſdiction which by Gods word he hath, is
head of the church, and hath the ſupremacy aboue all other. We
ſay that becauſe of his gifts of zeale, knowledge, conſtancy, or
boldnes, he was admitted and allowed to ſpeake and to doe,
many things,1. Pet. 5. 1. but that in his owne right, he was but equall with
the reſt and as he calleth himſelfe a fellowe elder, with them
that were meaner then apoſtles.
            Therefore to be a chiefe man,Head men haue not alwaies in their own right iuriſdiction ouer other. or a head man among them, is
not to prooue him to haue iuriſdiction ouer them. In all corporations
or fellowſhips, as aldermen in citties, although in
regarde of that place, they are alike, none more or leſſe an alderman
then another: yet among them, ſome are better eſteemed
of, euen of themſelues, becauſe of their learning, wiſedome,
dexterity in gouernement, credit, power, or wealth, not
becauſe they can in right claime it, but becauſe other doe for
ſuch things as they ſee in them, yeelde it vnto them, not that
they haue power ouer them, but onely they are of good accompt
among them.
            And thus much to proue, that that is not ſufficient, which

maiſter Bellarmine ſaith will ſerue the turne, to proue that the
fathers ſay that Peter was head,Lib. 1. cap. 25. or had primacy ouer ye church.
For neither his eſtimation in reſpect of his gifts, neither if by
voluntary ſubiection they did ſubmit themſelues vnto him, it
can proue him to haue right to rule ouer them. And this they
muſt proue, or els they gaiue nothing to their cauſe, that Peter
by the word of God, hath authority ouer the whole church, and
ouer the apoſtles. And therefore it maketh no great matter,
what men ſay of Peters authority, but how truely they grounde
their ſayings vpon Gods word. And thus I truſt it appeareth
to the indifferent reader, that the minor propoſition of that argument
which I haue ſet downe in the end of my anſwere vnto
maiſter Bellarmine ninth chapter of this booke,Pag. 12. wherein conſiſteth
the great ſtrength of the popiſh Monarchy, is not agreeable
vnto the truth, or catholike doctrine, howſoeuer that church
of Rome, reioiceth in that title that is none of hers, thereby deceiuing
the world, as if all that ſhee taught were ſound and catholike.
            The propoſition is this that Chriſt gane iuriſdiction vnto
Peter, ouer the vniuerſal church. The chiefeſt profes that either
they all haue, or that maiſter Bellarmine can alleadge, is out of
Saint Matthew the xvi. where they ſay this iuriſdiction is promiſed,
and Saint Iohn xxi. where they ſay it is giuen, which
their interpretation as I haue ſhewed cannot ſtand with the text
it ſelfe or the interpretations of the ſounder fathers. His ſecond
reaſon which conſiſteth of the prerogatiues which Saint Peter
had, is grounded either vpon fables, that deſerue no credit, or
vpon impertiment matters, that proue nothing to the purpoſe, as
if I be forced hereafter therto, I doubt not by Gods grace with
eaſe to proue. His third and laſt reaſon, is of it ſelfe ſufficient to
ſhew, that themſelues haue no great hope to proue it to be a catholike
doctrine, that is a doctrine taught and beleeued of all the
godly,Vincent. Lyrin. or almoſt of all, at all times, in all places, for Vincentius
Lyrinenſis thus defyneth catholike. But the firſt authour that
maiſter Bellarmine alleadgeth,Bellar. his 3. arg. for the ſupremacy, is out of the fathers. is more then two hundreth yeers
after Chriſt. So that the doctrine that cannot be proued, to
haue bene beleeued for two hundreth yeares, in the pureſt times
of the church, cannot be called catholike, or be ſaid to haue the

true antiquitie. And yet there is nothing that ſoundeth ſo much
in the mouthes of our aduerſaries as Catholike, Catholike, Antiquitie,
Antiquitie, whereas in trueth nothing can be catholike
vnleſſe it haue the true antiquitie: And the true antiquitie
muſt begin at God himſelfe. It muſt ſpring from him as from
the firſt fountaine. As moſt notably, and more than once, that
ancient and learned father Tertullian hath ſaid,De praeſcript. aduerſ. haeretic. That there is
nothing true, but that onely which the church receiued of the apoſtles,
the apoſtles from Chriſt, Chriſt from God. And this
is indeede ancient trueth, and true antiquitie.
            Now I muſt alſo take a view of the maior propoſition which
is this,The conſutation of the maior for popiſh ſupremacy ſet downe pa. 11. De Rom. pontif. lib. 2. cap. 2. whatſoener iuriſdiction Chriſt gaue to Peter, and not to
the reſt of the apoſtles, al that belongeth to the church of Rome.
And maſter Bellarmine beginneth to prooue this in his ſecond
Booke, beginning with Peters being at Rome. But whether
he were there or not, it maketh no great matter. For it is laide
of Paule, and Marke, and others, that they were there alſo, but
that maketh them not ſupreame heades of the church. But,
whereas he confidently affirmes,Whether Peter firſt preached at Rome. that many of the fathers teach,
that Peter firſt of all preached to the Romanes, and founded
the church there, becauſe perchance he thereupon would inferre,
that he was then biſhop of Rome: it is not amiſſe to examin his
proofe herein.
            Firſt,Iraen. lib 3. c. 3. Iraeny his place examined. that which he alleageth out of Iraeney, that the church
of Rome was founded by Peter and Paule, maketh nothing for
proofe of Peters firſt founding the church there: for Iraeny maketh
them both alike in that worke. Neither by founding the
church can be meant the firſt beginning of the ſame, but rather,
that they by their teſtimony and death, did confirme the godlie
there, and perfected and eſtabliſhed the church that was already
begunne by all likelihoode, as after ſhall be ſhewed.
            And whereas maſter Bellarmine addeth to Iraeny his own
gloſe, that is to ſay (ſaith he) firſt of Peter, and after of Peter
and Paule, as it is affirmed without proofe, ſo it may go without
anſwere.
            That which he reciteth out of Euſebius for Peters firſt preachingEuſeb. li. 2. hiſt. 14. Euſeb his place examined.
at Rome (though he write Firſt with great letters) is not
true. In Muſculus interpretation there are no like words to thē
               
that are heere alleadged. And that out of Arnobius, who ſaith
that Rome was conuerted to Chriſt,Contra gentes lib. 2. Arnob. anſwered. becauſe it ſawe the fierie
charets that Simon Magus had cauſed, to bee blowen awaie
with the blaſt of Peters mouth, may well bee vnderſtoode of the
more plentifull conuerſion of chriſtians there, not becauſe there
were none before. For I will ſay nothing of the iuſt cauſes that
may be alleadged, to doubt of this ſtorie alleadged out of Agiſippus
of Simon Magus his fierie charetes. And Epiphanius
is wrong delt withall by maiſter Bellarmine. For whereas hee
ſaieth,Heref. 27. Epipha. anſwered. that Peter and Paule were firſt apoſtles and biſhops in
Rome, he maketh him ſaie, that Peter and Paule were firſt in
Rome,Other of the fathers anſwered. thereupon inferring, that firſt they preached there, which
Epiphanius ſaith not. That which out of Chryſoſtome hee alleageth,
prooueth not Peter firſt to haue preached there, as neither
that out of Leo or Theodoſius.
               In pſal. 48. Serm 1. de natali Apoſtolorum. For Chryſoſtome ſaieth,
that hee did occupie the kingly citie, Leo that hee was appointed
to the chiefe place of the Romaine Empire, and Theodoſius
ſpeaketh of the religion deliuered by Peter. But this doeth not
proue,Paul. Oroſ. li. hiſt. 7. c. 6. Turonenſ. li, 1. Hiſtor, ca. 25. that it was firſt deliuered by him. Oroſins and Gregorie
of Turon ſay, that Peter being there, Chriſtians beganne, which
may be vnderſtoode of their more bolde profeſſion of Chriſtianitie
then before. For that there were chriſtians before Peter came,
there are in my iudgement ſtrong reaſons to prooue. Indeede
Theodoret ſaith,Ad Rom. cap. 1. Peter preached not firſt at Rome. Sadol. ad Rom. cap. 16. that great Peter firſt preached to them the doctrine
of the goſpell. Perchance he meant that he (not firſt of all)
but firſt of the apoſtles, did preach the goſpell there. For Sadolet
a Cardinall and a Romiſh catholike, in his commentaries vpon
Paules epiſtle to the Romaines, doth thinke that the goſpell was
firſt preached, and the church at Rome firſt aſſembled, by ſome of
the diſciples that fled out of Iury. And he nameth Priſcilla, Aquila,
Andronicus and Iunia.
               Rom. 16. 7. And in this reſpect, it ſeemeth
that Paule giueth this commendation vnto Andronicus and Iunia,
that they were notable among the apoſtles, becauſe their
miniſtery was ſo neceſſary for the church there, (for he doeth not
in anie other Epiſtle ſpeake of them.) But in this epiſtle Sadolet
ſaith that Saint Paule doth giue vnto them, this great commendation,
that they might haue the better credite among the
godly at Rome, and the greater reuerence, might be ſhewed towardes

them, in diſcuſſing and ending of theſe controuerſies,
which were begunne amongſt them, and for ſtaying of which
Saint Paule doth write this Epiſtle as Sadolet confeſſeth.
And of theſe Primaſius an ancient father ſaith in like ſorte,Primaſ. ad Rom. that
Andronicus and Iunia were accounted notable amongſt others
that were ſent to Rome, by whom they might beleeue, or by
whoſe example they might haue beene confirmed. Now if Peter
had beene the firſt that preached there, which maſter Bellarmine
a papiſt affirmeth, but Sadolet a Cardinall very confidentlie
denieth,Rom. 15. 20. Saint Paule, who woulde not builde vppon anothers
foundation, as he writeth vnto the Romanes, would not haue
taken vpon him to haue decided their controuerſies, and to haue
commended vnto them the miniſterie of others alſo to that ende,
but would either not at all haue medled with them, or haue put
them in minde of Peter their Biſhop.Rom. 15. 15. 1
                     •
                  . But contrariwiſe hee
challengeth them for his owne flocke, and as belonging to his
charge, which wrong he would neuer haue offered to Saint Peter,
if he firſt had planted the church and his ſeat there. Neither
would the Iewes (who in euery place were Peters eſpeciall
charge) that were at Rome, when Paule came thither, bee
ſo deſirous to be inſtructed of Paule as they were,Act. 21. 22. if they had
beene taught before by Peter, and he had beene their Biſhop
and had beene there at this time (for this Epiſtle was written
long after they ſay that he was biſhop of Rome) or if they had
knowne their owne biſhop, to be the vniuerſall biſhop or head of
all others.
            And thus I truſt, that notwithſtanding all that out of ſome
doubtfull ſentences of ancient writers, maiſter Bellarmine hath
gathered, yet this point is not ſo cleere for the church of Rome,
as they would perſwade the world that it is. But rather the contrary
appeareth moſt true, that Peter was not the firſt that preached
at Rome. As for that which maiſter Bellarmine doth alleadge
concerning Saint Markes goſpell,Bellar. obiect. that it is written at
Rome, according to that which Saint Peter preached: if wee
grant it,Anſwere. it doth not proue yet that Peter firſt of any other preached
at Rome. It only proueth that hee did preach there which
by way of admittance only for the preſent wee will not much

                  •
               and againſt.
            
               
As for that which hee ſaieth of the ouercomming of
Simon Magus by Peter,
               Bellar, 2. obiect. euen this one thing maie ſufficiently
ſhew that it is but fabulous, that Saint Luke, who tooke
vpon him to write the actes and doings of the Apoſtles,Anſwere. The ſtory of Simon Magus his 
                     •
                  iery cl
                     •
                  tetes a fable. & doth
very carefully write the miracles that were wrought by them,
as he that marketh may eaſily perceiue: and doeth alſo recorde
things done many yeares after this was ſuppoſed to bee done:
yet doeth not ſo much as make any mention of this conflice betweene
Saint Peter and Simon Magus, although in the eight
Chapter where he reporteth ſome talke betweene Simon Magus
and Peter, very good occaſion had beene offered, neither yet
Saint Marke Saint Peters owne diſciple, writing at Rome
mentioneth it. And therefore howſoeuer ſome of the ancient writers,
being deceiued by Egiſippus, haue thought of this fable:
yet I haue I truſt good reaſon and ſufficient warrant not to credit
the ſame.
            Now whether Peter died at Rome or not,Whether Peter died at Rome. Lib. 2. cap. 3. which is the next
point that is handled by maiſter Bellarmine, I will not much
gaine ſay it, becauſe I would eſpecially ſtand vpon the moſt materiall
pointes, that belong to the proofe of their maior propoſition,
which is, that Peters prerogatiues, belong to the biſhop of
Rome (if wee will beleeue the papiſts) by Chriſts inſtitution.
And herein I would craue of the indifferent reader,Canus. lib. 6. loc. Theol. cap. 8. without partiaſity
to iudge, whether this their doctrine of Peters beeing Biſhop
of Rome twenty and fiue yeares be a catholicke doctrine or
not.Whether Peter were biſhop of Rome. 25 yeares.
            
            For maiſter Bellarmine maketh a proud but a falſe brag, that
it hath the teſtimony and conſent of all the ancient writers.Lib. 2. cap. 4. Bellar. firſt arg. As
for his firſt reaſon whereby he will proue him to bee biſhop there,
becauſe of the dignity or great account that hath beene alwaies
made of the church of Rome,Pag. 13. 14. Anſwere. it is very weake. For the Church
of Rome was accounted off more then others (as before I ſhewed
out of the councel of Chalcedon & Ireny) becauſe Rome was
the imperiall citie. And no doubt alſo but that greater concourſe
of learned men, in that reſpect was there then els where; which
muſt needes cauſe that place, to bee in better eſtimation.
So that of this cannot Peters being Biſhoppe there bee concluded.
            
               
Secondly whereas hee will prooue that he was Biſhoppe of
Rome,Bellarm, 2. arg. becauſe where he was biſhop after that he leſte Antioche
it cannot be ſhewed,Anſwere. this his proofe is like the former. For
ſeeing he was an apoſtle, what neceſſitie is there, that he muſt
be biſhop in ſome peculiar ſeate or place? Where was Paule
biſhop? It appeareth by the ſtory of the Scripture, that he was
no where biſhop.Arg. 3. Bellarm, out of fathers. And why then ſhould wee of neceſſity make
S. Peter a bi
                  •
               hop in ſome chaire? Maiſter Bellarmines third
argument, which is the teſtimony of the fathers, hee imagineth
will beare all downe before it. But firſt wee muſt conſider that
the fathers were content at the firſt,Why the fathers did not much gainfay Peters being biſhop of Rome. to receiue this thing as a
truth without any great examination of it, becauſe it was but a
matter of ſtory, and ſo not much materiall whether, hee were
biſhop of Rome or not. But if they had beene in our daies,
and ſeene what neceſſary doctrine the church of Rome inferreth
thereupon, that it is a doctrine that we muſt beleeue, or els wee
cannot be ſaued, that Peter was biſhop of Rome, and of the
whole Church, and then for that the biſhop of Rome is Peters
ſucceſſour, in that vniuerſall biſhopricke, and that by Chriſtes
inſtitution, and that this muſt be beleeued vpon paine of damnation:
No doubt but euen thoſe godly fathers who ſeeme moſt to
ſpeake of that chaire of Peter,
               In Iof. cap. 20. Hom. 85. woulde haue ſaide as Chryſoſtome
writeth of Moſes chaire, wee muſt not now (ſaith he)
ſpeake of the Prieſtes ſitting in Moſes chaire, but in Chriſtes
chaire, hee I ſay, and the reſt would haue proclaimed it lowde
inough, that they are the true Biſhops not that ſit in Peters
chaire, but in Chriſts chaire.
            But I haue ſundry ſtrong argumentes to induce not my
ſelfe onlie,To beleeue that Peter was biſhop of Rome is no catholicke ſaith. but I truſt euen others alſo, to be aſſuredly perſwaded
(I will not ſaie that Peter was not Biſhoppe of
Rome) but that it is not a Catholicke Religion ſo to be
leeue.
            And firſt I will conſtantly affirme, that maſter Bellarmine
and all the Ieſuites that take his part, ſhal not be able to prooue,
that the fathers of the firſt two hundreth yeares, that are of good
account or credite (for in this caſe I except what their Popes
and counterfet fathers haue written or taught) that Peter
was Biſhop of Rome. Which beeing prooued, it is as cleare

as the noone day, that is this not catholicke doctrine. Themſelues
muſt needes confeſſe it.Peters being biſhop of Rome, not proued by the word. Now for proofe of it, firſt that in
the Scriptures we haue no ſuch things taught, it is moſt plaine.
And Maiſter Bellarmine himſelfe, who would faine haue it beleeued:
yet dareth not affirme of this anie thing els, then that it
maie be that the Lord did openly command,Lib. 2. cap. 12. that Peter ſhould ſo
place his chaire at Rome, that abſolutely the biſhoppe of Rome
ſhould ſucceede him. And there hee addeth, that howſoeuer the
matter is, it is not ſo by the firſt inſtitution. And as in the ſcriptures
this thing hath no ground,The firſt fathers knew no ſuch thing. Ignatius knew not Peters ſupremacy. ſo the fathers that liued in the
daies of the apoſtles, and next after them, doe not acknowledge
any ſuch matter. Ignatius who was Saint Iohns ſcholler maie
be a good witnes in this behalfe. All whoſe Epiſtles if we ſearch
and ſift, we ſhall not finde any thing in them, that teacheth vs
this point of popery, but rather the contrary. And yet he writing
vnto ſundry, and informing them in the moſt principall points of
religion, and ſuch things as were moſt neceſſary for chriſtians to
know, yea, and among other to the Romanes themſelues, muſt
needes haue informed them of this vniuerſall biſhop and of Peters
chaire,Ign. ad Trallia, & ad Romanes. if he had knowen of anie ſuch matter: in his ſeconde
Epiſtle which is ad Tiallianos I commaund not ſaith he as an
apoſtle, and to the Romanes I commaund not theſe thinges as
Peter and Paule. In both places hee had good occaſion to
haue vrged them with Peters ſupremacie, but eſpecially he ſhould
haue put the Romanes in minde of Peter, if hee had beene their
biſhop. And ſhould haue ſaid I doe not inioyne you theſe thinges
as Peter, who was your biſhop. But the greateſt matter that
he eſpieth in Peter and Paule, is that they are apoſtles. And
writing vnto the Epheſians,
               Ign. ad Epheſ. he moueth them to depende vpon
their biſhop, as the Church hangeth vpon the Lord, and the Lord
vpon his father.
            How happeneth that in this reckoning of theſe goodly couples
the Epheſians and their biſhoppe, the church and Chriſt,
Chriſt and God, there is not any mention of Peter or his ſucceſſour?
Doubtleſſe as yet this conceit was not hatched, which
yet more plainely maie be ſeene in that exhortation that he maketh
to the Saintes in Smirna to honour God as the maker and
Lorde of all,Igo. ad Simrna. but their biſhoppe (for that he ſpeaketh of their

owne biſhop the whole epiſtle ſheweth) as the high prieſt the
Image of God, and the moſt excellent thing in the Church.
Nowe I pray yon what account is here of Peters chaire or of
his ſucceſſion? Not one word. This alſo in his epiſtle is to be
obſerued, that hee ſeemeth to make more eſpeciall account of
Paul then of Peter.
               Ign. ad Philad. As writing to the Philadelphians, he ſaith
Be ye folowers of Paul and the other Apoſtles as they folowed
Chriſt, which it is to be thought he would not haue don, if Peter
had beene in ſuch account then, as ſince he is ſaid to be. Nowe
for Iuſtinus Martir who wrote about the yeare 147. doth neuer
ſo much as make mention of Peter being biſhop of Rome,
although in his ſecond Apologie he maketh mention of Simon
Magus how hee was honoured at Rome (but not of his fierie
chariots deſtroied by Peter,
               Iuſtinus apol. 
                     •
                  
                as ſome doe, whereof I ſpake before.)
Seeing therefore, Iuſtinus hauing ſo good an occaſton,
and writing and dwelling in Rome as by Hierom it appeareth
ſpeaketh not one worde of it there, neither yet afterwards in the
end of the apologie, wherein he ſheweth the ſinne of chriſtianitie,
it is likely that Rome was not then knowen, to be either
Peters chaire, or the biſhop thereof to bee vniuerſall biſhop.
Euſebius writeth of Denis of Corinth,Euſeb. hiſt. eo
                     ••
                   li. 2. cap. 2
                     •
                  . who floriſhed about the
yeare one hundred ſeuentie and foure, howe hee did write
vnto the Romans, and yet nothing is there of Peter, that he
was biſhop there, but onely, that Peter and Paul did plant the
church there. And in the ſame place Euſebius reporteth of
Caius, who (as he ſaith) was made biſhop of Rome after Zephirinus)
which Zephirinus died the yeare of the Lord two
hundred and twentie) that he writing vnto Proclus an hereticke,
put him in minde of the monuments of the Apoſtles that he
could ſhew. Whereas hee might haue made a better bragge,
to hane ſerued for his purpoſe, if hee could haue told them, of
Peters chaire. But as yet there was no ſuch matter knowen.
As for that which maſter Bellarmine himſelfe aleageth out of
Irenie, it proueth nothing for him. For in ſaying, that Peter
and Paul together did found a church there,Iren. li. 3. ca. 3. De preſcriptionbus aduerſus heret. he aſcribeth nothing
to Peter alone. And Tertulian that was about 200.
yeares after Chriſt doth ſeeme rather to make Clement the firſt
biſhop of Rome,Clement firſt biſhop of Rome. ſo litle doth he dreame of Peters chaire, or biſhoprick

there. Neither yet doth Cyprian plainly affirme, that
Peter was biſhop of Rome. He doth ſomtime indeede call that
church Peters chaire in reſpect of the doctrine that Peter taught
and publiſhed,Peters chaire. which at that time was beleeued at Rome, which
alſo perchance he in Rome confirmed by his death. As alſo our
Sauiour Chriſt ſpeaketh of Moſes chaire,Moſes chaire, Mat. 23. 2. and ſaith that the
prieſts did ſit in Moſes his chaire, ſo long as they taught the
lawe, that Moſes from God deliuered to them. But as for
Moſes hee neuer came neere the place where Ieruſalem was
built, to eſtabliſh any chaire there. And thus we ſee, that in all
theſe ancient fathers, who liued more then two hundred yeares
after Chriſt (for Ciprian floriſhed about two hundred and fiftie
yeares after Chriſt) there is no plaine proofe of Peters being
biſhop of Rome. And excepting Ciprians words, (who if he
allude vnto the words of our ſauiour Chriſt as he ſeemeth to do,
can make no more for the opinion of the church of Rome, then
any of the reſt) there is nothing in them all, that hath any likelyhood
of proofe of the thing in controuerſie. But if any man
anſwere that it is no good argument thus to reaſon.Obiection. Such
men haue not written that Peter was biſhop of Rome, therefore
hee was not biſhop there:Anſwere I reply, that if this that out of
them hath beene ſaid, doe not ſubſtantially prooue, that Peter
was not biſhop of Rome, (as if the allegations be wel conſidered
of, they are ſtrong preſumptions) yet doe they inuincibly
prooue, that for this ſpace of more then two hundred yeares,
they cannot ſhew of any authentike author, that hath acknowledged
Peter to be biſhop of Rome. Yea the firſt that is aleaged
by maſter Bellarmine is Ireny, who liued after Chriſt not
much leſſe then two hundred yeares. And therefore this doctrine,
doth eaſily appeare not to be catholike, and the godly fathers
which ſlace haue affirmed, that he was biſhop of Rome,
either do ſo call him in reſpect of the worke of a biſhop, which
(if he were there) by his care of Gods flocke, and conſtancie in
his truth he did ſhew, or elſe they teach that which had not bin
taught in the dayes next vnto the apoſtles times. A ſecond argument
that vnanſwerably prooueth this to be no catholike doctrine,
is the diſſenting of y• moſt anciēt authors that they alleage,
from themſelues in this point, wherin they affirme that Peter
               
was biſhop of Rome. For Ireny, who is firſt alleaged of maſter
Bellarnine,
               Lib. 3. cap. 1. cont. Ma
                     •
                  cio. 1 
                     •
                   hereſ. 27. Euſeb. li. 2. ca. 25. 
               Tertulian, whome in the ſecond place he produceth,
then alſo Epiphanius and Dionyſius biſhop of Corinth out of
Euſebius do al with one conſent ioyne Peter and Paul together,
I ſay not Peter onely, ſo that vnto the one as well as vnto the
other belongeth that dignitie by their records. And Damaſus
himſelfe a pope (I maruel if he would erre in this point) ſaith
that Peter came to Rome Nero being emperour,Conell. Tom. 1. ne Petro. Li. 3. cap. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                which muſt be
at the leaſt twelue yeares, after the reckoning that is nowe holden
for good, in the church of Rome. And Euſebius doth aleage
out of Origen, how Peter in the latter end of his life came to
Rome, and therefore he is not like to be Biſhoppe there xxv.
yeares. This doubtfulneſſe and vnconſtancie of their deliuering
this doctrine, is an infalible argument that there was not in
thoſe times, any catholike doctrine taught of this matter, but
that men might thinke thereof, as they ſaw cauſe. But now it
is no leſſe then hereſie to denie that Peter was Biſhoppe of
Rome.
            Now if vnto this that hath bin ſaid,A third reaſon. we adde the vocation or
office of Saint Peter recorded in the holy Scripture, that he
ſhould be the Apoſtle of the circumciſion,Galat. 2. 7. whereof, that euer he
was diſcharged, all the Ieſuites in Rome and Rheimes, will
neuer be able, out of Gods regiſter booke to ſhew. And one the
other ſide, that the ſingular care that the Apoſtle Saint Paul
(who willingly woulde not build vpon another mans foundation)
ſheweth himſelfe to haue ouer the Romans, more then ouer
any other, euen as if they were his peculiar charge, (as iu
the firſt and fifteenth chapters of that epiſtle appeareth) I truſt
there is no man of indifferent iudgement, but will thinke that
we haue great reaſon to ſtay our ſelues, and not raſhly vpon euerie
ſhew of the newneſſe of fathers, to runne and conſent vnto
ſuch opinions, as haue no ſhew of the ancient antiquitie, no
agreement among themſelues, no colour of probabilitie in the
worde of God, but the contrarie rather. Neither is that any
anſwere to my ſecond argument,Li. 2. c. 5. Bell. 06. (which maſter Bellarmine
doth ſaie) that the diſagreement about the time of Peters comming
vnto Rome, doeth not prooue that he came not at Rome
at all.
            
               
For my intent is not directly to proue, that Peter came not
to Rome as biſhop of Rome, but that this was not a catholike
doctrine for two hundred, or almoſt three hundred yeeres after
Chriſt, and this diſagreement doth proue that ſubſtantiallie. So
that it muſt bee another anſwere that muſt take awaie the
ſtrength of this argument, or elſe it ſtandeth vnaſwered. Neither
is that example that he bringeth of the vncertaintie of the
time of Chriſtes death, fit to proue the matter in queſtion. For
all are agreed that Chriſt died,Bellar. ob. 2. Anſwere. but that Peter was biſhop of
Rome is not certaine. And therefore the thing it ſelfe beeing
doubted of, the vncertaine ſetting downe of the circumſtances,
will make it leſſe credited. I am not ignorant that godly learned
men, haue ſet downe manie moe arguments, to prooue
that Peter was not biſhop of Rome, and that maiſter Bellarmine
beſtoweth ſixe or ſeuen chapters to anſwere the ſame as
well as he can. But my purpoſe being to trie as well as I can
how catholike their doctrine is, I content my ſelfe at this time
with theſe fewe. For to ſtriue what might bee ſpoken of this
matter, were an infinite labour. But whileſt I indeuour to goe
forward, I am forced a while to ſtay, and muſe at the immoderate
boldneſſe of maiſter Bellarmine, who vpon ſo weake
proofe, will make ſo certaine a concluſion. For purpoſing to
ſhewe the biſhoppe of Rome is a vniuerſall biſhop,Lib. 2. cap. 12. Bellarm. his triumphing before the victorie. hee thus
beginneth. Hitherto we haue plainly ſhewed, that the Biſhoppe
of Rome is Peters ſucceſſour in the Biſhopricke of
Rome.
            Nowe conſidering with my ſelfe, the weakeneſſe of the
two poſtes that muſt vpholde this building, I though he might
haue ſomething at the leaſt miſtruſted his owne cauſe. For if
Peter were at Rome, and firſt preached there, doth that proue,
that therefore the Biſhop of Rome is his ſucceſſour? But by
that meanes all they that came afterward in the places where
he preached ſhall bee all his ſucceſſours, and not onely the
pope.
            The ſecond ground of this conſiderate concluſion, is, that
he imagineth that Peter was Biſhop of Rome, and ſo died.
But the vanitie of his arguments I haue diſcouered before (I
truſt) ſufficiently.Pag. 56. &
                     •
                  . Therefore this bolde aſſertion I will requite

with this Sillogiſme, and ſo proceed.
            If it be not certaine that Peter was Biſhop of Rome, then
muſt this ſucceſſion of the Biſhop of Rome to Peter,
               Argument to the biſhop of Rome his ſucceſſion to Peter to be vncertaine. needes be
vncertaine.
            But it is vncertaine as I haue ſhewed by better reaſon then
maſter Bellarmine hath ſhewed, that Peter was biſhop there:
            Therefore I conclude, this ſucceſſion alſo, muſt needs be
vncertaine.
            But before I begin to examine Bellarmines euidence, wherby
he will proue the pope to haue ſupremacie ouer all the church,
the Reader muſt bee put in minde of that which before I haue
ſaid, whereby the very ground of this ſupremacie is ſhaken (if
I be not deceiued) namely it is with good reaſons (I truſt) denied,
that Peter had that ſupremacie ouer the whole church.
And if he had it not, how can the biſhop of Rome haue it from
him? Againe, we muſt conſider how this hangeth togither. If
Peter had that vniuerſall charge, and was biſhop of Rome alſo,
that therefore they that doe ſucceede him in the biſhopricke of
Rome, muſt in like manner that vniuerſall charge.
            But let vs heare M. Bellarmines reaſons. But the foure
firſt I of purpoſe omit, bicauſe they are either directed againſt
Nilus his opinion,Li. 2. de Rom. Pontif. cap. 12. who graunted (as maſter Bellarmine ſaieth
of him) that Peter had this vniuerſall charge ouer the whole
church, but denieth it to the biſhop of Rome, and therefore thoſe
arguments touch vs little, or elſe they are anſwered before in this
treatiſe. But he hauing proued (after his maner) againſt Nilus,
that ſeeing Peter had this ſupremacie, hee muſt needes haue a
ſucceſſour in the ſame. At the length he commeth to proue that
the B. of Rome is this his ſucceſſor, reaſoning thus: either the
biſhop of Antioch, or of Rome, muſt be Peters ſucceſſor in the
ſupremacie ouer the whole church. But the biſhop of Antioch can
not chalenge it: therefore Rome muſt ſucceed in this vniuerſall
biſhopricke. That Antioch cannot haue it he ſhews, becauſe Peter
reſigned that biſhopricke before he died. I will not here examin
or cal forth your witneſſes, in what place ye find, that Peter
gaue ouer to the biſhop of Antioch which you ſay hee had. But
I will aſke a queſtion of you, by what right he could reſigne it
ouer, and leaue the charge that God committed vnto him, and ſo

forſake the flocke whereof you are made ouerſeer. You muſt
either holde your peace,Marcel. epiſt. ad Antioch. or elſe tell vs ſome tale of a baſtarde
Epiſtle of pope Marcellus, which commaunded him ſo to
doe.
            And is it inough that Marcellus,
               A rotte a prop of ſupermacie. who liued about three hundred
yeares after this thing was done, ſhould ſay that Chriſt
commaunded him to doe it, and produce no witneſſe, alleadge no
proofe, ſet downe no circumſtances? Thus we ſee that this
ſupremacie doeth ſtande but vpon a tottering foundation. It
may alſo be doubted, whether if he had a vniuerſall charge ouer
the whole church, he might take vpon him a particular charge,
either at Rome, or Antioch. For our Sauiour Chriſt giueth
direction to his Apoſtles, whoſe charge was vniuerſall, Goe
into the whole worlde,Mark
                     •
                   16. 15. preach the Goſpell vnto euerie creature.
For although it is written of ſome of the Apoſtles, that they
were biſhops in certaine places, yet that is no anſwere to this
obiection, becauſe they were not vniuerſall biſhops, and therefore
muſt needes haue their ſeate ſomewhere, I ſay in ſome particular
charge.A vniuerſall biſhop muſt not be a ſitter, but 
                     •
                  ther a runner. For hee that is an vniuerſall Biſhop, and
hath allotted vnto him a ſeate or chaire, is vnproperly called
vniuerſall. It were more expedient for him in reſpect thereof,
to bee running, yea, or rather flying then to bee ſitting. But
to anſwere maſter Bellarmines argument. His Maior propoſition
is gathered of a falſe ſuppoſition.Whether it be needefull that Peter haue a ſucceſſour. For if it bee not
graunted, that Peter muſt needes haue one to ſucceede him
in this vniuerſall charge, then you ſee that there is no neceſſitie,
that his ſeate wherein hee muſt bee ſucceeded, is either
at Rome or Antioch.
            But wee denie firſt, that Peter himſelfe had this vniuerſall
charge. And in this reſpect, wee thinke it a verie needleſſe
matter, for vs to beate our heades about his ſucceſſour in
the ſame, But I pray you, what meaneth this, that maſter
Bellarmine taking in hande to write of the controuerſies of
theſe tymes, and to impugne and withſtande them, that in
theſe dayes doe ſpeake agaynſt his Popes ſupremacie,Bellarm. would match with an 
                     〈◊〉
                   aduerſary. doth
ſo ſuddenlie turne his backe vppon them, and incounter with
Nilus, who is much more friendlie to him in this matter
chen we can bee?Lib. 2. cap. 12. For whereas hee hath promiſed to prooue,

that the Biſhop of Rome dooth ſucceede Peter in the vniuerſall
Biſhopricke by Gods lawe, and by reaſon of ſucceſſion:
his arguments onely intend and prooue thus much: Peter had
this vniuerſall charge, and therefore another muſt haue it
alſo. And that Peter had it, hee ſaieth Nilus dooth graunt
it. But that is it that wee denie, and maſter Bellarmines ſtore
will not affoorde him one argnment agaynſt vs directlie, except
hee haue anie confidence in the two laſt, the fifth, and
the ſixt.
            And for the ſixt, as alſo his other arguments that may any
thing touch vs,Pag. 5. &c. they are anſwered almoſt in the beginning of
this Treatiſe. Let vs then ſee what ſtrength this argument
hath, that ſo much of the weight of the cauſe muſt reſt vppon.
Saint Paule ſaith the church is one body, but he head can not
ſay to the feete,1. Cor. 12. 2
                     •
                  . Bellarmines argument to prou
                     •
                   that Peter muſt haue a ſucceſſo
                     •
                  . I haue no neede of you: therefore the Church
muſt haue another head vpon earth beſides Chriſt. If the argument
be hard fauoured and miſhapen, and ill tied together,
and agree like ſtrings al out of tune, blame him that make it ſo.
For maſter Bellarmine doth ſo reaſon. Theſe are his wordes.
The church is one body,Li. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   12 
                     ••
                  g. 5 and hath her kinde of head here vppon
earth beſides Chriſt, as appeareth out of 1. Corinthians and
the twelfth chapter. In which place, after that the Apoſtle
Saint Paule hath ſaid, that the church is one body, hee addeth:
The head cannot ſay to the feet, I haue no need of you. Which
his reaſon, if it be drawen into a forme of argument, muſt (as
I thinke) be formed into ſuch a monſtrous ſhape as you haue
ſeene.
            But to omit the ſhape of his argument, let vs ſee what ſubſtaunce
there is in it. And if it bee examined, it hath as little
found matter,Anſwere. as good making. For, out of theſe wordes of
Saint Paule (the head can not ſay to the feete, I haue no
neede of you) hee thus inferreth, but Chriſt may ſay, that hee
ſtandeth in neede of none of vs: therefore by this head heere
Chriſt can not be meant. Is not this very clarkely handled of
maiſter Bellarmine, to apply that vnto Chriſt our head in the
church which S. Paul ſpeaketh of the head of a naturall bodie,
whereof he hath borrowed a ſimilitude, to teach how neceſſary
the members of Chriſt his myſticall body, are one to an other,

ſo that none may without wronging himſelfe deſpiſe another?
which collection of M. Bellarmine is moſt plainely againſt the
text it ſelfe, and the iudgement of all good expoſitours: Nay,
I ſuppoſe I neede except no expoſitor but maiſter Bellarmine
himſelfe. And yet we haue in that very place an other argument
of his. For a man may ſee that he was ſore pained in trauaile
of this argument. For, ſeeeing no way how to deliuer it
well, he was faine to heape vp much ſtuffe in few lines, (for al
this matter is contained in little more then eight ſhort lines) to
make a ſhew as though he had much to ſay, when as that which
he ſaid is farre worſe then iuſt nothing. Well, let vs view his
argument.Arg. of bellarm, the 2. One head beſides Chriſt there muſt be, but there is
no other then Peter: therefore Peter muſt be the head. We flatly
deny that we need any head but Chriſt, as before I haue proned.
Laſtly,pag. 6. 12, 13. bellarm. his 3. and laſt argum. 
               Peter dying, the church muſt not want a head:
therefore Peter muſt haue a ſucceſſor. But this argument ſuppoſeth
that Peter is the head of the vniuerſall church, which
they cannot prooue, and vntill they can prooue it, we will content
our ſelues with Chriſt our head.
            Thus we ſee how maſter Bellarmines fift argument, as a
plenteous ſpring ſendeth forth three ſtreames, but there is no
cleare water in any of them, but bad couers of a bad meſſe. And
what is all this to the biſhop of Rome, if Peter muſt haue a
ſucceſſour? For, as we deny Peters ſupremacie, ſo may wee
doubt whether he might be a biſhop, being not an apoſtle only,
as were the reſt, but an apoſtle of the Iewes, whereſoeuer they
were, we doubt of his reſignation of the biſhopricke of Antioch,
if he were at any time biſhop there, we doubt of his being biſhop
of Rome: and laſtly, whether this ſucceſſion muſt needes belong
to the biſhops of Rome if Peter had it: for it might bee
perſonall in Peter. And maſter Bellarmine, who in other queſtions
is plentifull of his reaſons, and will make ſome reaſonable
ſhew of proofe in this greateſt matter,bellarm. barren of reaſons. and which it eſpecially
behoueth him to prooue, is ſo barren, that he hath almoſt
nothing to ſay, no reaſon to alleage, although by his promiſe
he made vs looke for great matters. And yet when all is done,
he muſt either haue vs to graunt him the thing that is in queſtion,
which we cannot doe, or elſe he can ſay nothing to it.
            
               
But there are many ſtrong reaſons that moue vs to denie that
Peter had any ſuch vniuerſall authoritie ouer all Chriſts flock,Peter had not charge ouer the whole church.
or that any man, the biſhop of Rome, or any other ſhould haue
ſuch ſupremacie. Firſt the greatneſſe of the change, which is 
far aboue the abilitie of many, much leſſe can any one performe
it. Secondly, that our ſauiour Chriſt doth ſhew a litle before 
his death,Chap. 13. 14, 15, 16. as appeareth in Saint Iohns goſpell, a fatherly affection,
and tender care to comfort his diſciples, being penſiue becauſe
of his departure, and yet neuer vſeth this argument, or
giueth them this commaundement, that Peter ſhould be their
head, and they ſhould obay him. Although good oportunitie
was offered to haue ſpoken of it,Iohn 16. 7. if it had beene ſo when Chriſt
told them that it was expedient that he ſhould departe. He doth
not then tell them that Peter muſt be in his place, and ſupply
his roome, or that one ſhould haue general charge of his church.
But on the contrarie he appointeth his vicar and vicegerent euen 
his ſpirit to ſupply his want.Iohn 14. 16. Who can be in all places at
once,The ſpirit is Chriſts vicar. in euery particular church, yea in euery particular member
of the church, to comfort, inſtruce, direct, defend, and to do
to and for the godly, whatſoeuer is needefull or expedient for
them. Thirdly the apoſtles after Chriſt aſcenſion, and Saint 
               Luke that writeth the acts of the apoſtles make no mention of
ſuch a ſupremacie in Peter, vnleſſe we could borow maſter Bellarmines
ſpectacles, by which hee can ſpie that one pope is contained
in theſe words,Epheſ. 4 4. De pontif. Rom. li. 1. cap. 9. Verſe 11. one bodie, and one ſpirit, as he doth alſo
find out the ſupremacie plainely ſet downe in theſe words, hee
gaue ſome to be apoſtles: and yet more plainly if we may beleeue
him in the epiſtle to the Corinthians,
               1. Cor. 12. 28. he hath ordained in
the church firſt apoſtles, then prophets. Now let them that can
picke that ſoueraigne Supremacie out of thoſe wordes ſay
ſo.
            But for my part I confeſſe my ſight is ſo dimme, that I can
not ſee ſo farre into that mill ſtone. Theſe and ſuch like reaſons,
beeing compared with their proofs out of ſcripture which
make nothing for them vnleſſe they be ſore wreſted, from their
naturall and true meaning, doe euen proclame it to the world,
that this doctrine of the popes ſupremacie, is nothing elſe but a
deuiſe of mans braine, a fruit of his pride. And thus to thinke

I am the ealelier perſwaded, when I ſee how maſter Bellarmine
toileth himſelfe, to ſet downe the ſtate of the queſtion
For although in the beginning almoſt of this twelfth chapter
he promiſed to prooue that the biſhop of Rome, is by the lawe
of God,Bellarm, not ſo good as his word ſucceſſor vnto Peter in the ſupremacie of the vniuerſall
church, yet afterwards he confeſſeth that the church of
Rome hath not this ſucceſſion by Chriſts firſt inſtitution of
this ſucceſſion, and that perchaunce (for ſo he ſpeaketh to teſtifie
how loth hee is to confeſſe the truth plainly, though he cannot
denie it) perchance he ſaith it cannot be proued by the lawe
of God, that the biſhop of Rome, as he is biſhop of Rome is
Peters ſucceſſor. And yet although it cannot be proued to be
decreed by Gods lawe, it is ſaith hee a thing that belongeth to
the catholike faith. For (ſaith hee) to be of the fayth, and to
be by Gods lawe, is not all one, for it is not by Gods lawe
that Paul ſhould haue a cloke (hee might haue ſaid as much
alſo for Tobias dog) yet this muſt be beleeued. I would not
haue thought that Pauls cloke had beene ſuch a neceſſarie relique,
but I remember that Balthaſar Coſſa, who was pope
Iohn the three and twentieth of that name,Stella Iacob. Bergom. gained well by Peters
cloke when time was, for by caſting it vpon his owne
ſhoulders, he made himſelfe pope.
            But can maſter Bellarmine find no better ſtuffe to perſwade
vs to beleeue the popes ſupremacie? They make it
a matter of damnation not to beleeue the ſupremacie of the
pope. And is it of as great neceſſitie to beleeue that Paul
had a cloke? If maſter Bellarmine be ſo perſwaded, I lament
his follie. If hee thinke otherwiſe, why doth hee bring
it to prooue that to beleeue the ſupremacie of the biſhop of
Rome, is a pointe of the catholike faith, although by Gods
lawe this ſupremacie cannot be prooued? And as they ſtagger
in ſetting downe by what authoritie right or lawe they
claime this ſoueraigntie: ſo they haue no great proofe for their
manner of this their dignite, whether it be perſonall or not. By
Chriſts firſt inſtitution maſter Bellarmine telleth vs it was perſonal.
            If Chriſt made it perſonall who could change that eſtate
and make it ſucceſſionall? maſter Bellmine anſwereth, that it

was perſonall, generall, or publike, ſo that it belonged to him
and his ſucceſſors. Whether that can be called perſonall, that is
to ſay belonging to the perſon onely which belongeth alſo to his
ſucceſſours let the indifferent Reader iudge. But how is this
prooued that Chriſt gaue this prerogatiue to him and his?Li. 1. cap. 12.
Maſter Bellarmine ſaith ſo often times, eſpecially in the twelfth
chapter of his firſt booke, but his proofe is litle elſe then his affirmation.
            Againe, hee ſaieth, that this ſucceſſion is made both perſonall
and locall, by Peters dying biſhop of Rome. But as alreadie
I haue proued, that doctrine of Peters beeing at Rome
biſhop is not ſo certaine, that chriſtians may build their faith
thereupon: So that we ſee there building is altogether vpon
the ſand, their proofe weake, their reaſons obſcure, and their
places nothing pregnant for that they are brought. And I maruell
that nowe it ſhould be counted hereſie, not to beleeue the
Romiſh biſhop to be by Gods lawe ſupreame head of the whole
church,Tom. 2. Luth. fol. 45. ſeeing that in the yeare of our Lord God one thouſand
fiue hundred and twentie Albert by the goodneſſe of God,
cardinall prieſt of the holy church of Rome, of the title of Saint
Chryſogon,
               A cardinal counteth the Popes ſupremacie but a toy. Arbhbiſhop of the holy churches of Magdeburge
and Mentz, primat of Germany and prince elector, gouernour
of Halberſtade, and marques of Brandenburge (for theſe
litles hee giueth himſelfe) in an epiſtle writen to Luther,
ſheweth himſelfe griued and diſpleaſed, that ſome diuines
of good accoumpt, did ſo earneſtly contend for their friuolous
opinions and trifling queſtions, namely of the power of the
biſhop of Rome, whether it be by Gods lawe, or by mans
lawe? And of free will, and many other ſuch toyes, not much
concerning a chriſtian man.
            This cardinall you ſee thinketh it not worth contending
for. And I am verely perſwaded many moe will bee of his
mind, vnleſſe they ſee better matter then maſter Bellarmine
canne bring, to prooue it to be by Gods lawe. But although
hee haue no ſtore of Scripture for him yet hath
hee great hope in councilles and fathers. And I aſſured
my ſelfe that the councilles, if hee will truſt them, will moſt
plainly decide this queſtion, whether that ſuperiority that

the church of Rome challengeth ouer all other churches, be by
Gods law or mans law, as hereafter it ſhall (if God will) appeare.
Nowe therefore to examine maiſter Bellarmines next
proofe which is out of the counſels.Lib. 1. cap 13. And the firſt counſel that he
alleageth, is the Nicen counſel, not that which themſelues haue
deliuered to vs as authenticall and true, in the tomes of counſels
ſet foorth by themſelues: but to ſerue this turne, we muſt
haue a new addition, and a ſtrange interpretation not that which
agreeth beſt with the words,Bellar. arg. out of the Nicen counſel Canon. 6. and is thought moſt true of them
that liued neare vnto the daies of that counſell. Firſt therefore
we muſt adde (ſaith maiſter Bellarmine) to the beginning of
the ſixt canon, the church of Rome alwaies had the ſupremacy.
And why muſt thoſe wordes be added? Paſchaſinus forſooth a
biſhop in the counſell of Chalcedon did ſo cite that canon.Action. 16, The biſhop of Rome a forgerer. He
did ſo, but he was legate for Leo then biſhop of Rome that did
alleadge it, & by Aetius Archdeacon of Conſtantinople he was
diſproued, who read not onely the coppy of the canon, by a alſo
the approbation of the ſame counſell, and canon, by a counſell
holden at Conſtantinople, of 150. biſhops, Nectarius being biſhop
there.
            But one found out a greeke coppy of that counſellong ſince
and in that ſaith maiſter Bellarmine thoſe wordes are. If the
coppies that we haue, haue thus long beene thought true and
good, I ſee no reaſon why for ſome one greeke coppy, which
might very well be falſified by ſome fauorite of the church of
Rome, we ſhould diſcredit that which hath ſo long beene receaued:
eſpecially ſeeing the counſell of Chalcedon, the matter on
both ſides being diſcuſſed and heard, did giue vnto the church of
Conſtantinople as great priuiledges as the church of Rome
had. Which they woulde not haue done, but that they ſawe
Paſchaſinus his allegation, for his maiſter the biſhop of Rome
(for he was one of his legates) to be forged. Nay if that
Rome had gotten this prerogatiue by Gods lawe, as nowe
the papiſtes teach,Canon. 6. without wickedneſſe they coulde not haue
done it.
            Then theſe words of that canon of the Nicen council (Becauſe
the biſhop of Rome hath ſuch like cuſtome) muſt alſo haue
a newe interpretation, For whereas Ruffinus, who liued, if

not in, yet very neare the dayes of the Nicene councill, doeth
plainely expound,Hiſt. li. 1. cap. 6. howe in thoſe dayes they tooke the ſence
and meaning of thoſe wordes, namely, that the Biſhoppe of
Rome ſhould haue cure of the churches that belonged to the ſuburbs
thereof: Maiſter Bellarmine that commeth many hundreds
of yeares after, will in no wiſe like of that expoſition, becauſe
he imagineth it to be too narrow a compaſſe for the proud
pope.Other maner of Popes in thoſe dayes then now we haue. But hee muſt remember, that when theſe limittes were
appointed vnto him, the Biſhops, not of Rome onely, but of other
places alſo, were other manner of men, than now they are
for the moſt part. And it ſeemeth that theſe limittes were laide
vpon them, rather as a burden, thē ſought and ſued for as an honour.
            And that the godly and learned men, who ſought eſpecially
the good of the church, did cauſe this diuiſion of thoſe places
to be made, for the better keeping of vnitie in the church, appointing
vnto euery one of theſe primates or patriarches, ſuch
to bee in ſome reſpect vnder their charge, as they ſawe were
(for ſuch conſiderations as were beſt knowen vnto them) moſt
likely to ſhew themſelues willing to be ruled by them. Yea. and
the leſſe compaſſe or circuite of iuriſdiction might perchaunce
bee appoynted to the Biſhop of Rome, becauſe that thorowe
great recourſe of people of all places vnto that Citty, beeing
the imperiall Citty, hee was ſo troubled with many matters
of al mens, that he might not ſo well intend and looke to a great
charge of his owne.
            And I knowe not why maiſter Bellarmine ſhould ſo alter
as hee doth the worde parilis into talis, but to gaine as much
credite as he can to his interpretation. For, parlis conſuetudo
which are the wordes vſed by the Councill,Bellar. changeth the words of the canon. is an equall cuſtome,
and hath reſpect to that which is ſaide of the Biſhop of
Alexandria. So that this is the meaning of thoſe wordes, that
Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, ſhould be vnder the Biſhop of
Alexandria, becauſe the Biſhop of Rome hath ſuch like cuſtome,
or a cuſtome equall to that. But the expoſition that
maiſter Bellarmine would haue to ſtand for good, is, that
the biſhop of Rome had ſuch a cuſtome to appoint the Biſhop of
Alexandria thoſe limittes, which interpretation howe forced it

is, how it cannot aptly be gathered out of the words of the councill,
I referre it to the indifferent Reader to conſider. And becauſe
this word parilis equall cuſtome, will not ſtand with
Maiſter Bellarmines ſenſe, he truneth it away, and in ſteede
thereof would vſe a word more indifferent for him. And ſo (good
Reader) thou mayeſt ſee how Maſter Bellarmine moſt abſurdly
reiecteth the plaine and old interpretation of this canon which
Ruffinus affordeth vs, and would haue vs beleeue a new gloſe
of his owne, that muſt quite alter the ſenſe, and adde much
to the wordes of the text it ſelfe. And yet when antiquitie ſerueth
their turne: none crie out for Antiquitie more than they.
They go about to diſcredite our doctrine, becauſe it is newe
onely, and yet theirs we ſee here, is both new and naught, and
yet are not they aſhamed to bragge, that all that they teach is
catholike.
            The ſecond Councill alleaged by Maiſter Bellarmine,
               Concil. Conſtan. Hiſtor. li. 5. ca. 9. Bellarm. a falfifi
                  
                     ••
                   of antiquitie. is
the Councill of Conſtantinople, of which hee ſaieth out of
Theodoret, that they came together in that place by the commaundement
of the Popes letters ſent to them by the Emperour.
The more I reade Maiſter Bellarmine, the more I find
and miſlike his euill dealing, who handleth Gods cauſe nothing
ſincerely, but walketh in the ſame (as in this his argument
may eaſily appeare) with a deceitfull heart. For firſt to
make the matter ſeeme more plaine on his ſide then in deede it
is, hee ſaith, that they came to Conſtantinople at the commandement
of the Popes letters: but Theodoret ſpeaketh nothing
of any commaundement, but vpon the Popes letter. The like
alſo is in the letters themſelues that are ſet downe in the Councill.
For it ſeemeth that Damaſus, whether it were vpon deſire
he had to chriſtian vnity, and agreement in religion, or elſe
becauſe he ſawe the emperour Theodoſius bent to haue a councill,
and he was perchance deſirous to ſeeme to haue ſome ſaying
in that matter, or for any other conſideration whatſoeuer,
wrote vnto the Emperour about a Councill. But if the Pope
might haue called a Councill, hee woulde then haue directed
his commaundements vnto the Biſhoppes to aſſemble, not to
the emperor, what theſe letters were it is not knowen. If they
were to require and intreate the emperour to call a Councill, it

maketh nothing for proofe of maſter Bellarmines argument, or
the popes power. If it were to commaund the emperour to ſend
his letters to them, or to cauſe them to be ſummoned, it were in
deede ſomewhat like vnto the ſawcy and vnmannerly writings
of theſe prowd prelates of our time, but then neither the Pope
burſt ſo to commaund, neither the emperour did owe, or would
performe any ſuch ſeruice or duety to him. But the report of
the Councill it ſelfe (as it is deliuered vnto vs by themſelues,_
doth ſufficiently declared that all was done in that councill,Concil, tom. 
                     •
                  . The emperour had all the commaunding in that councill. at
the commaundement of the emperour. Firſt, he commaunded
that the Biſhops ſhould come out of euery biſhopricke to Conſtantinople,
as he that gathered the councils together teacheth
out of Theodoret.
               Hiſt. li. 5. ca. 6. The emperour deſired them to haue a care
of that they had in hand. And out of Socrates he ſheweth, that
the emperour called alſo the Macedonian heretickes, becauſe he
had good hope that they alſo might be vnited, to the Church.
            Moreouer out of Theodoret, that the emperour conſulted
with Nectarius, what courſe were beſt for quietneſſe in the
church, they came to the emperour to take ſome good order in
theſe matters, he queſtioned with the heretikes, concerning the
the triall of the matters in queſtion: he tooke order that both
partes ſhould ſet downe their minde in writing, hee tooke that
they had written, prayed earneſtly to God to direct him to chuſe
the truth, tore the writings of the heretickes, allowed or receiued
onely that docrine that taught the equalitie of the perſons.
He alſo allowed the Nouatians their churches in the city, becauſe
they were in this point conſtant. And out of Sozomen,
that the emperour made a lawe, that heretickes ſhoulde neither
haue churches, neither be permitted to preach of the faith (a
good lawe to be earneſtly thought vpon and practiſed in theſe
our dayes) nor ordaine biſhops or others. All theſe things being
ſet downe in the Bookes of Councils, by them deliuered vnto
vs, who can thinke that Maſter Bellarmine, who alleadgeth
this Councill for ſtrength of his cauſe (and that falſely alſo)
wherein all things are ſo direct againſt him, would ſee the truth,
if it were neuer ſo plaine before him. The third councill is that
which was aſſembled at Epheſus, & that alſo M. Bellar. (belike
by ſome wonderful attractiue vertue) wil draw to his ſide.
            
               
The third Councill (ſaith he) as Euagrius doth witneſſe,
ſaith that it depoſeth Neſtorius, by the commaundement of
Caeleſtine biſhop of Rome. How now maſter Bellarmine,
haue you quite fallen out with truth, and made a league with
falſhood?Yet more falſhoode in Bellar. haue you purpoſed ſtill to abuſe your reader, by moſt
ſhameleſſe affirming that which is not true? The counſell ſaid,
we, by the neceſſitie aſwel of the canons, as alſo of the epiſtle of
the moſt holy father, our felow miniſter Celeſtine biſhop of
Rome compelled &c. Where is this that maſter Bellarmine
affirmeth? Celeſtine biſhop of Rome wrote perchance to ſhew
his deteſtation of the hereſie of Neſtorius, and they willing to
doe him that honour, that they would ſeeme much to eſteeme
of his zeale in faith, that beeing ſo farre diſtant in place, he
would be vnited as it were to them in their iudgement againſt
Neſtorius, they ſhew that they were mooued much by his letters,
and incouraged to proceede againſt Neſtorius. But here
is no word of any commaundement that he gaue them, but rather
the contrarie. For they call him their felow miniſter, and
ſo acknowledge not him to be a commaunder ouer them. Yea
and in a mandate to Philip prieſt, vicar or vicegerent to Celeſtine
then biſhop of Rome, and others ſent to Conſtantinople,
they tell the popes vicar plainly, and his felowes thus: Wee
will your holineſſe to vnderſtand, that if you deſpiſe any of theſe
things, neither this holy ſynode will ratifie it, neither ſhall
you be permitted to be pertaker of our communion. Yea and
before, that council directeth euen the popes legate and the reſt,
that if the emperour ſent for them, they muſt in any wiſe be obedient
to his commaundement, and muſt not refuſe to goe,
(which doctrine were hereſie in our dayes) but they ſhould not
agree with Iohn of Antioch and the reſt, but vpon ſuch conditions
as (not the pope) the council did ſet them downe, vpon
the paine aforeſaid.
            And that this Councill was aſſembled by the Emperours,
is in many places declared: as out of Euagrius that
it was at the appointment of Theodoſius the younger, and
after by the commaundement of the moſt religious Emperours.
The like is alſo teſtified, in the ſuperſcription of the former
mandate, that I haue ſpoken of.
            
               
And it is alſo worth noting that the councill writing to the
Emperours, for the credite of their councill, doeth not vrge
that the pope is head there (but indeede they craue that Cirill
and Memnon, not Cirill onely whom they ſay the pope Celeſtine
deputed for him be reſtored to them again that their councill
be not without a head) but they ſay that Celeſtine Archbiſhop
of Rome,Pag. 588. doth ſit ioyned with them there, he doth aſſidere
ſit I ſay with them, not praeſidet, he ruleth not, he coutroleth
not the councill, and ſo it is alſo ſaid of Aphrica and
Illyricum that they aſſident ſit with the councill. And out of
this that hath beene ſpoken as alſo by ſuch other thinges as in
that councill are recorded, we may gather what truth is in that
alſo, that maiſter Bellarmine alleadgeth of an Epiſtle ſent by
the councill to Celeſtine, reſeruing the cauſe of Iohn of Antioch
as more doubtfull to be decided by the biſhoppe of Rome.
But as I finde not any ſuch Epiſtle in that councill, ſo this is
plainely written, in the report that the councill maketh of their
doings to the Emperours, that they excommunicated Iohn (of
Antioch) the preſident of the Apoſtatas councill,Pag. 588. and them that
were with him: and depriued them of all prieſtly miniſtery,
and reuoked all their vnlawfull doings. If this be to referre
his cauſe to the pope, let the world iudge.
            Then he commeth to the council of Chalcedon,
               The fourth Councill alleadged by Bellarmine. and that maketh
for him too, if we wil truſt him; but in examining it, we ſhal
finde it much like the reſt, directly againſt the ſupremacy of the
biſhop of Rome.Act. 1. For firſt in the beginning of that councill it is
declared that it is gathered by the decree of the moſt godly and
faithfull Emperours Valentinian and Martian who alſo profeſſeth
that he deſired to be there to confirme the faith,Pag. 740. wherein
were iudges appointed to moderate their doings and ſayings,
and to conclude their articles, not the pope, or his legates,
(for they as it appeareth in this councill, were at the commaundement
of theſe iudges, as well as others, but lay men,
officers vnder the Emperour. It will be hard then for maiſter
Bellarmine, in reſpect of ſome fewe excellent names that may
be giuen to Leo biſhop of Rome, whereof alſo it may be he
was worthy in reſpect of ſome good parts that were in him, it
will I ſay bee harde, by ſuch names, to proue his ſupremacie

by this councell, which hath almoſt done what it can, in preiudice
of any ſuch prerogatiue that he might claime.The councell of Chalcedon againſt the ſupremacy. For if it belong
not to him to call councils, neither to rule in them when they
are called, he hath but little ſupremacie ouer others. And we ſee
in this councell both theſe things are done by others, and not by
him.
            But what doth Maiſter Bellarmine finde in this councill for
the popes ſupremacy?Bellarm, his reaſons out of this councill. Lib. 1. cap. 12. That in that, the pope Leo is called the
biſhop of the vniuerſall church. This tale hee hath tolde but a
little before, (perchance that maketh him more perfect in it) ſaying
that three letters are ſent from the Eaſt church to Leo biſhop
of Rome, and in them all he is called the pope of the vniuerſall
church, there are indeede foure ſuch letters euen togither, to the
biſhop of Rome, and the councill of Chalcedon, and in none of
them is he called the pope of the vniuerſall church, but only the
vniuerſall archbiſhop or patriarch.
            But there is a great difference betweene a vniuerſall biſhop,
and a biſhop of the vniuerſall church.Act. 3. pag. 858. But ſuch miſſes are ſmal
faults, with maſter Bellarmine. Indeede Paſchaſinus the popes
owne legat doth call him pope of the vniuerſall church,Act. 16. who did
alſo ſeeke afterwardes, by falſifyiug the coppies of the councill
of Nice to procure the ſupremacie vnto his maiſter, and therfore
we muſt not ground our faith vpon his wordes. But for that
name of vniuerſall biſhop which is often giuen to the biſhop of
Rome,Vniuerſall biſhop not only the popes name. it is not yet a name peculiar to him, as a great friende of
theirs,Annal. An. 187. and at this day in great account among them, doth tell
them, namely Caeſar Baronius in his hiſtory. For out of him
they may learne that Eleutherius a pope himſelfe, in a decretall
epiſtle of his, written to the biſhops of France, calleth them vniuerſall
biſhops,Epiſt. ad Philad. as Ignatius calleth the biſhop of Philadelphia,
the biſhop of the common church, and ſo Gregory Nazianzen
ſpeaketh of Athanaſius biſhop of Alexandria. Which Baronius
ſeemeth thus to vnderſtand, that they ought to haue a care (as
indeed euery man ſhould haue) of the good of the whole church.
And theſe names of head of the church,To whom theſe names belong. vniuerſall biſhop, and
ſuch like, were doubtleſſe at the firſt graunted to ſuch as were
moſt worthy men in the church, in reſpect of their learning and
ſkill that they had, or their trauell and diligence that they vſed,

to benefit the vniuerſall Church. And by this meanes, was it
more commonly giuen to the biſhops of Rome then to others,
becauſe they, in regard of the place or city wherein they were,
had moe occaſions of doing good offered vnto them, and moe opportunities,
by reaſon of his neereneſſe to the Emperour, to ſolicite
ſuch matters.
            And in this ſorte is it giuen for a rewarde of well deſeruing,
and to incourage them that were able,How theſe names are now vſed. to doe their vttermoſt indeuour,
to benefit the church. But now it is a name tied to one
chaire, in which for the moſt part doe ſit of the vnworthieſt men
that are in the church. So that if a man conſider howe little
good they doe in the church, and how much hurt, wee ſhall thinke
that a ring of gold will better become a ſowes ſnowt, then they
beſeeme that honourable title, or it them. And as for that which
the councill doth write vnto Leo, ſaying, that he is appointed of
our Sauiour to keepe his vine, they ſpeake it not in reſpect of
his being biſhop of Rome, but in conſideration of his excellent
giftes of learning and other good graces, wherewith God hath
indued him. And that this is their meaning it doth plainely appeare,
by thoſe things that afterwardes in that councill they did.
For if they had meant by thoſe wordes,Act. 16. that he, as biſhoppe of
Rome, had ſupremacy ouer the whole church, then woulde they
not haue giuen vnto the biſhop of Conſtantinople, equall priuiledges
with Rome, and ſo haue taken from Rome, that which
Chriſt gaue (as they pretend) to the biſhop thereof. Thus to
be ſhort, in this one councill, we ſee this ſupremacy had three notable
checkes. It was called by the Emperours, and moderated
by lay Iudges, and the biſhop of Conſtantinople made equall
to him of Rome.
            The fift councill that is heere alleadged,The fift councell alleadged by Bellarm. is the fifth Conſtantinople
councill. But this can bring litle credite to their
cauſe, ſeeing it may iuſtly be doubted, whether euer there were
any ſuch or not. For beſides that miſtruſt which the very title of
that councill, which is in the ſecond tombe of Councils doth
worke in them that reade it,Concil. tom. 2. becauſe it cannot be ſet downe when,
or in what popes dayes it was celebrated, but that it was about
the time of Agapetus, Siluerius, and Vigilius: I ſay beſides
the vncertainety of it that there appeareth,Anno. 552. 
               Functius one ſkilfull

in hiſtories hath noted, that this is not once ſpoken of in the Conſtantinople
hiſtories. And therefore it is not likely that any ſuch
councell, was kept there. Neither yet can the reſt of the councels
alleadged by maiſter Bellarmine ſtande him in any ſteede.
For we will not deny, but after that once the pope had gotten into
that proud chaire, almoſt all did yeeld vnto him honour and reuerence,
ſome for feare,Later councels are not in this cauſe indifferent. ſome for flattery, vntill they had made
him little inferiour to God himſlfe. And therefore wee iuſtly
reiect the councels that were gathered ſince his power was ſo
greate, and his pride ſo vntollerable, that by ſome meanes or other
hee would be honoured as himſelfe thought good. And
therefore the ſecond councell of Nice which was about the yeare
ſeuen hundred eighty nine, the lateran about the yeare one thouſand
two hundred and fifteene. That of Lions about the yeare
one thouſand two hundred ſeuenty and foure, and that of Florence
about the yeare one thouſand foure hundred thirty nine, are
no fit witneſſes againſt vs, who doe not deny but that the Pope
ſometime by faire meanes, ſometime by foule, ſometime by flattery,
ſometime by threatning, ſometime by force, ſometime by
craft, and alwaies by euill dealing, hath gotten to bee in ſorte as
yee ſee, ſupreame head of the Church.
            But we ſay that he is not ſo by the word of God, which hee
claimeth to be, and maiſter Bellarmine promiſed to proue, but
he cannot doe it. Neither was he accounted in the purer times of
the Church, to haue that ſupremacy by Gods word, as before I
haue ſpoken.Pag. 14. Neither would they in any wiſe permit ſuch power
vnto him, although he ſought it earneſtly, and ſhamefullie in
the councell of Chalcedon.Act. 16. After the councels maiſter Bellarmin
will bring in popes to beare witneſſe on his ſide.Popes are ſuſpected witneſſes. But honeſter
men then many of them were, are not to be heard in their owne
cauſe. Yea and although many of them were good men, and
were profitable members in Chriſtes church, yet becauſe they
were men, they might haue ſuch infirmities as doe follow the nature
of man, and might (eſpecially not ſeeing the inconuenience
and ruine of the church, which the pride of that ſeate hath brought
forth) aſcribe more vnto their owne ſeate, then either in truth
they could claime, or in chriſtian humility they could take vpon
them.
            
               
And for the firſt popes, which all they that write of this matter
recken vp in great numbers, I truſt we ſhal not hereafter bee
troubled with their names, becauſe maiſter Bellarmine hath giuen
them a reaſonable good diſcharge.Lib. 2. cap. 14. For he confeſſeth that
in their writings there are ſome errours, neither dare he affirme
that they may not be doubted of: and as for the reſt of them,
becauſe wee haue ſeene euen almoſt from the beginning of any
credite that they had, ſome ſparkes of their pride, now and then
to glitter and burſt forth in their importunate ſeeking, or too ready
accepting of that that belonged not to them: as in equity we
are not bound, ſo neither in diſcretion ſhould we, when the cauſe
concerneth not vs, but Gods truth, heare what they can ſay for
themſelues, againſt the ſame. Neither are their writings for the
moſt part any ſuch, as that by them wee may iudge throughlie
what they did thinke.What maner of writings of popes are alleadged againſt vs. For epiſtles or letters (ſuch are thoſe writings
altogither almoſt which are alleadged againſt vs) are vpon
ſundry particular occaſions written, whereby the writers
might happely be forced to ſay more for the credite of that ſeate,
then themſelues would haue ſaid, if that occaſion had not beene
offered. But this I am ſure of, they for the moſt part ſpeake far
otherwiſe, and more plainely in that point, then doe the other ancient
writers of their time, and that maketh me thinke that they
did ſpeake for themſelues, and were ſomewhat pricked forward,
with a purpoſe to aduance their ſeat.Bellarm. proofe out of Greeke fathers. Lib. 2. cap. 15. Inſcript. Epiſt. ad Rom. Ignatius anſwered. Therefore letting them
paſſe as partiall in this cauſe, let vs come to this next proofe,
which is out of the greeke fathers.
            And firſt commeth in Ignatius who writeth to the church that
ruleth (for I will admit the worſt that Maiſter Bellarmine or
any other can alleadge ont of this place) in the Romane region.
But will Maiſter Bellarmines logicke conclude that therefore
the church of Rome hath ſupremacy ouer the whole church? He
muſt firſt bring the vniuerſall church within the place of the Roman
region before that can be Out of Ireny he hath theſe words.Lib. 3. cap. 3.
For vnto this church for the more mighty principality (ſpeaking
of the church of Rome) it is neceſſary that the whole church doe
come,Ireny examined. that is the faithful from al places, in which alwaies of them
that are from all places, is kept that tradition which is from the
Apoſtles.
            
               
The wordes as you may ſee are ſomewhat hard, by reaſon that
he who tranſlated Ireny out of greeke, did here, as in many other
places tranſlate him very darkely. But I haue engliſhed them
word for word. His meaning is, that they that come from other
places of the world, be it neuer ſo farre off, yet doe not alter the
tradition that the apoſtles left vnto them, and yet many muſt
needes come thither, becauſe that in reſpect that Rome is the
Imperiall citty, the church alſo hath the more mighty principality,
and ſo in deciding of cauſes hath the more reuerence and
authority. And thus doth he proue that to be true, that in the beginning
of that chapter he ſaid, that it is an eaſie matter for him
(that will) to ſee the tradition of the apoſtles manifeſted through
the whole world, becauſe that from whence ſoeuer they do come,
yet ſtill they keepe one tradition.
            By this argument doth Ireny confute the heretikes, becauſe
the tradition of the apoſtles being kept in all places (not only in
the church of Rome although becauſe it was beſt known, or moſt
famous, he bringeth that for example) yet no ſuch doctrine as the
heretikes ſpeake of, is taught among them. But nowe maiſter
Bellarmines vnſeaſonable collection out of this place, is very
farre from Irenies meaning. That it is neceſſary (ſaith he) that
all churches ſhould hang of the church of Rome. He proueth
firſt by that which goeth before, becauſe principality is giuen to
this church: ſecondly of that which followeth, becauſe hitherto al
in that church haue kept the faith that is in being vnited,Bellarm. arg. out of Ireny examined. and cleaning
to that church, as the head and mother. Theſe are maiſter
Bellarmines words. But firſt he ſaith wrong of Ireny that he
ſhould indeuour to proue ſuch neceſſity in comming to the church
of Rome, eſpeciall taking, as here he doth for a bounden duty.
For it is maiſter Bellarmines meaning to make the church of
Rome, the onely church that muſt heare all great matters, decide
all doubtfull queſtions, and commande all other churches.
But Ireny his meaning is, that all other men had occaſion, to
ſeeke rather of that church then of any other for helpe and direction,
becauſe that in reſpect of the greatnes of the citty, the church
there was in ſome greater accompt, as before I haue ſhewed,
but he neuer ſaide that all were bound to ſubmit themſelues to
that church,Dog. 83. as maiſter Bellarmine and his partakers, would

haue him be thought to ſpeake. Secondly he muſt ſpeake more
plainely what he meaneth by this, that principality is giuen to
the church of Rome.Principality in Ireny how to bee vnderſtood. For if he meane that men yeeld great reuerence
to the church of Rome, we yeelde that in the primitiue
church they did ſo, & that iuſtly, becauſe the true faith was there
ſincerely kept, but this principality will not pleaſe maiſter Bellarmine,
or proue his intent. And if Ireny had meant that this
principality had beene giuen by Chriſt, a man of meane vnderſtanding
will eaſily thinke that he would haue ſpoken it in more
plaine tearmes.
            But what neede I to vſe many words? the place it ſelfe is
plaine. For the more mighty principality (ſaith Ireny,) if he
had thought of the ſupremacy of the biſhop of Rome, he would
haue ſaid moſt mighty principality. For more mighty principality
doth but make him better then others in ſome reſpect, not
aboue all others which he claimeth to be. So that to proue his
intent he muſt haue better proofe. For this will not warrant
that ſoueraigne authority of the biſhop of Rome. Thirdly, that
which maiſter Bellarmine would tell vs out of this place, that
all churches muſt be vnited and cleaue to this church of Rome,
as their head & mother, hath at all no ground of Irenies words.
And thus we ſee howe he doth racke and rent the wordes out of
their plaine ſence, to ſerue for his purpoſe, which being wel weied
of, make rather againſt them, and their ſupremacy. Epiphanius
is his third witnes,Hereſ. 68. Epiphanius examined. who reporteth that Vrſarius and Valens
two Arrian biſhops being conuerted, did go to Iulius biſhop
of Rome, to giue an accompt of their errour and fault.
But if that proue the ſupremacy of the biſhop of Rome, then
muſt Athanaſius alſo haue that ſupremacy as well as he, for it
followeth immediatly after, that they vſed the ſelfe ſame proofes
that they repented of their errour vnto Athanaſius. So that the
intent and cauſe of their going to pope Iulius, or pope Athanaſius
(for he is there ſo called) was not to acknowledge his ſupremacy,
but as it was known that they had erred, ſo woulde they
haue it well knowen that they reuoked their hereſie. Neither
did they craue pardon of their offence,Athan. Apolog. 2. of Iulius biſhop of
Rome (which out of Athanaſius he endeuoured to proue) becauſe
he had authority ouer all perſons, but becauſe they knew

their offence to haue beene againſt the whole church, they were
deſirous that the biſhop of Rome for his parte, as a principall
member of the church but not a head aboue all, ſhould not impute
that fault vnto them. And this is the part of euery chriſtian
man or woman, hauing made a generall fault, whereby many
godly are offeuded, to make alſo a publike ſatiſfaction for the
ſame. And cannot this be done to pope Iulius, but we muſt make
him head of the church? Athanaſius alſo his letter to pope Felix
is alleadged,Athanaſ. epiſt. to Felix pope. Bellarm. argu. out of Athan. examined. wherein Athanaſius being much diſtreſſed of
the Arrians, and wrongfully dealt withall, and not hauing any
hope that the greeke Church coulde helpe him, the Emperour
himſelfe being an Arrian, the rather to mooue the biſhoppe of
Rome to pity his caſe ſaith thus. For this cauſe God hath placed
you and your predeceſſours Apoſtolicke prelates, in the
towre of height, and hath charged you to haue care of all churches,
that you ſhould helpe vs. That God by meanes of Conſtantine
and other good Emperours, aduanced high the Biſhop
of Rome we deny not. And we alſo knowe, that thoſe good biſhops
did much good with that their authority to the church of
God, and were a great reliefe to the oppreſſed, a comforte to the
troubled, and a good ſtay for religion. We yeeld moreouer that a
care ouer the whole church a belongeth not to the biſhop of Rome
only,Annal. Ann. 187. but to euery chriſtian, as Baronius a papiſt telleth vs. And
as Saint Paule ſaith of himſelfe, although hee were not an vniuerſall
Biſhop, or pope ouer all the church, yt that he had a care
ouer all the Churches.2. Cor. 11. 28. Which care as it ſhoulde be in all, yet
it ſhould be greateſt in them, whom God hath beautified with
greateſt graces of power, wiſedome, knowledge, credite or any
other thing, whereby they may doe good to others. So that the
effect of Athanaſius his wordes vnto Felix is, that as God
hath inabled him, ſo alſo he ſhould apply his greatneſſe to doe
him good.
            We doe not yet ſee the Biſhop of Rome to haue iuriſdiction
ouer the whole church, but that the greatneſſe that hee hath, hee
ſhould vſe it to the comfort of the godly. But indeede the Biſhop
of Rome in ſteed of the care that he ſhould haue, doth exerciſe
the power that he hath.
            And the excerciſing of his power beganne ſomewhat ſoone in

that chaire. And therefore the fathers in the ſixt council of Carthage
as it ſeemeth, were moued in the canons of the Nicen
council to alter one worde. For hauing agreed in the ninth
canon or chapter of that council of Carthage to heare the Nicen
decrees read, when they come to the ſixt chapter, where the
Nicen council hath, that the biſhop of Alexandria ſhould hane
power ouer the churches of Lybia, Egipt, & Pentapolis, as the
biſhop of Rome hath within his libertie,Care for power. in ſteede of the word
power, they read care? Which no doubt thoſe godly fathers
did, becauſe they ſawe how immoderately, and by what bad
ſhifts, they did then ſeeke to bring vnder their ſubiection all others.
And therefore by this meanes they would teach them to
whome they did graunt ſuch honorable places, that they were
called rather to a burden, then to an honour, to looke vnto their
charge, rather then to ouer 
                  •
               ooke them. So then this care that
the biſhop of Rome ſhould haue ouer all churches we wiſh alſo
that hee would haue. And yet we doe not hereby make him,
the biſhop of the vniuerſall church.De ſententia Dionyſ. Alex. epiſc. And for the third place out
of Athanatius, it hath leſſe waight then any of the reſt. For becauſe
ſome accuſed the biſhop of Alexandria to the biſhop of
Rome, therefore he concludeth that the biſhop of Rome is chiefe
iuſtice aboue all, and may take vpon him to iudge all matters:
but accuſations are for the moſt priuat.Accuſations prooue no iuriſdiction. And who can hinder but
that any may make complaint to a man that hath nothing to doe
in the matter? And many ſuch complaints wil be made, to ſuch
as will be willing to heare all matters, as were many of the B.
of Rome,Epiſt. 52. Bellarm. argum. out of Baſil. to increaſe their owne power. That which is aleaged
out of Baſil, is a requeſt that Baſil did purpoſe to make to
the biſhop of Rome, like vnto that which Athanaſius made to
Felix, and therefore one anſwere doth ſerue them both. But
in that epiſtle Baſil calleth Athanaſius the Top of all chriſtians,
which name they would faine ſhould be peculiar to their
pope.Carmine de vita ſua. Nazianzen examined. That out of Gregorie Nazianzene was not woorth
blotting of ſo much paper, For hee ſaieth the Citie of Rome
beareth ſway ouer the whol world, what is that to the church of
Rome?
            And that that is alleaged out of Chryſoſtom in the firſt place
is not much material, becauſe Chriſoſtome maketh that requeſt

to the B. of the weſt church, and not to Innocentius alone. Yea,
& not Chryſoſtom only in the ſame his epiſtle, but Socrates alſo
in his hiſtorie teſtifieth, that Chryſoſtom appealed from his
aduerſaries (not to the pope which he would doubtleſſe haue
done, if hee had taken his authoritie to haue beene ſuch, as now
the church of Rome would haue it imagined) but to the generall
council. And not hee onely appealed to a council, but the multitude
alſo were readie to make a tumult for him, and ſaid it was
meete the matter ſhould be heard (not by the pope) but in a
generall council.Epiſt. 2. ad Innocent. Secondly out of Chryſoſtom he alleageth
theſe words, we alwayes thanke you, for that you haue declared
vnto vs your fatherly good will. What will the charitable
affection of the pope, prooue him to be head of the whole
church? If it will not, this will doe no good, his third place is
this,Ibidem. I intreate your watchfullneſſe, that although they haue
filled all with tumults: yet if they will haue their deſeaſe
healed, they be neither afflicted, neither put out of mens companie.
            Muſt the biſhop of Rome bee the ſupreame head, or elſe
this requeſt be in vaine? He being, as it is alwaies confeſſed, of
great authoritie, (although not ſo great as they imagine) might
either by intreating, or by authority winne many to be of his
minde, and ſo hinder the excommunication of Chryſoſtomes aduerſaries.
So that none of theſe arguments can conclude for
the popes ſupremacie as we ſee. And yet they wring whatſoeuer
is ſaid or done to the church of Rome,Why the Eaſt churches ſought to the Weſt. as if it were a ſtrong
proofe for ſupremacie. Whereas the godly of the eaſt church
being thus diſtreſſed, were in policie forced (and not for religious
cauſes) to ſeeke for helpe of the Weſt church, and of the
biſhop of Rome for their owne quietneſſe. And this doth appeare
moſt plainly, in an epiſtle that Baſil writeth vnto the biſhop of
the weſt church for their helpe,Epiſt. 61. and eſpecially by the aduiſe that
hee giueth to Athanaſius to that end, wherein hee ſheweth
that there is no way for their ſafetie, but to cauſe the biſhops
of the Weſt church to take good parte with them. And then
if they chance to ſeeke for this at the popes hand,Epiſt. 48. by and
by without all doubt hee muſt be head of the church. It
maketh me weary euen but to reade their arguments. They

doe ſo force their authorities that they bring, and ſo vnnaturally
apply them,Epiſt. 10. Cyril exan. 
                     •
                  . that it is tediouſneſſe to thinke of it. Such is that
alſo that foloweth out of Ciril. For Ciril did thinke that if Neſtorius
would not reuoke his hereſies within the time limited by
Celeſtine biſhop of Rome, all men ought to ſhunne his companie,
as a perſon excommunicat and depoſed.Epiſt. 18. And writing to
Celeſtinnus, he doth deſire to know of him, whether he thinke
good, that men ſhuld yet communicat which Neſtorius, or they
ſhould ſhunne his company. And what if Ciril ſawe that in Celeſtine,
that he thought him worthie to be eſpecially regarded in
theſe matters, doth it thereupon folow, that he would haue him
to haue ſoeuraigne iuriſdiction ouer the whole church? Or if hee
thinke him meete to deale in his owne matter, muſt he needs
giue him power ouer all men, in all cauſes? Maſter Bellarmine
muſt make new logicke, before he can prooue ſuch bad concluſions.
            But then to mend the matter, he bringeth in an authoritie
that is not to be found in the Author that he doth aleage for it.
But wee muſt take it vpon the credit of Thomas of Aquine.
They ſhew that they want proofe, when they would faine call
againe the things that are not to helpe their cauſe. As for Thomas
we know welenough his good will to the church of Rome.
For he would not onely ra
                  •
               e out of the earth theſe ſentences of
Ciril,
               Locorum Theol. li. 6. cap. 5. but alſo as Canus reporteth of him, hee ſpeaketh of one
Maximius that ſaieth much for the authoritie of the biſhop of
Rome. Yea and he findeth much out of the council of Chalcedon.
               Cap. 6.
            
            In which councill the Biſhop of Rome, had his authoritie
(that he ſought for) much abridged. Yet I ſay Thomas hath
found out euen in that council good ſtuffe, to confirme the authoritie
of the biſhop of Rome,Li. 5. ep. 14. ad Naiſ. that ueuer came to our hands.
And no meruel: for Melchior Canus telleth vs, that Gregorie
complaineth that in his dayes they were blotted out by heretiks.
And I pray you, howe then did Thomas of Aquine come by
them,Forged writings. who was after Gregorie almoſt ſeuen hundred yeares?
Thus you may ſee howe they ſeeke by forged writings
that which by authorities of credit, they can not maintaine.
Well then let fained Ciril goe, and let vs ſee what

               Theodoret ſaith. He as others before him had done craueth the
Popes helpe againſt Dioſcorus.
               Epiſt. ad Leonem papam. And Leo the pope did for him
what he could, we deny not. But yet before the councell of Chalcedon
would reſtore Theodoret to his place againe,Act. 8. he was forced
by the whole councell, to ſhew his deteſtation of Neſtorius,
Eutiches, and all heretickes although the pope had receiued him
to communion before.
            And heere before I goe any further this one note I thinke
neceſſary to be added, concerning many of the former teſtimonies.Marke what writings the church of Rome alleadgeth for her ſupremacy.
That becauſe they are drawen from the priuate Epiſtles
of men diſtreſſed, ſeeking for helpe, and therefore they might wel
be forced to write with as great humility as they could deuiſe to
write, for to obtaine ſuccour: it is no reaſon that theſe their forced
petitions, and priuate requeſts, ſhould be accounted as rules
for catholicke religion.Lib. 3. cap. 8. Sozomen examined. Then commeth in Sozomen in which he
miſtaketh both the place (alleadging the ſeuenth chapter for the
eighth an errour eaſily committed) and the matter. For although
Iulius biſhop of Rome, did thinke well of the dignity of his ſeat,
yea and in reſpect of his mightineſſe that hee was now growen
vnto, partly by the goodneſſe of former Emperours, but chiefly
through the diſſentions of the eaſt or greeke churches, hee was
in duty alſo bound more then others to haue a great care ouer all
churches: yet that his ſupremacy was not then acknowledged
that very Chapter ſhall ſufficiently teſtifie. For there it is reported,
how that the biſhops of the eaſt churches (to whom Iulius
had written ſomewhat ſharpely, in the behalfe of Athanaſius
and others that fled to him) did make anſwere to Iulius, with a
letter ful of tauntes and threatnings, and ſhewed that their churches
were as great and as many as his: finding fault alſo with
Iulius for receiuing ſuch to his communion, and ſuch other
things. So that wee ſee that they did not account the Biſhop
of Rome as ſupreame head of the church: neither doth Sozomen
ſay that Iulius his ſeat came to that dignity by Chriſtes inſtitution,
or by Gods law, which Bellarmine tooke in hand to
proue, but hath not brought one teſtimony of the fathers that can
performe that promiſe.The church of Rome pleadeth poſſeſsion, not by right. They plead as the Lawyers ſay in poſſeſſorio,
they ſay they haue it by poſſeſſion, ſo many haue come to
the church of Rome for helpe, when they were diſtreſſed.
            
               
In thus many caſes popes haue intermedled in other biſhops
charges. So they tell vs what they haue done. But the queſtion
is how iuſtly, by what right, law or authority, they haue
done many of the things that they haue done. We would haue
them plead de petitorio. Let them proue their right. For it is
true that long ſince the pride of this ſeat did beginne, abuſing
Gods good liberality, and the fauour of godly princes towarde
them, ſtill increaſing in that ambitious humour, vntill they had
ſet themſelues aboue all. Which authority when they had once
gotten, they did ſhew themſelues vnſatiable and cruell, deſpiſing
all authority, and making their wil to be in ſteede of law, as ſhal
God willing in the proofe of their practiſe, which is the ſeconde
part of this treatiſe, be declared. But it doth not followe, they
haue done this,Concil. tom. 2. therefore they haue done well in ſo doing. That
which is alleadged out of Acutius that Simplician the pope
had care ouer all churches is much to the commendation of Simplician,
that he had ſo due regard of his dutie, but this prooueth
him not to haue authority ouer all becauſe he had, or at the leaſt
ſhould haue care ouer all.Liberatus in br
                     •
                  
                  uiatio. But I muſe what maiſter Bellarmine
meaneth to tell vs a tale out of Liberatus, of a nameleſſe biſhop
of Patara. What matter is it to vs, or what ſtrength can it bring
to his cauſe, to know what he or other men, not knowen in the
church of God, for their learning, iudgement, zeale, or ſuch other
vertues as are neceſſary for them that ſhoulde be witneſſes in
matters of religion, doe thinke or ſay? Much ſuch proofe might
be had out of the legend of lies. But that will neuer proue their
doctrince to be catholicke.
            Laſtly the woordes of Iuſtitian in that hee calleth the pope
Iohn the ſeconde,Epiſt. ad Ioh. Codice primo titulo. head of all holy churches may well bee admitted,
as in former times that name head was often vſed, yea, and
is ſtill of vs. A man of good dexterity or countenance is called
a head man among others although hee hath not authority ouer
them. But ſuch a head as now the pope is become, that will controll
all biſhops, yea depoſe emperours, diſpence with Gods
word, make new laws in the church, & haue his ſaying in all matters,
Iuſtinian himſelf could not haue liked. And it muſt be marked,
that we deny not, but a biſhop of Rome (as alſo another mā)
may welbe called head of the church, if they be indewed with

ſuch gifts as are to the benefit of the whole church. But we deny,
both that the name is or ought to be peculiar to the church of
Rome,How we deny the pope to be head of the church. or the biſhop thereof only: and alſo that the authority
which by that and ſuch like names he challengeth vnto him is tolerable
in him or in any other. For indeede our contention is,
whether the biſhoppe of Rome haue ſupremacy ouer the whole
church or not. Now excellent names were giuen vnto men in
times paſt,Tom. 2 pag. 162. Pag. 263 as the name of pope, Baronius a great papiſt of our
time, confeſſeth was common to all biſhops.Ruſſin. Hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 28. The like he alſo
writeth of the name of vniuerſall biſhop. And Athanaſius was
called Pontifex maximus. The greateſt biſhop, and yet not
he, but Liberius was then biſhop of Rome. And for this name
head (as I haue ſhewed) it is nothing ſtrange in all ſocieties,
to haue a heade man, and yet he not to haue iuriſdiction ouer
them. By all which it appeareth, howe weake an argument may
be drawen from theſe names which may be common to ſo many,
to proue the ſupremacy which the biſhop of Rome challengeth
to himſelfe onely.
            Nowe maiſter Bellarmine hauing wrung what he can (which
is not much) out of the fathers of the greeke church, commeth to
the latin writers, to try what gleanings he can get among them.
Whom I doubt not but we ſhall finde ſpeaking very reuerently
of the church of Rome,Bellar. arg. out of latine writers. as in truth it well deſerued, becauſe that
the biſhop of Rome (although he began very ſoone to encroche
ſomewhat vpon other mens right, and to enlarge his power) yet
he vſed his greatneſſe and authority for a long time, to the maintenance
of true religion the comfort of the diſtreſſed, and to withſtande
by himſelfe, and other the biſhops of the Weſt church, the
hereſies that troubled eſpecially the Eaſt churches. In al which
things we know that by their place, for that they were biſhops of
the Imperiall city, and the authority that they were come vnto,
by fauour of the Emperours, they were as it were ringleaders
vnto others: ſo that although they were moued ſometimes to
theſe good things, by a deſire that they had to be medling in all
matters, which was one of the waies whereby they came to their
greatnes: yet in that they did good vnto the church, the godly did
both commend them, and alſo beare with them, although ſometime
they were too forward, and ſtept too farre before others.

But when they would haue had this authority confirmed to them
in councils, and eſtabliſhed as a law of the church, then did the
ancient fathers, wiſely withſtand their vnlawfull deſires, as the
vi. councils of Carthage,
               Why and howe although the latine fathers did reuerence the biſhop of Rome. and the councill of Chalcedon doe
plainly proue. So that the godly learned fathers of thoſe times,
partly to incourage them in their well doing, did giue them due
commendation when they deſerued it, and partly for quietneſſe
ſake and the peace of the church, did wincke at many of their
inordinate proceedings, and vnorderly attempts, ſo long as they
were but their priuate actions; yet would not the iuriſdiction of
the vniuerſall church. And theſe things being well remembred,
I may I truſt be ſhorter in anſwering to the particular places.
And firſt for the place out of Cyprian,
               Lib 2. cap. 16. Dè Vnit Eccl. alias ſimp. prelat. which maiſter Bellarmine
proſecuteth in many words as he is forced to doe, that he
may get out of him but a ſhew of an argument. It is anſwered
in few words. For indeede maiſter Bellarmine groundeth vpon
a falſe principle, which I dare not ſay that he could not but ſee
his errour, but it is maruell if he can be ignorant of it.
            The wordes wherein he eſpecially truſteth are theſe.Cyprian examined. This
commeth to paſſe (that hereſies growe in the church) whilſt there
is no returning to the beginning of the truth, neither is the head
ſought for, neither is the doctrine of our heauenly maiſter kept.
Nowe by this word head he vnderſtandeth the head of the church
whom he maketh Peter.
            
            Whereas it is moſt certaine that Cyprian doth meane nothing
els here, then in another place where he endeuoureth to perſwade
after the ſame maner and by that very argument, where by the
head he meaneth that which the apoſtles taught. For ſaith he
if we returne to the head and beginning of the tradition of the apoſtles,
mans errour ceaſeth. And there he teacheth vs by
a ſimilitude howe we ſhould come to the heade, by the ſimilitude
I ſay of a conduct, wherein if the water faile we goe to the
head of it, that is, to the fountaine, and ſo from thence examine
the want of the water: ſo ſaith he, muſt Gods prieſtes goe to
the beginning when there is any queſtion of Religion. And that
he meaneth that head in this place, the very wordes by him alleadged
do prooue, becauſe the former wordes put vs in minde
of returning to the originall or beginning of the trueth, and the

wordes that follow, leade vs to the heauenly doctrine. Well
then, the head in this place doth ſignifie the ſpring and fountain,
from which our doctrine muſt beginne, and ſo maſter Bellarmines
argument is quite ouerthrowen. And hauing proued that
he buildeth his reaſon vpon a falſe ground, I truſt I neede not
beſtow any more labour to proſecute him in his wandering
wordes.
            
               Optatus is the ſecond who ſpeaketh nothing to helpe this
deſperate cauſe.Contrr Parmenion. li. 2. For although he commend vnto vs that one
chaire in reſpect of the vnitie of doctrine (for all the prieſts nowe
ſaith Chryſoſtome muſt ſit,Hom. 85. in Iob. 20. not vpon Moſes chaire, but vpon
Chriſts chaire) yet in the wordes alleadged by maſter Bellarmine
he addeth, and we haue proued that that is ours by Peter.
Optatus a biſhop in Affrike (not of Rome) ſitteth in Peters
chaire. Therefore Peters chaire and the popes chaire are not
all one, vnleſſe their doctrine be one. It is not tied to Rome, or
to that church. But alluding to that place of Moſes his chaire
which our Sauiour Chriſt ſpeaketh of, becauſe the Scribes and
Phariſes taught that which Moſes did teach.Matth. 23. 2. 
               Optatus alſo ſaith
that he doth ſit in Peters chaire, becauſe hee taught that which
Peter did confeſſe and teach.Optatus againſt Peters chaire at Rome onely. Yea, and he prooueth by this argument
againſt the Donatiſts (who taught, that they onely
were the church) that the church is alſo where he taught, becauſe
euen there is Peters chaire: ſo that if Optatus your owne witneſſe
ſpeake truly, then you haue maruellouſly abuſed the world
for many yeares, in making them beleeue that S. Peters chaire
is at Rome onely. But Saint Ambroſe ſeemeth ſomewhat
plainer then the reſt,Amb. in epiſt. 1. Timoth. 3. in that firſt place alleadged by maiſter
Bellarmine.
            
            The church is called Gods houſe, whereof Damaſus is a
ruler this day. But yet the words do not import any ſuch thing,
as may prooue the Supremacie of the Biſhop of Rome. For,
wee will not deny that the Biſhop of Rome is a ruler in the
church, but, that he is the only ruler we can not graunt. But
Saint Ambroſe expounding thoſe wordes of Paule wherein he
teacheth Timothie how to behaue himſelf in Gods houſe,Ambroſe anſwered. takes
occaſion to ſhew, both what is Gods houſe, namely, the church,
and who they are that are rulers in Gods houſe, namely, the biſhops

or paſtours to whom the miniſtery is committed. And to
make this plaine by an example, he ſetteth before vs the houſe of
God at Rome, which is the church there, and the ruler of Gods
houſe there, who is Damaſus their biſhop. If any man aſke
how it commeth to paſſe that he rather nameth Damaſus then any
other biſhop? Sundry reaſons of it may be yeelded. Firſt
Ambroſe himſelfe was a biſhop in Italy (for Milaine is in Italy)
vnder the popes wings, and therefore the biſhop of Rome
was the moſt famous biſhop and better knowne to his people
then any of the other patriarches, and therefore fitteſt for an example.
            Secondly there had beene a very great ſchiſme or ſtrife about
the popedome,Platina in the life of Damaſus. one Vrſicinus ſtanding for it againſt Damaſus,
ſo that many of both ſides were ſlaine in the very church in ſtriuing
for it. But Damaſus in the end obtaining the popedome
Saint Ambroſe to teſtifie his owne perſwation, and to aſſure others
that Damaſus and not Vrſicmus was biſhop of Rome,
although he ſtood for it, doth take occaſion heere to name him.
            Thirdly,Platina. 
               Damaſus beeing pope was accuſed of whoredome
whereof hauing cleared himſelfe, it is not vnlikely but that S.
Ambroſe did the rather take this occaſion to pull al ſuſpition out
of other mens minds, by giuing this teſtimony of him. Another
cauſe alſo may be added, that as it ſeemeth he was as learned as
any biſhop of Rome before him. For which S. Ambroſe himſelf
a being a learned man, might then rather delight in naming
him.
            The reſt of the places out of S. Ambroſe haue no waight
at all.Orat. in Satyrum 
               Satyrus did aſke the biſhop, whether he agreed with the
Catholicke biſhops, that is with the Church of Rome. He meaneth
by catholicke biſhops, ſuch as held the catholicke faith, that
then was maintained at Rome. If it be a good argument to ſay
Rome is a catholicke church, therefore it muſt gouerne all the
churches in the world: then will this alſo be a good argument,
Hippo was a catholicke church, ſo was Millaine, ſo are alſo the
churches that we haue allowed in England by authority, therefore
they were, and ours are heads ouer all others. And that maſter
Bellarmine will not allow. But he aſketh why the biſhops
are not catholickes that agree not with the church of Rome, if it

be not becauſe Rome is the head of the catholike church? I
maruell much that maiſter Bellarmine whoſe wordes go for oracles
with many, will ſhew himſelfe ſo ignorant of that he alleadgeth.
For if hee had read but the wordes that immediatly
doe follow,Bellarmines ignorance or falſehood. the reaſon is, there rendered why he aſked that queſtion,
namely becauſe the church there was in a ſchiſme. For one
Lucifer had ſeperated himſelf from their communion. Lo here
M. Bellarm. he dreameth not of any headſhip of that church, but
aſketh this queſtion whether he helde the faith that then was
preached at Rome.Athanaſius. And Athanaſius in his creede ſpeaketh in
this ſence of a catholike faith. Yea the name of catholike was
alſo as it were a note of their profeſſion. That whereas the Donatiſts
gloried, that they onely had the true church, the catholikes
on the contrary would be known by their name, that in any
place of the world, they might be of the true church. Yea
there were Emperours that made a lawe,The name of Catholike. that whoſoeuer beleeued
the one godhead in trinity and equal maieſty of the father,
the ſonne, and the holy ghoſt ſhould be called Chriſtians, and
Catholikes,
               Lib. 7. cap. 4. as their law doth teſtifie. Yea Sozomen reporteth
of a lawe made by the Emperour that all ſhould beleeue the
lawe deliuered by Peter the head of the apoſtles (but howe he
may be called head of the apoſtles I haue ſhewed before) and
that nowe Damaſus biſhop of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria
doe holde and that they onely that worſhip the trinitie with like
honoure, ſhould be called the catholike church. And doeth maiſter
Bellarmine to make his bad proofe ſeeme better, aſke howe
they may be called catholikes, that agree with the church of
Rome, vnleſſe it be in this reſpect, that they take it to be the
head of the catholike church? heere are catholikes we ſee and
yet not bound to beleeue that head.
            After he alleadgeth two other places of like force.De Sacram, li. 3. cap. 1. The
effect of them is, that he woulde followe the paterne of the
church of Rome. So woulde I alſo if I had liued in thoſe
daies, when they ſincerely held the faith committed to them by
Gods worde. And he doubtleſſe, if he ſawe the ſuperſtition, and
Idolatry, and treaſons, that vnder coulour of religion, are hatched
there in our daies, he would thinke euen the cotten ruines
of Rome, to bee ouer good, to bee a cage for ſo badde birdes.

But to follow their example, is not to yeelde vnto them power
ouer vs.
            To go forward, out of ſaint Ierome hee reaſoneth thus:
Saint Ierome for pope Damaſus anſwered:Epiſt, ad Alg. de Monogam. the Synodicall
conſultations of the Eaſt and Weſt, therefore they that ſought
for anſwere from the ſeate of Rome in their matters acknowledged
the ſuperioritie thereof. If I ſhould tell Maiſter Bellarmine
againe, that Maiſter Caluine in his time, and Maiſter
Beza in his time, haue anſwered more matters and queſtions
that came from ſundry of the reformed Churches, and ſome
particular men, then many of the popes of that time, yet I am
ſure he wil neuer confeſſe them to be vniuerſall Biſhoppes, for
that. No more neede wee graunt to him, that the Pope is a
vniuerſall Biſhop,Ad Damaſ. ep. de nomine hypoſtaſ. becauſe many queſtions were mooued to
him. Againe, Saint Hierome confeſſeth himſelfe to be Damaſus
his ſheepe, and that hee is of communion with him.
Alas, what childiſh proofes are theſe? May not Hierome
confeſſe himſelfe to depend vpon Damaſus, but that hee muſt
thereby tie all others likewiſe to be ſubiect vnto him? It is a
ſhame for men ſo to deceiue the world, aud to haſten euen their
owne damnation by abuſing the ſimple in ſuch ſort. They crie
it out in euery corner, that there is no ſaluation to be hoped for,
vnleſſe they doe acknowledge the Biſhoppe of Rome to bee
head of their Church: and yet are they not able to yeelde ſo
much as one good reaſon out of the Scriptures or ancient writers
of the purer age for proofe of their doctrine. It muſt bee
beleeued as an article of faith, and yet they coulde ſhewe no
ground, no warrant for it.
            Out of ſaint Auguſtine is alleadged, that in the Church
of Rome,Epiſt. 162. the principalitie of Peters chaire hath alwayes flouriſhed.
Auguſtine and Optatus as they were in one time, ſo
were they of one minde. And as before out of Optatus I ſhewed,
and that by Chriſtes teſtimony, that the Apoſtles chaire
is his doctrine, ſo here doeth it ſignifie. And ſaint Auguſtine
his meaning is, that Rome hath eſpecially kept the Apoſtles
doctrine or faith, the which in Saint Auguſtines dayes,
might truely bee verified. Againe, out of Saint Auguſtine
epiſt. 92. he deſireth pope Innocent to helpe them againſt the

Pelagians, which maruellouſly troubled. Paleſtine and Affrike.
            Now out of this will he conclude the popes Supremacie.
But ſaint Auguſtine himſelfe denyeth that hee had any ſuch
meaning, in that he was one of that ſixt councill of Carthage
that ſo ſtiffely denied ſupremacie vnto the pope, ſeeking it ſo earneſtly,
and by very falſe practiſes. And the Biſhop of Rome,
was then of great abilitie to doe good, as alſo any other may be,
and yet not haue iuriſdiction ouer them that ſeeke for that good
at his hands. I would haue them to bring ſome plaine proofe,
and not ſo to ſtand vpon ſtrange coniectures.Epiſt. 157. Againe, Sozimus
biſhop of Rome willed hini to go to a councill at Ceſarea,
and hee therefore ſaide that hee muſt needes goe. If Sozimus
did commaund, and Auguſtine would not ſtand vpon his right
in ſuch a matter, where perchance his going might be profitable
to Gods church, yet that would not make Sozimus head of the
church. No, at that time they did not gather any ſuch hard concluſions.
For although they would not refuſe to do good, euen
being more imperiouſly commaunded then reaſon would, yet
ſupremacie (as I haue ſhewed) they would not acknowledge
in the Biſhop of Rome, but rather were content to bee at great
charges to conuince the popes falſhoode.
            In the laſt two places ſaint Auguſtine commendeth the
biſhop of Rome,Ad Boniſ, l. 1. c. 1. in that being ſo high as he was, yet he would
be friendly to them that were humble or lowe, and then confeſſeth
euery Biſhoppe to be high, yet him to be higher. A man
may be friend to them that are lower then he is: and one Biſhop
may be higher than others, and yet not haue iuriſdiction
ouer them.Proſper de ingr. Higher, I ſay in gifts, credite, place or many other
waies.
            In England we ſee differences of biſhoprickes,Proſper examined. where yet
the one hath not iuriſdiction ouer the other. Now for Proſper,
it were hard if his poeticall amplifications ſhould be able to carry
away the weight of ſo great a cauſe. But for his words if he
ſay that Rome is Peters ſeat in reſpect of the doctrine that there
was taught and maintained, as before Optatus and Auguſtine
(of whome he was a great follower) haue done, wee
yeelde vnto him. Otherwiſe I leaue the godly Reader to the

arguments before alleadged, to conſider what he ſhould think
concerning this point, whether Peter was Biſhop there or not.
And where he ſaith that Rome is made vnto the world the head
of paſtorall honour, wee yeelde vnto that alſo, that at that time
there was no church, that either more ſincerely did keepe that
which the apoſtles taught, or had more credit and authoritie amongſt
other churches then Rome had, in reſpect that ſhe was
able and willing to do good vnto many other.
            But where he ſaith that what by armes ſhee could not, by religion
ſhee hath ſubdued: is not ſimply true. For there are manie
that neuer were nor will be (by likely hood) ſubdued to Romiſh
religion. But in ſome reſpect we alſo confeſſe that to be ſo,
in that religion ſubdueth the heart, and winneth the affection of
men to bee ſubiect, whereas that outward force can onely
preuaile againſt the outward man.De perſecution
                     •
                   Wandalica. Now for Victor Vticenſis
who calleth the church of Rome head of all other churches,
I haue often ſhewed that it may truly ſo be called in reſpect of
the authoritie which by many occaſions it had goten, not in reſpect
of any inriſdiction that Chriſt gaue vnto it, more then to other.
The next is Vyncentius Lirinenſis,
               Vincent. Lyrinenſ. in commonit. who alluding vnto
the name, or indeede rather giuing vnto Rome that name, that
was commonly giuen vnto it, ſaith that the head of the world
gaue teſtimonie vnto it (meaning the council of Epheſus.) You
ſee ſaith maſter Bellarmine that the biſhop of Rome is called
head of the world.Vincent wrung to a wrong ſenſe. Nay you ſee howe our popes catholiks incroch
more and more, for that vnſatiable gulfe of the church, of
Rome, which will neuer haue honour and authoritie enough.
Who euer before maſter Bellarmine hath called the pope the
head of the world? He hath wont to be but head of the church.
But I feare that if his kingdome continue a while Acharonta
mouebit, hee will keepe a ſtir in hell alſo. But Vincenſius giueth
no ſuch name to Iulius biſhop of Rome. He would not be ſo
iniurious to the ciuil authoritie he had learned better then ſo, to
giue to Caeſar that that belongeth to Caeſer, and to God that
that is Gods, although the church of Rome might quite blotte
out of their bookes that leſſon, for any regarde that they haue
to keepe it.
            As for Vincentius, his meaning is plaine enough to them

that will ſee the trueth. For hauing ſpoken of ſundry places
from whence learned men came to that councill of Epheſus,
firſt out of the Eaſt, then alſo out of the Weſt churches, he
nameth Iulius biſhop of the citty of Rome, which citty he calleth
the head of the worlde, as immediately after he calleth
Carthage one of the South, and Millaine one of the North, the
ſides of the world.
            But if he had made ſo very great accompt of the church of
Rome, as in theſe daies men would haue vs to doe, he would
haue had perchance ſome more regard in placing that church in
ſome other order, then to make it almoſt the laſt that he mentioneth.
            Out of Caſsiodor a ſenatour and a great officer in Rome
maiſter Bellarmine alleadgeth ſomewhat.Lib. 11. Epiſt. 2. ad Ioh. papam. You (ſaieth he to
Iohn Biſhop of Rome) ſit as watchmen ouer chriſtian people,
as you are called father you loue all.
            I ſee nothing heere that can helpe maiſter Bellarmine or
his cauſe. For who euer did thinke otherwiſe, then that the
Biſhoppe of Rome, was a watchman ouer chriſtian people?
Or who will ſay that the Pope hath not or at the leaſt
ſhoulde haue a fatherly affection towardes all?If he commende his cure, how proueth that his power? Well it followeth.
It is our part to looke to ſomewhat, you looke
to all.
            
               Caſsiodor liuing vnder the popes noſe, is content either
by this praiſing of him to teach him what care he indeede ſhould
haue, not onely to doe good to the people of Rome where he
was Biſhop, but alſo as occaſions ſhould be offered to helpe others
alſo. Or els it may be that hee giueth him greater praiſe
then he deſerueth.
            But what is this for the popes ſupremacy? Muſt not the
building needes fall that ſtandeth vpon ſuch weake propes?
Much like is that which followeth that the ſeat which is pope
Iohns peculiar place, is giuen generally to the whole worlde,
that is as I take it to doe good to all. If a Romane magiſtrate
to the biſhop of Rome doe extoll more then in truth he
may, the power of that citty, or els tell how farre their benefits
doe extende, muſt this be ſo ſtrained and wrung to prooue ſupremacie?
            
               
The laſt teſtimony alleadged by maiſter Bellarmine dothValentinianus Theodoſ. in praeamb. Concil. Chalcedonenſ.
ſo little helpe his cauſe, that if he had done wiſely he ſhould neuer
haue ſpoken of it. For by that Epiſtle and others that are
ſet before that councill of Chalcedon it may eaſily appeare, that
Leo Biſhop of Rome did then beſtirre him vſing the diſcention
of the Eaſt church as a meane to increaſe his owne authoritie.
For it is moſt plaine and cannot be denied, that afterwardes
in that councill,Leo earneſtly ſeeketh ſupremacy. by his legates, he ſought the ſupremacy
very earneſtly and in ſundry of his Epiſtles diſanulleth
that the councill did againſt it. And in theſe Epiſtles he maketh
mone to many to procure Theodoſius the Emperour to
ſtand his friend.
            An
                  •
                in this Epiſtle here cited by maiſter Bellarmine, Valentinian
ſheweth howe Leo came vnto him, told him of the diuiſion
of the Eaſt church, and great troubles there. For indeede
Flauianus a catholike biſhop was depoſed by Dioſcorus,
and ſo cruelly handled, that he died thereof within three
daies.
            Well Valentinian maketh petition to Theodoſius, That
(the biſhop of Rome) may haue place and power, to iudge
of the faith and of the prieſts. Which requeſt made by Valentinian,
in the letter which Valentinian confeſſeth that Leo
requeſted him to write, ſo iumping with that which afterwards
Leo in the councill practiſed, may much perſwade vs to thinke,
that he ſolicited Valentinian the Emperour, either plainly or
couertly, to moue this in his behalfe. Well then this being but a
requeſt made that it may ſo be, that cannot proue that it was ſo,
but contrary.
            And what reaſon doth Valentinian the Emperour an eſpeciall
friend to the biſhop of Rome, vſe to commend his ſuite. Antiquity
gaue him principality of prieſthood ouer all. Wherein I
firſt note that not Chriſt, but ancient cuſtome, is pretended to
haue priuiledged him.
            And here againe marke howe this agreeth with that which
was afterwards in the council of Chalcedon obiected by Paſchaſnus,
               Supremacy claimed by cuſtome not by gods law.
legate for Leo this biſhop of Rome. The church of
Rome (ſaith Paſchaſinus) alwaies had the ſupremacy.Act. 16. But this
his allegation was proued falſe.
            
               
But the allegations of Valentinian the popes ſolicitour in
this cauſe, and of Poſchaſimus the popes legate being ſo like,
it maketh me the bolder to coniecture, that they were both forged
in one ſhop, becauſe they haue both one ſtampe.
            Thus haue I taken a view of all ſuch teſtimonies as are alleadged
by maiſter Bellarmine out of them, that liued within
600. yeares of Chriſt, for to eſtabliſh the pride of that Romiſh
ſeat. I haue of purpoſe omitted iii. or iiii. by him alleadged,
becauſe they wrote after the time that Phocas that murthering
traitor, (who killed Mauritius his Lorde and maiſter for his
Empire, hauing firſt killed before his face his wife and fiue of
his children,) had granted vnto Boniface biſhop of Rome third
of that name, to be ſupreme head ouer the whole church. Wherein
although I haue endeuoured to be ſhort, yet I truſt it plainly
enough appeareth to them that will not ſhut their eies againſt
the truth, that although the church of Rome had indeede in regard
of her conſtancy in the truth, and power which ſhee grewe
vnto by many occaſions, being in the imperiall citty, great authority
amongſt all other churches: and although learned men
were by their diſtreſſed eſtates forced many times in their priuat
ſeates, to yeelde to that church more intereſt to meddle in their
matters, then of right it had: yet it cannot appeare by any thing
that they bring out of any approued record, within the compaſſe
of thoſe yeares, that the church of Rome was either by Gods
lawe, appointed the head ouer others, which is indeede the point
that they ſhould proue, or that by common conſent of the godly
it was ſo catholickly receiued. And yet if this latter could haue
more apparent proofe, then euer Rome or Rhemes can afforde
in this cauſe, they ſhould gaine nothing, but that good men haue
either ordained or tolerated ſuch a ſtate. Which howſoeuer it
might ſeeme tolerable, when many good men poſſeſſed that
place: yet that the church, ſhould be ſubiect to ſuch as nowe for
the moſt part ſit in that ſeat, no chriſtian heart can well endure
it. But now this labour being taken in hand, to trie the popes
title vnto the ſupremacy, or how he pleadeth, or what claime he
can make: I muſt needes giue warning to the chriſtian reader,
to marke how that as maiſter Bellarmine hath ſaid little, or rather
nothing at all, to prooue this authority of the biſhop of

to be grounded vpon Gods lawe: ſo be hath not brought one
council within the ſaid ſix hundred yeres or any thing ſufficiently
materiall out of the fathers of that time to proue that by mans
lawe he was decreed ſo to be, but onely ſomtimes perchance by
particular men vſed, as if he had authoritie ouer all. And ſhall
this be accounted a catholike doctrine, that neither God nor
man, for ſix hundred yeares after Chriſt, commaunded to be beleeued?
If there come no better euidence then maſter Bellarmine
can bring, without all doubt the pope will be found, to be
but an intruder into other mens right, a vſurper of other mens
iuriſdiction.
            But maſter Bellarmine will helpe his former want, with
a new ſupply.Li. 1. cap. 17. Obiect. of Bellar. He affirmeth very boldly, as hee doth often in
other matters, that we knowe neither the time wherein, neither
the author by whom, this ſupremacie had beginning. Yet it
may be that we ſhall geſſe ſhrewdly at it.Anſwere. But firſt wee muſt
vnderſtand that the roote of this ſupremacie that is the pride
and ambition of heart that was in many of the popes, was lying
long in the ground before it did ſprowt and plainly ſhew it
ſelfe, and when it grew that it might be ſeene, yet was it not
perfected in a long time after. But it did plainly ſhew it ſelfe
in the time of Phocas of whome I ſpake before. For he with
much adoe ordained,Plat. in Bonif. 3. that the biſhop of Rome ſhould be called
and counted the head of all churches, as many of the popes
frends tell vs, and among other Platina. A very fitt patron,
for ſo proude a prelat. And after that the pope had gotten by the
emperours decree, this glorious title, yet he could not preſently
get quiet poſſeſſion of the ſame, but the biſhop of Conſtantinople
did ſtill ſtriue for that name.Omph. annot. in Bonif. 3. Vntil at the length, they
were both content to winke, and the one to ſuffer the other to be
be called vniuerſall biſhop. So that both of them had that name,
and were ſo called. And nowe the biſhop of Rome hauing obtaiued
thus much in the weſt church, that hee in all councils and
meetings was chiefe, and that they ſhould ſubmit themſelues
to him. Before it was long hee had taken ſo good roote aud begane
to grow ſo mighty, that he durſt alter and chaunge, giue to
and take from men at his pleaſure, and to turne all things vpſide
downe, yea and in the end, to cheeke the greateſt monarchs.

But of theſe matters I ſhall if God will haue better occaſion
to intreate in the ſecond parte of this treatiſe. Now I will only
ſay that they were comme to ſuch power as Platina writeth of
Boniface the eight,Plat. in Bonif. that they would rather put feare into the
hearts of emperours, kings, princes, nations, and people then
religion. And thus when they had bene in increaſing and growing
in ſtrength, for the ſpace of at the leaſt eight hundred yeares,
at length in the council of Florence we find this their ſoueraigne
and ſupreme power confirmed in theſe words.Concil. Florent. We define that
the holy apoſtolike ſeat, and biſpp of Rome hath the ſupremacie
in the whole world. So that although we cannot perfectly
ſay, when this poyſon of pride beganne in the church of Rome,
yet you ſee we can perfectly enough tel when it beganne to ſhew
it ſelfe, and when it was made an eccleſiaſticall drecrees.
Neither is that of any waight which maſter Bellarmine alleageth
out of Gregorie to the contrarie,Lib. 7. epiſt. 63. that the church of Conſtantinople
is vnder the church of Rome. For he cannot meane
thereby the church of Rome ſhould haue ſupreame authoritie
ouer it and all other churches, ſeeing that no man more then
Gregorie inueieth againſt the name of vniuerſall biſhop, but
his meaning is onely this, that the church of Conſtantinople
is not of ſo good account or authoritie in meetings or aſſemblies
as that of Rome. Which beeing applied to our queſtion
proueth nothing. For to prooue that the church of Rome may
ſit, or go, or write his name, before the biſhop of Conſtantinople,
is not to prooue him to haue iuriſdiction ouer him. That
which out of Iuſtinian he alleageth,Pag. 98. is anſwered before, as that
alſo that hee bringeth out of the epiſtle of Valentinian to
Theodoſius, ſauing that maſter Bellarmine incrocheth ſomewhat,
and taketh more then is giuen him.Pag. 112. For where Valentinian
ſaith that Antiquitie hath giuen that to Rome,
maſter Bellarmine ſeeth that will not ſerue his turne, to
prooue it to haue beene from Chriſt, from whom onely they
can claime it, if by the lawe of God they will haue it, and therefore
hee ſaith not as Valentinian doth that it hath beene of old
time,Bellarmine addeth to Valentinians words, or changeth them. but alwayes. And ſo wreſteth his words quite out of
tune. And it is but a fooliſh ſhift whereby they ſeeke to pervert
the truth and by theſe forced gloſes, to corrupt the words of

almoſt all ſtories, when they denied Phocas firſt to haue giuen
ſupremacie to the pope,Bellar. lib. 2. de pontif. Rom. c. 17 he did (if you will truſt maſter Bellarmine)
but declare it and did not giue it. Platina ſaith that the
pope obtained this of Phocas to be called and counted head,In Bonif. 3. and
ſo doth Sigebert:
               Cron. Euſeb. and Euſebius ſaith that by the conſent of Phocas
it was ſo inſtituted. And Beneuenutus Imolenſis a ſtorie cō
               mended
by pope Pius the ſecond, by his adding to the ſame, the
liues of foure emperors, ſaith that Phocas firſt obtained that
Rome ſhould be head of all churches. If he Firſt obtained this
title to Rome, if he did inſtitute it, if the pope obtained this of
Phocas, then let the indifferent reader iudge, how vntrewly
maſter Bellarmine ſaith that Phocas did but declare this thing,
and that it was before. Yea what needed this any declaration of
of the emperour, if the church had receiued it as a catholike doctrine.
Or if it be not a catholike doctrine, what meaneth
maſter Bellarmine, to make ſo falſe braggs as he ſometimes
doth, of the conſent of fathers in this doctrine. And thus I
truſt I haue layed open the vanitie of the proofe, and the weakeneſſe
of the argument, whereby they indeuoure to ſtrengthen
and eſtabliſh, the tyranous ſoueraigntie of the church of Rome.
For if Peter had no ſuch iuriſdiction ouer others, hee could not
giue it to any other. If his beeing biſhop of Rome, haue not
any ſuch ground, but that it may iuſtly be doubted of, and ſtrong
preſumptions to the contrarie: then is not the popes ſucceſſion
of Peter, ſo certaine, as they would haue it thought. Yea and
if Peter were biſhop of Rome and if hee had ſuch ſoueraigntie:
howe do they proue that it is bequeathed to them, to what perſon,
howe in what words, at what time, in what place, befor
what witneſſes? Al which things how weakely they prooue,
hitherto I haue declared. And yet to goe further, admitte,
that Peter had ſuch iuriſdiction, which cannot bee prooued,
but I admit I ſay that hee had it, admit alſo that hee could,
and did, leaue the ſame to the biſhop of Rome, which we alſo
iuſtly denie: muſt it therefore cleaue ſo faſt to that chaire in
Rome,If iuriſdiction were had, yet it might be loſt. that it can not for any cauſe bee altered? Muſt it be ſo
hereditarie to his ſucceſſours, if they had beene his ſucceſſours
that are biſhops of Rome, that they could not forfet it for any

terſpaſſe, that it may not be taken from them, for any offence?
God forbid that wee ſhould be ſo fooliſh, as to tie God to anie
place or people, to any ſect or ſucceſſion in ſuch ſort, as that
howſoeuer men doe abuſe his graces, or their owne callings,
yet ſtill they muſt haue the place that once they haue gotten,
and they muſt ſerue him in that place, whether he will or not, as
though they had it by euerlaſting patent.Exod. 28. 1. Did not God chuſe
to be his hie prieſt Aaron, and his ſonnes by name Nadab, Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar to ſerue in the prieſtes office? No
man can deny it. And yet Nadab and Abihu for offering onely
with ſtrange fire (many greater offences then that,Leuit. 10. 1. Prieſts for their ſinnes puniſhed. are committed
in the church of Rome) were burnt with fire from heauen,
to ſhew that God is not ſo in bondage to them whome hee
hath placed in ſuch roomes, that hee muſt haue their ſeruice
whether hee will or not. Yea, and didde the prieſthoode continue
alwayes in Aarons line, vntill the very time that the Leuiticall
prieſthoode was vtterly aboliſhed? No verily. For
Herod ſet vp prieſts at his pleaſure, when he came to be made
king of Iewry, ſo that then the line of Aaron was vtterly extinct,
concerning the prieſthoode, and they that afterwards were
prieſts were not of the ſame. Where then is the choice that God
made of Aarons poſteritie to ſerue him? And what greater promiſe
can the church of Rome finde made vnto Peter (I ſay not
to them, for they had none made) then was made vnto Phinehas,
euen a couenant of the prieſts office for euer?
                  
                     •
                  um. 25. 13. And yet
we ſee this was not onely altered now, when the prieſthoode
was quite gone from Aarons poſteritie, but alſo euen long before,
when the prieſthoode was giuen vnto Eli that was the ſon
of Ithamar, and taken from the poſteritie of Phinehas, ſo that,
not ſo much as his ſonne ſucceeded him.
            And concerning Eli the prieſt,1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. 30. the prieſt, the Lord had ſaid, that he and
his houſe ſhould haue walked before God for euer, (meaning in
the prieſtes office.) But when God ſaw how Eli did wincke at
the great diſorders of his ſonnes, whereby Gods ſeruice was
hindered,31 then hee let Eli to vnderſtand, that hee would cutte
off his authoritie, and ſtirre himſelfe vp a faithfull Prieſt,
that ſhoulde doe according to his heart, and according to his
minde.
            
               
And this was performed when Abiathar was put out of the35
prieſthoode by Salomon, and Zadoc was made Prieſt in his
ſteede.2. Kings 2. 27, 35 And of this Zadoc it is ſaid by God himſelfe, by that
meſſenger or man of God that was ſent to Eli. I will builde
him (meaning Zadoc) a ſure houſe,1. Sam. 2. 35. and he ſhall walke before
mine annointed for euer. And yet (as is before declared) the
prieſthoode was taken from his line alſo, ſo that there were diuers
hie prieſts that were not of his houſe. If nowe God in
his iuſt iudgement might, and in his vpright and faultleſſe iuſtice
did, take from them, that which they might as aſſuredly
haue claimed to themſelues and their poſteritie, as euer Peter
might claime ſuch ſoueraigne iuriſdiction, to him and his ſucceſſours,
ſo that they haue their light put out, and their candleſticke
remooued: how much leſſe may they claime any perpetuitie
to rule ouer Gods people, that can pretend almoſt no
colour of title for the ſame?God left Silo. What, is Rome any better then
Silo? It pleaſed God there to dwell many yeeares, he made
it as it were his tent among men,1. Sam. 4. Pſal. 78. 60. Ier. 7. 12. God calles it his place, where
hee ſet his name at the beginning. And yet was it in the ende
made a by-word among the people, that God when hee will
threaten his grieuous wrath,14 ſaieth hee will doe as hee did to
Silo.
            And againe,Ierem. 26. 6. I will make this houſe like Silo, and will
make this city a curſe to all the nations of the earth: becauſe he
forſooke the habitation of Silo,Pſal. 78. 60. the tabernacle where he dwelt
among men. Let them that would ſo faine tie vs to that Romiſh
chaire, ſhew that euer God ſate ſo in it, or ſaid ſo much
of it, as hee hath ſpoken of Silo, and when they haue ſo done,
yet can they haue no greater intereſt in God than Silo had,Ierem. 7. 12.
from which God departed, for the wickedneſſe of the people
of Iſrael. And ſhall we thinke that hee will reſt in that polluted
neſt, or dwell in that vncleane denne, where Gods name is
moſt horribly blaſphemed, with ſuperſtitions and idolatries aboue
meaſure? If hee haue forſaken Iſrael, can hee delight in
Italy.
            If hee haue left Ieruſalem, will hee tarry at Rome? For
euen Ieruſalem that holy citie:Ieruſalem for ſin forſaken, and the temple. nay, the Temple there, which
was the glory of that people, and the wonder of the worlde,

which had ſo many promiſes of Gods fauour, ſo many tokens
of Gods good liking of it, (for the Lorde had choſen Zion,
and loued to dwell therein, ſaying, This my reſt for euer,
heere will I dwell, for I haue a delight therein) Pſalme one
hundred thirtie two, the thirteene and foureteene verſes, euen
that Temple (I ſay) which God himſelfe commaunded to bee
made, and choſe for his ownne houſe, was not only deſtroyed
by the Babylonians, and afterwards being built againe) by
the Romaines, ſo that not one ſtone was left vppon an other,
but alſo God left the place it ſelfe, and caſt off that people, for
being a people vnto him, as the Apoſtle Saint Paule to the
Romanes in the eleuenth chapter telleth vs, and experience
proclaimeth it. Yea, where is the promiſe concerning the fleſh
that was made vnto Abraham, I will bee thy God, and the
God of thy ſeede? Geneſis the ſeuenteenth chapter and ſeuenth
verſe. What is become of that peculiar people of God, the
Lordes owne inheritance, the people that he choſe to ſet his
name among them, the vine that hee brought out of Egypt?
Were they not many times for their ſinnes, a pray vnto their
enemies, a reproch among the people? Hath not the wild bore
out of the wood ſo deuoured the ſame, that not ſo much as one
roote of it is knowen to grow there? In ſo much as the prophet
Eſay in their names maketh a iuſt and true complaint
ſaying, The people of thy holineſſe haue poſſeſſed it but a little
while, for our aduerſaries haue troden downe thy ſanctuarie:
We haue beene as they ouer whom thou neuer bareſt rule, and
vpon whom thy name was not called, Eſay the ſixtie three chapter
and eighteene and nineteene verſes. What then, is the promiſe
of God of none effect? Will not God be as good as his
word? Yes doubtleſſe, he can not lie, hee will not deceiue vs.
But all ſuch promiſes haue a ſecret condition of ſeruing God to
be vnderſtoode.
            And if we on our part (I will not ſay performe the condition,
for we can not doe it) but if we will ſtriue and indeuoure
earneſtly to fulfill it, no doubt but hee will aſſiſt vs with his
good grace, and embrace vs, with his endleſſe and infinit mercies.
But if we hearken onely to that he promiſeth, and regarde
not that which he requireth, we deceiue our ſelues with a

vaine expectation of that that belongeth not to vs.A ſimilitude. God dealeth
with vs as a good maiſter dealeth with his ſeruant. Firſt hee
hireth him to be his ſeruant, and whatſoeuer promiſes of good
turnes he afterwardes maketh vnto him, they depend vpon that
firſt couenant, if he ſerue him diligently. If then a maſter promiſe
to his ſeruant, to do him ſome great pleaſure, may that
ſeruant neglect his dutie, loiter & linger about his worke, leaue
his buſineſſe vndone, deſpiſe his maiſters commaundement
and yet ſay within himſelfe, my maiſter oweth me a good turne?
He may not, there is no reaſon to moue him to it. If then the
church of Rome claime ſuch promiſes and priuiledges to belong
to them, as they pretend they haue, yet they might long ſince, by
the abuſing of their authority, and other good graces and gifts
of God, haue forfeited, and loſt the ſame. As we haue to ſee moſt
plainly in the example of the Leuits who were of Aarons time,
to whom it did belong by right of inheritance as it were, and
ſucceſſion to be prieſts vnto God.Leuiticall prieſts for ſin diſgraded. Ezech. 44. 12. And yet when they ſinned againſt
the Lord, and had no regard to keepe couenant with him,
of them he ſaith I haue lift vp my hand againſt them, and they
ſhall beare their iniquity, and they ſhall not come neare vnto me,
to doe the office of the prieſt vnto me, neither ſhall they come
neare vnto any of my holy things, in the moſt holy place, but
they ſhall beare their ſhame, and their abominations which they
haue committed. The like depriuation from their charge, and
diſgrading them of their prieſthoode,Hoſ. 4. 6. we reade of in Hoſea the
prophet: Becauſe thou haſt refuſed knowledge, I wil alſo refuſe
thee that thou ſhalt be no prieſt to me, and ſeeing thou haſt forgotten
the law of thy God, I will alſo forget thy children.
            May he caſt off his prieſtes, whome himſelfe appointed to
be his prieſtes, who had that office by ſucceſſion, and therefore
we cannot doubt of their calling?The popes calling is many times by wicked meanes. And yet muſt hee be
tied to them that by briberie, violence and many vile practiſes,
as poyſenings, couenantes with the Deuill, and
ſuch other lewde meanes, doe poſſeſſe that ſeate, and therefore
haue noe ſhewe of lawfull calling, and when they are
in it, doe nothing leſſe then ſet foorth Gods trueth, maintaine
his glorie. or thinke of Gods lawe? No no, he is
nowe as free as euer he was, to chuſe him ſuch ſeruantes,

as are according to his owne heart he is no more bound to dwell
ſtill at Rome, then hee was not to remoue from Ieruſalem.
The one place is alreadie deſtroied with a perpetuall deſtruction:
For the other vnleſſe it amend, there is reſerued a more
heauie iudgement. And vpon this point I haue ſtaied ſomewhat
the longer, not onely for their ſakes that imagin the pope
cannot erre or be remoued, but to admoniſh euen vs alſo, that
profeſſe the goſpell that vnleſſe we repent, wee ſhall all periſh
likewiſe.Luke 13. 3. We are the figtree, for which the dreſſer of the vineyard,Luke 13. 6. 7. An admonition
                     •
                   to the profeſſors of the goſpel.
intreateth that yet this fourth yeare we may be ſpared (for
we haue beene three long yeares, yea three times twelue yeares
vnfruitfull. Our owner looked for figes but we yeld none, for
grapes,Eſay 5. but we beare none, but ſower ones.) Now is the time
wherein much digging, and dunging, is beſtowed vpon vs. If
we continue ſtill fruitfeſſe, as we haue beene, there is no hope
of mercie, but without ſparing we muſt be cut downe. and ſo
ſhall be caſt into the vuquenchable fire. And this is in trueth a
more chriſtian and neceſſarie collection, and more agreeable to
Gods iuſtice and to the whole courſe of ſcripture,Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. 2, Theſſa. 1. 5, 6, 7 which promiſeth
good things, to them that walke in the feare of God, and
threatneth Gods wrath, to them that are diſobedient, and delight
in ſinne:Praeſ
                     •
                  t. in lib. pontif. Rom. then that which maſter Bellarmine gathereth, out of
the ſinnes and ſchiſms of the popes. For hereby will he proue,
that the church of Rome is the true church, becauſe they haue
had very many moſt grieuous ſchiſmes, euen among the popes
themſelues (now where is the vnitie that ſo much they bragge
of?)
            And becauſe there haue beene many wicked popes, amongſt
whome himſelfe nameth Steuen the ſixt Leo the fifth Chriſtopher
the firſt,Bad Popes are as pearles to beautifie the church of Rome. 
               Sergius the third, Iohn the twelfth, with others
not a few as his owne words are. And yet notwithſtanding that
they haue had many vices (as hee ſaith) the glorie of that ſeate
is increaſed, and amplified thereby greatly. Indeede ſuch pearles,
doe beſt become ſuch ſwines ſnowts. But what maketh
maſter Bellarmine to like the better of the Romiſh church, and
the rather to be induced to imagin, that it is a true church,
becauſe euen the heades thereof, haue beene ſo bad companions,
and ſo abounding in all wickedneſſe?
            
               
Forſooth becauſe if the biſhop of Rome had not beene of Gods
appointment (ſaith he) and that church the true church, it coulde
not haue ſtood and continued ſo long, being ſo full fraught with
ſo many ſinnes. But that is it that is in queſtion whether the
church of Rome be the true church or not. We deny it, wee
finde not in it the ancient faith, the doctrine of the apoſtles, the
ſincere word. Wee ſee not there, the pure adminiſtration of
Gods holy Sacraments. They teach vs outward hypocriſie for
true holines, fooliſh toyes, for ſpirituall worſhipping.
            Theſe and ſuch like things doe ſtrongly perſwade vs, that
God hath done to Rome as he hath done to Silo and to Ieruſalem
long ſince, and will he prooue it to be the true church becauſe
the biſhops are euill? Now if the name and outward ſhew of a
church, haue ſo blinded the eies of maiſter Bellarmine, that hee
will, that it muſt needs be as it is called, that is to ſay, the catholicke
church,The name of the church is often where the church is not. I would haue him looke to Ieruſalem, how in the
time of Chriſt, when the church was in them that followed
Chriſt, yet the name and outward glory of the church, remained
with the prieſts, and that company, which were the greateſt enemies
to Chriſt and his church.
            As therefore we ſee not in the church of Rome when we try
their doctrines, any probability that they are the true church of
Chriſt: ſo we ſet this downe as the infallible courſe of his iudgments,
with whom it is counted a righteous thing, to ſet himſelfe
againſt ſuch as delight in ſinne, that he that ſpared not the
angels that left their firſt eſtate, neither delighted in his owne
people whom he had brought out of Aegypt when they ſinned againſt
him,Iude. 5. 6. will haue no pleaſure in the church of Rome any longer,
then ſhee hath pleaſure in his law,Reuel. 2. 5, 16. Reuel. 3. 16. but will remooue their
candleſticke, fight againſt them with the ſword of his mouth, and
ſpew them out, when they reiect his truth.
            Thus then we ſee that God left the prieſts, whom he had appointed,
the people, whom he had brought out of Aegypt, and taken
to be his peculiar inheritance, the place, that hee had choſen,
the temple, that hee commaunded to be made, becauſe of their
ſinnes.
            Let theſe things make vs with indifferent iudgement, and
without partialitie to trie, whether God be alſo departed from

that church of Rome or not. For there is no doubt, but if any
people whatſoeuer, ſinnes as they did, they may alſo be puniſhed
as they were: But that church of Rome hath ſinned, in as
abundant meaſure, as euer did Ieruſalem, as themſelues and
their owne ſtories doe ſhew, therefore why ſhould they flatter
themſelues imagining that God will not deale with her, as he
hath dealt with others.
            And here wee may conſider howe vntrue that popiſh poſition
is, that the church of Rome, or the Biſhoppe of Rome
can not erre. Can hee ſinne? They confeſſe that hee can not.
Yea, and their owne ſinnes doe record ſuch ſinnes of theirs,
as aſcend vp before the Lord, and cry vnto God for vengeance.
No doubt then but ſuch may erre, and fall into hereſies alſo.
For it is truely ſaid of Saint Auguſtine, that men by their
ſinnes doe fall into hereſies, and hereſies are the very puniſhment
for ſinne. For he that is the iuſt iudge, muſt needes
poure foorth his wrath,Rom. 1. 18. vpon ſuch as detaine the truth in vnrighteouſneſſe,
and vpon ſuch as knowe God by his workes,
but will not glorifie,Verſe 21. 23. him as God, and therefore in their exceſſe
of folly doe turne the glorie of the incorruptible God, into the
ſimilitude of corruptible man, yea and of things moſt baſe and
vile, for man to worſhip.
            Thus then wee ſee howe ſinne deſerueth, that God in his
wrath ſhoulde ſtrike with blindneſſe, ſuch as do delight therein.
For when the loue of the trueth is not receiued, God ſendeth
vnto ſuch as refuſe the trueth, ſtrong illuſions, that they ſhould
beleeue lies, Theſſalo. 2. 10. 11. And if you would haue example
thereof, none is better then Salamon, who was for
wiſedome the wonder of the world, and yet when he gaue himſelfe
to ſinne with women, he was by that meanes drawen to idolatrie:
In ſomuch as Nehemiah,
               1. Kinb. 12. 4. fearing leſt for the like
offence, the like iudgement of God, ſhould fall vpon the people
of his time,Nehem, 13. 26 warneth them by the example of Salomon to take
heede. Did not (ſaith he) Salomon king of Iſrael ſinne by thoſe
things? And Sathan knew well enough, that this was the
readieſt way, to drawe men to idolatrie, (which is deede deteſtable
hereſie) by moouing them to carnall and filthie adulterie.
            
               
Therfore alſo he preuaileth againſt Gods people by that wicked
practiſe.Num. 25. 1. Shall wee then thinke, that the church of Rome,
(whoſe ſinnes are greater then were the ſinnes of Sodome and
Gomorah) cannot be left vnto it ſelfe, and plunged in errour?
Or that the pope cannot erre, whoſe wicked doings are as exceſſiue
as his power is great? Maſter Bellarmine in his booke
of the biſhop of Rome, taketh great paine to prooue that the
pope cannot erre. But euery bodie may ſee by his doubtfull
ſetting it downe, that he cannot well tell what to affirme of it.
For he will not conſent with ſuch Romiſh catholicks as teach
that the pope may erre, and alſo teach hereſie, if hee define any
thing out of a councill.De pontif. Ro
                     •
                   li. 4. cap. 2. And hee dare not agree with Pighius,
but reiecteth his opinion, who although that the pope cannot be
an hereticke, or teach hereſie openly though he alone define of
any thing.
            But maſter Bellarmine will walke in a middle path which
is this: that whether, the Pope may bee an hereticke or not, he
cannot ſet down any hereſie, to be beleeued of the whole church,
wherein this conditionall manner of ſpeaking, (if or whether he
be an hereticke or not) doeth ſhewe his doubtfulneſſe in this
queſtion. But becauſe he is perchance in the next chapters eſpecially
in the fift chapter of a more reſolute opinion, I vrge
not this point any further. But this is his flat reſolution,Li. 4. de Rom. pontif. cap. 3 that
when the pope teacheth the whole church hee cannot erre by any
meanes, in the thing belonging to faith. No neither yet in precepts
of manners,cap. 5 which are preſcribed to the whole church,
and which are of things neceſſarie to ſaluation, or for ſuch
things as are of themſelues good or euill. Further alſo hee
affirmeth that it is proueable, and may godlily be beleeued
(for I ſet downe his words) that hee can not onely not erre, as
hee is pope, but alſo as hee is a particular man, hee cannot
hee an hereticke, in beleeuing any thing obſtinatly againſt
the faith. Whereby it appeareth plainly that maſter Bellarmine
holdeth, that the pope can neither erre at all, in faith or precept of
maners, as he teacheth the whole church: neither can he be an obſtinat
hereticke as he is but a priuat man, not conſidering him as
pope.
            Againſt which doctrine I briefely oppoſe 2. or 3. arguments.
            
               
The firſt is that which immediatly before I touched. Hee
may ſinne they deny it not:That the pope may erre. Arg. 1. therefore he may alſo fall into hereſie.
Which thus I proue.
            The ſelfeſame ſpirit which is the ſpirit of truth,The ſpirit that teacheth truth doth alſo ſanctifie. is alſo the
ſpirit of ſanctification, as powerfull to worke the one effect as
the other. And he that praied not for Peter alone but for al the apoſtles
that their faith ſhould not faile, although the words Sathan
deſired to ſift you are directed to Peter (as to one perchance
bolder then the reſt, and proud of the promiſes that were made)
to keepe him vnder, as Theoph. writeth euen he I ſay prayeth
alſo for all vnto his father,Theo. in Luc. 22. Ioh. 17. 17. Ioh. 14. 16, 17. Pſal. 25. 9. 2. Cor. 3. 5. 
               That he would ſanctifie them with
his truth. The ſame father alſo, from whom muſt come the
ſpirit of truth, will as Dauid aſſureth vs, guide the humble in
his way, which thing the ſame prophet often praieth for) becauſe
of our ſelues, we are not ſufficient ſo much as to thinke a
good thought but our ſufficiency is of God. And why doth
Gods ſpirit lighten our harts, and inſtruct our conſciences, if
not to the end that we ſhould be fruitful in holines and righteouſnes.
Yea the holy ghoſt doth not worke in vs any knowledge, according
to that promiſe the church of Rome ſo much claimeth,
but that therewith alſo it reformeth vs, it doth not giue faith,
but that withall it doth purifie vs. Yea it frameth vnto obedience
all ſuch, as it traineth to vnderſtanding. And therefore it is ſaid
that faith doth purifie our harts.
            By this knowledge, Wee all beh
                     •
                  lde as in a mirrour the
glory of the Lord,
               Act. 15. 9. 2. Cor. 3. 18. 
               with open face, and are changed into the
ſame image, from glory to glory, as it were by the ſpirite of
the Lord. And ſo new mindes make new men, and lightened
hearts, will bring foorth godly life. For it is a hard matter that
he that beleeueth well, 
                  〈…〉
                (euill as Saint Auguſtine)
doth teſtifie.Auguſt. de tempore ſerm. 237. Yea and a little before in the ſame ſermon Same
Auguſtine teacheth, that faith in latine being called fides, conſiſteth
of two ſillables, the firſt ſignifieth doing, the other ſaying.
ſo that if a mā ſay he beleeueth, do (ſaith this holy father) as thou
ſaiſt, and that is faith. Whereby hee ſheweth that there is no
true faith but it is exerciſed in doing the workes of the ſpirit. I
                  •
               
then the ſame ſpirit giue knowledge or faith, and godlineſſe of
life, and true faith 
                  〈…〉
                from good 
                  〈…〉
                if

it be, it is but a dead faith) and godly conuerſation, is as neceſſary
for euery Chriſtian, as true religion. I maruell that
maiſter Bellarmine or any other ſhame not to tell vs, that the biſhops
of Rome cannot erre from the right path of knowledge,
(as if they were wholy lead by Gods ſpirite) whereas manie
of them haue wholy wandred out of the waies of godly life, as
men nothing guided, but quite forſaken of that holy Ghoſt.
And therefore this I ſuppoſe may ſerue for my firſt argument.
            Such as are not lead by Gods ſpirite to liue godly are not
taught by the ſame: but many of the Biſhops of Rome are not
lead by Gods ſpirite to liue godly, therefore many of them are
not taught by the ſame, and by conſequent they may erre. For
they haue no colour of not erring, but that only that they claime,
the direction of that ſpirite, that was neuer promiſed to ſuch
prophane prelates, nor cannot lodge in ſuch ſinkes of ſinne. My
ſecond argument is this.
            Pope Adrian the ſixt did teach,Arg 2. to proue the pope may erre. that the pope may be an heretike,
and teach hereſie. And this doctrine was defendet by him
and others,De pontif. Rom. li 4. cap. 2. as maiſter Bellarmine himſelfe confeſſeth, ſo that
he would haue it to bee beleeued of all. And no man can denie,
but that it is a queſtion of faith, eſpeciallie in the Church of
Rome, whether the pope maie erre or not. Thus then I reaſon.
Adrian the ſixt Pope of that name, did either ſay that
which was falſe, or that which was true. If he ſaid falſe, then
he beeing a pope was deceiued in iudgement, in a matter of
faith, and ſuch a matter as he woulde ſhoulde bee receiued vniuerſally,
as a catholicke doctrine, and ſo the pope hath erred.
If hee ſaie true, then is it alſo euicted by his teſtimonie, that
the pope may erre. For he affirmeth it ſo. So that whether hee
lie or ſpeake the trueth, it is ſufficient to prooue that which I indeuour
to proue. For if hee lie himſelfe erreth, if he ſay true other
may erre.
            The thirde argument ſhall bee of the examples of ſuch as
did erre:Arg. 3. To prooue that the pope may erre. I ſay of ſuch biſhops of Rome, as haue beene by their
owne ſtories,Marcellinus. Damaſus in pontificali. noted for heretickes. I will not ſpeake any thing
of pope Marcellinus, who ſacrificed to Idols, as alſo ſtories doe
teſtifie, bicauſe it is ſaid that he repented him therof. But yet we

may learne out of him, that if a pope may fall to ſuch frailety
as to commit ſo groſſe Idolatry, which is a greater ſinne then
to fall into many of the hereſies, that are condemned (by that
name) of the fathers, he may alſo erre in iudgement.
            
               Liberius a pope,Liberius. Hieron, in cron. did not only conſent to the condemnation
of Athanaſius, that great learned and catholike father, as many
ancient hiſtories doe report, and our aduerſaries deny not, but
alſo did communicate with two notable Atrian heretikes, which
was a great offence to the godly, and an incouraging of thoſe
heretikes. But maiſter Bellarmine anſwereth that neither he
taught any hereſy,Lib. 4. de Pontif. Rom. cap. 9. or was an heretike. The queſtion is, whether
the pope may er or not. Now our aduerſaries draw vs from the
queſtiō,The papiſts anſwere not directly to the queſtion whether the pope may erre. not anſwering whether Liberius did erre or not, but they
tell vs that he was no heretike, and that he taught no hereſie.
And admit he did neither of theſe two, I meane that he neither
became an heretike, neither yet taught hereſie: yet he may erre.
Yea Liberius did fouly erre, in that externall action, whereby our
aduerſaries confeſſe that he conſented to the baniſhment of Athanaſius,
               Bellar. de Rom. Pontif, li. 4. ca. 9.
and in communicating with thoſe two Arrians Valence
Viſacius, and by help of Arrians get again to be biſhop of
Rome, depoſing Felix. For to er is to wander or go out of the
right way, whether it be for ignorance or feare, or through any
other affection, he that ſteppeth aſide doth erre. And becauſe this
giueth great light, to al that is to be ſaid of this queſtion: it ſhal
not be amiſſe ſomewhat more throughly to conſider of the ſame.
Firſt you ſee that whereas their doctrine is briefly deliuered that
the pope cannot erre: they wil haue it thus to be vnderſtooed, the
pope cannot be an heretike, that is, he cannot continue obſtinatly
in hereſie, nor he cannot teach hereſie, when he giueth generall
precepts that ſhould belong to the whole church. For that is
the meaning both of Melchior Canus, in his Theological places,Lib. 6. cap. 8.
and of maiſter Bellarmine in this place before alleadged.
The intent alſo of their doctrine, is to commend vnto vs that
their Italian head, as a fit head, for to guide the vniuerſal church,
and able to be ahead to the whole body.
            Nowe therefore let vs ſee how well their doctrine, and their
meaning agree together. For the head of the church ſhould be
ſuch, as ſhould in nothing, no not for a time leade the body of the

church awry. But the church may be led into many fooliſh opinions,
ſtrange conceites,The difference betweene errour and hereſie. De ciuit. dei Li. 18. cap. 51. and dangerous doctrines euen by ſuch
as cannot be called heretikes. For an heretike is he (as Saint
Auguſtine telleth vs) that being of any euill and corrupt opinion
in the church, and being reproued, or moniſhed to amend,
reſiſteth ſtubbornly, and will not reforme his contagious and perilous
doctrines, but defendeth the ſame, and is drawen to deuiſe
or follow ſuch opinions, for his own profit, eſpecially for his own
glory, and to aduance himſelfe.
            Now who ſeeth not, that a man in place of credite and authoritie,
as the biſhop of Rome hath beene (by ſuch bad means
as he hath vſed theſe many yeares, may wonderfully indamage
and indanger the church of God, before any body wil or dare reprooue
him, for any opinions that he will holde? And when he
is found fault withall (as he muſt be before they can count him
an heretike) how many ſubtile ſhifts can euil men haue, to continue
a long time in their wicked opinions, without reuoking
the ſame, or reforming themſelues, and yet to auoide the danger
of being accounted ſtubborne or obſtinate. The Pelagians
againſt whom ſaint Auguſtine writeth many bookes did turne
many waies their lewd opinions,Contra 2 Epiſt. Pelag. l. 4. 5. 6. changed often (in ſome ſhewe
of words) their poſitions, and did adde (as by reaſon they were
forced, and by arguments compelled) ſome ſuch wordes vnto
their errours, as that thereby they might auoide the note of
contumacy, and deceiue the more vnder a ſhew of truth, as may
appeare by ſaint Auguſtine, who confeſſeth plainly, that if their
meaning were not knowen to be euill, their wordes could well
enough haue beene borne withall. Admit then that a biſhop of
Rome, being of ſuch abſolute authority as now they are, could
as cunningly as did the Pelagians, couer and cloake an hereſie.
Might not he be an heretike many yeares, before he would be
driuen to recant? And might not he then by ſuch meanes, bring
irreparable hurt to the church of God?
            Thus we ſee, that as by this doctrine that the pope cannot
erre, they goe about to aſſure vs, that the head which they haue
ſet ouer the church, cānot deceiue vs, if we wil be lead by him: ſo
their interpretation of that their poſition, argueth in them great
doubtfulnes, & yt they dare not defend their own fayings, vnleſſe

they may expound their words after this manner, that the pope
cannot erre, that is he cannot obſtinately or ſtubbornly teach (as
a doctrine to be receiued of the whole church) any hereſie. And
I pray you what ſafety can the godly finde in following ſuch a
head,A ſimilitude. as when he hath guided them into many errours, yet he
will not ſtubbornly ſtand in defence of them? Such may wel be
compared to ſouldiers, that by the raſh leading of an vnſkilfull
captaine are brought into the hands of their enemies, and when
the captaine ſeeth his folly, he would faine mend it if he coulde,
and is ſory for that he hath done.
            But what helpeth this his late repentance, the diſtreſſed ſouldiers?
nothing at all. Euen ſo that the biſhop of Rome cannot
continue in his errour (if it were true that he had ſome ſuch priuiledge)
it might be good for himſelfe: But ſuch a head is for others
very dangerous, becauſe y• not all they who are ſeduced by
ſuch mens inſtruction or example, are alſo reduced by their recantation
or amendment, as appeareth by multitudes of examples.
And ſo we ſee that this their interpretation ſtandeth not
with either their common receiued doctrine, or with their intent
and meaning which is to promiſe ſafety from errour, vnto them
that receiue that head. Whereas in truth their meaning is to
tell vs that the pope may be of a wrong iudgement, but if he be
much vrged he cannot be obſtinate, he wil not ſtand to it. And
whereas they defend,Bellar. de Rom. Pontif. li. 4. c. 3. that the pope cannot teach hereſie as a doctrine
publikely to be receiued, in ſome reſpect I thinke it to be
moſt true.Popes no teachers. For ſeldome or neuer are there any popes, that can
teach either truth or hereſie. They cannot preach, they cannot
with wholeſome doctrine feede their flocke, they cannot deuide
the foode of life, and breake the bread of the word, vnto Gods
houſhold ſeruants. For want of knowledge, they cannot of
themſelues doe much either in defence of truth, or to maintaine
errour. But this expoſition will not pleaſe them. They haue
another meaning. For when they tell vs, that the pope cannot
be an heretike, when he teacheth the whole church, their meaning
is plaine enough, that in particular iudgements they may
erre, but not in their generall decrees, or preachings or inſtructions.
Which they are forced to ſay, for the auoiding of ſuch inconueniences,
as might growe by defending the doing of many

of their popes. But if popes may be charged with hereſie, how
can we thinke but that in their talke,Popes doings or ſayings may be hurtful to many. in their ſermons (if they
did preach,) and vpon all ſuch occaſions as were offered vnto
them, they would by foure means or other, commend that which
they liked of, and condemne the contrary? And their very words
when they ſpeake of matters of faith, are indeede inſtructions to
all: and their examples alſo, are publike inſtructions to y• whole
church. Neither muſt we imagine that thoſe (holy fathers forſooth)
had one religion in ſecret, and an other that they would
publiſh. Therefore if we proue that they did erre, I truſt alſo it
will followe, that this errour was a ſtumbling blocke to the
church, and that they may erre when they giue leſſons to all the
church.
            Laſtly let vs conſider the foundation whereupon they raiſe
this building.Luke 22. 31. 32. Becauſe Chriſt ſaid vnto Peter, Simon Simon.
behold Sathan hath deſired to ſift you as wheat. But I haue
praied for thee that thy faith ſhould not faile. To whom was
this ſaid? To Peter, although not to him alone, as before out
of Theophilact I haue ſhewed. But Peter immediatly after
erred,Peter after this prayer erred. Matth. 26, 74. ſo as that he thriſe denied his maiſter, as Saint Luke in
the ſame chapter ſheweth, yea and that as Saint Matthew reporteth,
with curſing and ſwearing. Whereby it moſt plainly
appeareth, that Chriſt did not pray that Peter or the reſt of the
apoſtles, ſhould be free from all infirmities, and ſhould as it
were put of the nature of man, but that finally he or they, ſhould
not fall from the faith. But I cannot but maruell here at maiſter
Bellarmine, that he cannot ſee that Peters faith at this time
failed.De Rom. pontif. li. 4. cap. 3. For euen handling theſe words, and this fact of Peters,
we know not ſaith he, that Peters faith euer failed. He feared
at the queſtion which the damoſell aſked of him,Whether Peters faith failed. he denied his
maſter, and that with curſing and ſwearing. Did he this for
feare? No doubt he did it for feare. What was the cauſe of ſo
great feare?Matth. 14. 31. Was it not weakneſſe and want of faith? Had he
litle faith, when hee feared drowning, in ſo much as Chriſt reprouing
him ſaid, O thou of litle faith why diddeſt thou doubt?
And can maſter Bellarmine find no want of faith, in his ſo exceſſiue
feare, that he forſwore his maſter? Peter therefore notwithſtanding
Chriſts prayer both could and did erre. And ſhall

we thinke the pope to be more holy, of a more ſanctified nature,
of a ſounder iudgement, then Peter was? They will not
ſo ſay themſelues, therefore they alſo may erre. But for maſter
Bellarmines ſubtill diſtinction,Lib. 4. cap. 3. betweene perſeuerance and not
failing, making not failing and not falling all one, but perſeuerance
to be ſuch, as that a man may fall, and yet by riſing againe,
is ſaid ſtill to perſeuere: I confeſſe it is more ſubtil, then
ſound. For perſeuering and continuing is all one, and continuance
hath no ceaſing or intermiſſion.
            And further I muſt put the godly reader in remēbrance, that
if this were granted to Peter, that the pope doth claime, that he
could not erre: yet muſt he proue himſelfe to be Peters ſucceſſor,
and that the priuilege is alſo ſucceſſiue, to that ſeat, before he cā
by theſe wordes prooue his infallible iudgement. And what they
can do for theſe points, I haue ſhewed before their great weaknes,Many popes haue erred. Honorius.
if it be but weaknes, in ſo great light and ſunſhine of truth,
not to ſee y• right way. I omit of purpoſe many popes to whom

                  •
               rrour is imputed by ſome ancient hiſtories. I come to Honorius
of whome it is written by many hiſtories that he was a Monothelite,
whoſe hereſie was, that Chriſt God and man had but
one will.
            And to omitte all the ancient Records,Lib. 6. cap. 8. that may be aleadged
to prooue him ſo to be, I reſt ſpecially vpon Melchior
Canus his confeſſion in his theologicall places, and one proofe
vrged by him amongſt many others. For hee doth not onely
acknowledge Honorius to bee an hereticke, but alſo telleth
vs, how Adrian the ſecond, in the firſt action of the eighth generall
councill, confeſſeth that Honorius was by the Greeke
church condemned as a hereticke, and that Agathe biſhop of
Rome, conſented vnto the ſame his condemnation. In which
argument although maſter Bellarmine
               Lib. 4. cap. 11. deſſent vtterly from
Melchior Canus, yet hee is not any thing able to take away
the waight of that reaſon, but that Honorius although a pope,
muſt be pronounced, and holden for an hereticke, euen by the detree
of a generall councill.
            What ſhould I ſpeake of the errour that was moſt apparent
in thoſe ſeditious popes Steuen the ſixth,The errour of Steuen and other Popes. and Sergius the third,
againſt Formoſus another pope, now long dead. And againſt

the dooings and decrees of pope Theodore, and Iohn the tenth.
Steuen reuoked whatſoeuer Formoſus had done vp a councill
called belike for that purpoſe, Iohn the tenth afterwards maketh
good the dooings of Formoſus, diſamulling that that
Steuen did, yea, their 
                  ••
               ntention was ſo great, that they
commaunded ſuch as had taken orders of one, that they ſhould
(as if theſe firſt orders were nothing worth) take orders of another.
            Theſe thinges are reported by all hiſtories, and therefore
are alſo confeſſed of themſelues, that are our aduerſaries. If
pope Formoſus did not erre, then Steuen that d
                  ••
               lt ſo hardly
with him, and ſo diſannulled his dooings and decrees, did
erre. If Steuen did right, then Iohn who afterwardes vndid
all that he had done, did wrong. Yea they diſannulled the
very orders that the popes that were their aduerſaries had giuen.
Which thing maiſter Bellarmine in his fourth Booke
and twelfth chapter confeſſeth to be a matter of faith. Therefore
heere the pope erred in faith. No (ſaith he) this is onely
a matter of fact, it is not decreed by any of them. Let vs
marke out queſtion, that is, whether the Pope may erre or
not.
            Maiſter Bellarmine ſaieth, theſe Popes did wrong, but
they decreed nothing of diſanulling thoſe orders, which men
booke of their predeceſſours, and therefore erred not in iudgement.
Sigebert ſaieth, that Steuen decreed,Sigebere, chron. that Formoſus
his ordinations were or ſhould be voyne.Plat. in Iohn 10. 
               Platina ſaieth, that
Iohn the tenth iudged amiſſe, becauſe hee iudged that they
muſt take orders againe, that did take orders of Formoſus. So
Iacob Bergomenſis and Stella, agree with Platina. Theſe
therefore condemne Steuen the ſixt to erre 
                  〈◊〉
                iudgement, and
ſo doe manifeſtly 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ that the pope did erre, and confute
maiſter Bellarmine his anſwere to this obiection. Iohn the
two and 
                  〈◊〉
                pope of that name did not beleeue onely, but
euen teach, that the ſoules ſhould not ſee God before the latter
day, as maſter Bellarmine himſelf confeſſeth. But it was (ſaith
he) no hereſie in him ſo to teach,Lib. 4. cap. 14. What is hereſ
                     ••
                   in the church of Rome. becauſe there was not then anie
decree or deſtinction of the church for that point: If it true maſter
Bellarm
                     ••
                  
                
               
                  〈…〉
                hereſie 
                  〈…〉
                not defined it?

A thing defined in the ſcriptures, ſet downe in Gods word, and
plainly taught in Gods booke, may (I perceiue) by the doctrine
of the church of Rome, be gainſaide without danger of hereſie, ſo
long as man hath not approued the ſame.
            The leſſons (I perceiue) that God teacheth vs, muſt not bee
counted the doctrines of the church, vntill the biſhop of Rome,
or ſome councill haue ſet downe ſome order therein. Well howſoeuer
the wiſe maiſters of Rome will define what ſhall be hereſie,
yet I truſt they will graunt that hee erred in iudgement, becauſe
he taught then, that which not only the ſcriptures gaineſay,
but euen the papiſtes themſelues will confeſſe to be erronious.
            But what ſhould I ſtand in particular examples?Canus. lib. 6. c 8. Arg. 4. that the pope may erre. If it bee
true that both Melchior Canus and Bellarmine confeſſe, eſpecially
Canus, that both the ſeuenth and the eight ſinodes did condemne
as an hereticke Honorius the pope, doth it not appeare
manifeſtly thereby, that they made no doubt, whether a pope
might erre or not? It is not a queſtion amongſt them, they heare
of his doctrine, they condemne it as erronious. Neither did
Formoſus his friends vſe any ſuch argument, to hinder Steuen
his cruell dealings againſt Formoſus, or Steuens friends to mitigate
the rage of Iohn the tenth againſt Steuen, they ſaide not
thus, Formoſus was a pope, and Steuen was a pope, they cannot
erre. No it is a doctrine of later growth, and of a newer
ſtamp.
            Maiſter Bellarmine anſwereth that thoſe two councels that
are before mentioned,Lib. 4. cap. 11. Lib. 4. cap. 6. Bellar, anſwere again 
                     •
                  his owne doctrine. did thinke that the pope as a priuate man
might erre. Wherein although he conſent not with himſelfe,
who thinketh that he cannot erre as before I ſaid: yet would he
thereby if he could, take away the ſtrength of the argument. But
he laboureth all in vaine, for how doth it appeare that the councels
thought of any ſuch matter. There is no ſhew, no likelihoode
of it.Bellar. chargeth the fathers with vniuſt dealing. No wordes to induce him ſo to thinke. As for
that which he ſaith of Honorius his letters, that they condemned
him of hereſie becauſe of that which they found in his letters. I
maruell maiſter Bellarmine hath ſo ſoone forgotten himſelfe as
to alleadge it. Seeing himſelfe in the beginning of the eleuenth
chapter, doth firſt doubt of the credit of thoſe letters, and ſecondlie

he denieth that any error is in the ſame contained. Doeth
maiſter Bellarmine thinke the fathers of thoſe councels, to haue
beene ſo ſimple, that they could not iudge of Honorius his writings,
whether they were hereticall or not, aſwell as himſelfe?
Or will he imagine that they were ſo raſh, that they would condemne
him without cauſe? If he in his epiſtles had no errour, as
maiſter Bellarmine affirmeth almoſt in the beginning of his eleuenth
chapter, why doth he heere affirme, that for his epiſtles,
and the hereſies which therein he maintained, he was condemned
of thoſe councels? If he were an hereticke as by very many teſtimonies
it doth appeare, why doth maiſter Bellarmine ſeeke ſo to
free him from that fault, and to take from him that ſtaine? Euen
becauſe he would (as wel as he can) defend that moſt vntrue
doctrine of the church of Rome, that the pope cannot erre.Arg. 5. that the pope may erre. Si papa. diſt. 40. And
yet their owne law ſuppoſeth that the pope may erre, and confeſſeth
that for hereſie he may be reproued. But in this, as almoſt
in euery point wherein they diſſent from vs, they ſhew how little
they are in deed, according to their name, that they woulde faine
be called by. For they call themſelues catholickes, as if the doctrine
that they teach, or beleeue were catholicke, that is vniuerſ
                  •
               allie
receiued.The difference in opinion amongſt papiſs. Bellar. de Rom. pontif. lib. 4. ca. 2. And yet in this controuerſie they are not agreed
how to defend it, or what to ſay of it. Gerſon of Paris,
Almain Alphonſus all of them papiſtes, and pope Adrian the
ſixt himſelfe, are of one mind, Albert Pighius an other papiſt of
an other.
            
               Bellarmine and his maiſters make a third ſect. And yet theſe
men reproue vs for difference in opinion, bragge of their owne vnity,
and muſt needs be thought to haue a catholike faith. But to
conclude ſeeing the giftes of the ſpirite whether of ſanctification
or of truth, are giuen vnto men according to meaſure,The concluſion of this point whether the pope may erre, Iohn, 3. 34. and not in
fulnes (for to Chriſt only God giueth the ſpirite not by meaſure,
and therefore he ſpeaketh (without errour) Gods words: ſeeing
that pope Adrian the ſixt, hath aſſured vs that popes may erre,
and we haue it plainely recorded in their owne hiſtories, and confeſſed
by many of themſelues, that they haue erred: laſtly ſeeing
they haue been, euen by councils condemned of hereſie, and their
owne lawe prouideth and taketh order for popes that doe erre,
and the Church of Rome is not yet reſolued, how to defend the

cantrarie: we may I truſt hauing ſo good warant, euen from
their owne frends, without any note of hereſie affirme, that
popes may erre. Yea what is there in them but errour? They
wander out of the wayes of truth and of godlineſſe. So that
in that accurſed companie, we may ſee that to be moſt true, that
where there is a boundance of ſinne, there God iuſtly may, and
often times in his iudgements doth, caſt ſuch into the deepth of
errour, that they who had no deſire to liue according to the light,
that did ſhine vnto them, in ſeruing the Lord in true holineſſe,
ſhould be caſt into the dungeon of ignorance, as vnworthie to
inioy that light which they ſo vnthankefully refuſed, of that
grace which they ſo wickedly abuſed. The matter then being
thus, that neither Peter had any ſuch iuriſdiction ouer the
whole church, as is claimed by the church of Rome: neither
if he had it, he could, or (for any euidence that yet is ſhewed)
he did bequeathe it to the Romiſh church, and laſtly ſeeing
that church if any ſuch priuiledge, had beene lawfully to her deuolued,
hath committed ſuch things, as would haue forfeted
a better right, then euer ſhee had in that vniuerſall authoritie:
it doth (I truſt) appeare to the indifferent Reader,
that their claime is vniuſt, their title falſe, and that they haue
no colour of intereſt from Chriſt, whoſe ouely poſſeſſion that
is, that they would haue. But it is no new thing in the church
of Rome, to bring in falſe euidence to prooue a forged claime.Concil. Carthaginenſ. 6.
They did ſo in the council of Carthage when by vntrue copies
of the council of Nice they ſought the ſoueraignty ouer all other
churches. For Alipius a biſhop in that council affirmeth
twiſe that they could not find in the decrees of the Nicen councill
any ſuch thing as they aleaged,Cap. 4 for the authoritie of the
Biſhop of Rome. Nouatus alſo another biſhop ſaith, we reade
no ſuch thing in the Nicen councill.Cap. 6 The fathers therefore of
that council did decree, that meſſengers ſhould be ſent to Conſtantinople,
Alexandria and Antioch as Alipius had inoued
them to get the true copies.Cap. 4 Epiſt. concil. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ad Bonif. For they hauing read many bookes
of the council of Nice, yet could neuer read in any latine, or
yet in any Greeke copies that they had, that which the biſhop of
Rome his legat did alleage. To trie the truth therfore, they ſent
and ſought, that they might get the true copies of that Nicen

council from thoſe places, making no doubt, but if thoſe copies
did agree which came from thence, they muſt be moſt true, as
they all acknowledge writing to pope Boniface. When the copies
came, they could finde no ſuch thing. Is it not then very
plaine that the Biſhop of Rome his legate vſed falſe writings,
for proofe of a bad cauſe?
            But maiſter Bellarmine telleth vs that Saint Auguſtine
and all they of they council miſtooke the matter,De Rom. Pontif. Lib. 2 cap. 25. being deceaued
by ignorance, becauſe they knew not what the council of Sardis
did ſet downe concerning that point. The queſtion is whether
the council of Nice did giue ſuperiority ouer all other to the biſhop
of Rome, as his legates did affirme? And it is moſt plaine
that it did not. And therefore that which is in the councill of
Sardis, (which if we ſhall beleeue the booke of councils, ſet
forth by Peter Crab a frier and a papiſt, was at the leaſt fortie
yeares after the councill of Nice) it maketh nothing to iuſtifie
them,The council of Sardis cannot be alleadged for the Nicen. and excuſe their falſehoode, that for the decrees of the
Nicen council, doe alleadge that which was ordained in that
council of Sardis.
            And of that council of Sardis, it may truly be ſaid, as in the
Lateran council, or at the leaſt in the Tripartit worke added vnto
it,Lib. 3. cap. 10. complaint is made, that now adaies it is harde to finde
either olde or newe councils, inſomuch as the authour doth
there maruell, that the church of Rome hath beene ſo negligent
in that pointe, as not to take order for the better keeping
of them.
            
               Auguſtine writeth of that council of Sardis that is was an
Arrian council,Contra Creſco, lib. 3. cap. 34. holden againſt Athanaſius. The time alſo when
it was kept is very vncertaine. Yea almoſt al the circumſtances
argue great doubtfulnes of that council. They that write the
ſtory of that council, doe write thereof ſo diuerſly, both for the
number of biſhops aſſembled there, and alſo concerning the Arrians
being there, which ſome affirme, ſome deny, that therby we
may learn how little credit is to be giuen to it, for to ground any
vncertain or doubtful doctrine vpon, y• it might haue credit. But
that which maiſter Bel. doth afterwards ſay, is yet more abſurd.
For hauing affirmed that he is indeed perſwaded, that theſe canons
(which the church of Rome alleadgeth for her ſupremacy.)

are not in the Nicen couecil, but onely in that of Sardis, yet he
thinketh that Zozimus and Boniface two biſhops of Rome, did
therefore name them the decrees of the Nicen council, becauſe
they were both written together in a booke at Rome,Whether that booke at Rome may by likelihoode be truer than the bookes of the Greeke church. the ignoraunce
whereof did much trouble the fathers as he ſaith. Can
maſter Bellarmine ſuppoſe that thoſe fathers, whoſe earneſt indeuour
was at that time to keepe the decrees of the councill of
Nicen, were ignorant what was to be accounted of that council,
or what articles belonged to the ſame? Or is it likely that
the copies of the councill of Nice ſhoulde bee more perfect at
Rome ſo many hundreds of miles diſtant from Nice, then at
Conſtantinople which is hard by it, or at Antioch or Alexandria
not ſo far diſtant from it? Or doth he thinke it reaſon,
that one Romiſh and another vnknowen copie, writen perchance
with that councill of Nice, by ſome that ſought thereby to
increaſe the dignitie of the church of Rome, of ſet purpoſe to
bring it to that credit, that it ſhould be accounted as parcel of
the council of Nice: can he I ſay thinke it reaſon that thoſe two
copies ſhould correct and control, ſo many of better credit by a
great deale, then they are. No, theſe are but ſhifts to blind
mens eies, and indeede but bables for fooles to play withall.
Maſter Bellarmine doth alſo labour in this place very earneſtly
to prooue that the council had many decrees moe then thoſe that
are in the firſt tome of councils ſet forth by Peter Crab, or ſpoken
of by Ruff
                     •
                  nus. To what end is all this? Forſooth to excuſe
his holy fathers, that they ſhould not be thought to giue
counters for gold, or lead for ſiluer. But how can hee excuſe
them,Conc. Nicen. c. 6. for that they added to the begining of the ſixt canon,
that the church of Rome hath alwaies had the ſupremacie, in
which falſe tricke Paſchaſinus Legate vnto the Biſhop of
Rome,Act. 16. was taken in the council of Chalcedon? For it is not
the tranſlation out of Greeke of Dionyſe an Abbat, almoſt
three hundred yeares after that council was kept, that Alan
Cope ſpeaketh of, and maſter Bellarmine before hath aleaged
for his defence,Li. 2. cap. 13. that can haue credit againſt ſo many authenticall
copyes, ſo diligently ſought and ſent for, ſo carefully examined
by ſo many hundreds of learned men, and ſo faithfully
deliuered for diſcuſſing euen of this controuerſie: for Paſchaſinus
               
hauing alleadged in that councill of Chalcedon for his
maiſter the Biſhoppe of Rome the wordes before mentioned,The popes legate taken with falſifying.
was by thoſe copies diſprooued. And whereas maiſter
Bellarmine doth ſet downe this as the intent of the Biſhop of
Rome in the Councill of Carthage,Li. 2. cap. 25. that he meant to ſhew, that
not onely all men might appeale to him, but alſo that it were
expedient for the church, that ſo they ſhould do. Marke how directly
the councill of Carthage doeth oppoſe it ſelfe againſt the
Pope therein, in their epiſtle which hath this title, The Epiſtle
of the Affrican Council to pope Celeſtine biſhop of the
citie of Rome.
               Conc. Afric. cap. 5 For, whereas maſter Bellarmine did confeſſe
that the cauſes of inferiour miniſters might be heard at home,
but Biſhops muſt be heard at Rome: this councill in this epiſtle
ſaith directly contrary,No appeales to the pope. vſing it as an argument from the
leſſe to the greater: If (ſay they) the cauſes of inferior clarks
by the councill of Nice are prouided for, how much more is it
ordered then, that biſhops if they be excommunicate in their prouince,
ſhall not of your Holineſſe be haſtily, or raſhly, or againſt
order thought to be reſtored to the communion? Thy will him
to baniſh from him, ſuch as ſeeke ſuch wicked refuges, becauſe
(ſay they) the Nicene decrees haue plainely committed, not inferiour
clarkes onely, but alſo the Biſhops to their metropolitanes.
They aſſure themſelues, that no prouince ſhall want
the grace of Gods ſpirit, to order theſe things. And that euerie
man may, if he miſlike of the iudgement of them that haue heard
his cauſe, appeale to a councill either prouinciall, or generall
(no wordes of appealing to the pope.) Unleſſe a man will imagine
(ſay they) that God will grant his ſpirite of triall of matters
to euery one, and deny it to all aſſembled in a Councill.
And further, they alleadge that the trueth of matters examined
farre from home, can hardly be found out, by reaſon that witneſſes
can not well be carried ſo farre. For, as for the legates
à latere that ſhould come from the popes ſide, for examination
of ſuch matters, they vtterly miſlike, as a thing not to be found
in any of the ſynods of the fathers.
            Thus we ſee, that in as plaine termes as they can deuiſe, this
Councill doeth oppoſe themſelues to that which the Biſhop of
Rome did ſeeke to obtaine. And thus it appeareth, how vntruely

the church of Rome hath delt very long ſince, to exalt her
ſelfe aboue others, and to maintaine her owne pride. And how
ſhee hath in the times of thoſe learned fathers, beene bridled in
their councils. Wherein they haue ſet downe lawes, to mitigate
and keepe vnder their immoderate affections, how ſoeuer
they would ſometimes write or ſpeake of them, or to them that
were biſhops of Rome for the peace of the church, and the reuerence
of the perſons being men often times indued with very
good gifts, and ſuch as by their acquaintance and credit, being
in the imperiall citie, did helpe many that were diſtreſſed.
            Now therefore let vs yeld that honour to him onely whome
God hath ſealed,Iohn 6. 27. eph. 1 22. matth. 17. 5. 1. pet. 2. 25. that he be acknowledged the head of his church,
the lawe maker to his people, the ſheapheard to his flocke. Let
vs receaue no other vicar to ſnpply his roome,Ioh. 14. 16, 17. but that ſpirit of
truth which God our gracious father ſhall giue, and which ſhall
abide with vs for euer. But as for them, that without any good
warrant of Gods word, or ſufficient calling from God, claime
to be as kings, and loue to liue as lords ouer Gods heritage,
deteſt them as the proud off-ſpring of Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
               1. Pet. 5 3. 1. Sam. 2. Num. 16. 2.
or rather as the wicked ſonnes of Ely that did as themſelues
would: yea as men that are enemies to Gods lawes, vſurpers
of Chriſts office, deſpiſers of all authoritie, abuſers of
all maieſtie, and therefore moſt perillous plagnes to chriſtian
princes. And thus much to examine how iuſt a title the
pope hath, or how iuſt a claime he may make,
to be ſupreame head of the
Church.
         
         
            
            The ſecond part of the
Suruey of the Popes Supremacie,
which is, a proofe
of his Practiſes.
            
               NOw that it plainly appeareth in the firſt
part of this Treatiſe, to them that doe
not wincke with their eyes againſt the
trueth, that this Supremacie that the
Biſhop of Rome moſt prowdely abuſeth,
hath not any ground in the worde
of God, as is ſeene, partely by the
weakeneſſe of their owne arguments,
and partly becauſe the fathers being aſſembled together in their
generall councils, ſome of them more then foure hundred and
fiftie yeares after Chriſt haue taught vs the contrarie: it is neceſſary
for the better vnderſtanding of this matter, yea for the
more deteſtation of their vniuſt authoritie, that ſomething bee
ſaid of the ſecond part of this Treatiſe, which is a proofe or examination
of the popes practiſes. But herein I muſt conſider
of two pointes. Firſt, how, and by what meanes, they got vnto
that high eſtate wherein nowe they are. Secondly, after
what manner they haue vſed themſelues in the ſame. In fewe
wordes how they haue ruled. And becauſe the church of Rome
was not ſodainely, or in one inſtant aduanced to this place of exceſſiue
pride and inſatiable ambition, wherein ſhe now challengeth

rule and dominion, ouer al that profeſſe chriſtianitie: it wil
not be amiſſe, but a thing very pertinent to this my purpoſe, to
ſee by what ſteps the pope hath come to ſuch height, & by what
practiſes, he hath attained to ſuch honour. Whereas therefore
the godly fathers of the primitiue church, did many times ſtand
in neede of the help or counſel,Helping the diſtreſſed churches in their neede. or comfort, of the good Biſhops
of Rome, that were in their times, and as occaſions fell out,
were forced ſomtimes to flee to them for ſuccor, who alſo found
reliefe at their hands very often: the ages ſucceeding, did interpret
this charitable affection, and performance of chriſtian duety
in theſe godly Biſhops of Rome, to be not ſo much tokens of
the loue towards all, as of their power ouer all. And yet a man
may be as good as he will to them, ouer whom he hath no power
at al. Although therefore we neither can nor will deny, that
which the Author of the Apologie for the Engliſh Seminaries
doth ſo confidently pronounce, that the famous fathers called
for aide, comfort, and counſell in their diſtreſſes of the biſhop of
Rome: yet iuſtly we may, and for the true
                  •
               hs ſake, we muſt affirme,
that this ſeeking for theſe cauſes to the biſhop of Rome
doth not prooue him to haue authoritie ouer all, but onely that
at ſuch times, he had better meanes to helpe the diſtreſſed then
they that ſought vnto him, had to releeue themſelues. But many
times the godly are forced to flie for aide (as theſe men did
whom the Apology nameth) as Cypr. Atha. Chryſ. Aug. Baſil,
Ierom, Miletius & Theod. to men worſe thē themſelues as Iacob
to Laban, from the wrath of Eſau, and Dauid to the Philiſtins,
to auoide Sa
                     ••
                  s rage, and Ioſeph with Chriſt, to eſcape
the bloudy hands of Herod, went into Egypt.Gen. 28. 1. Sam. 21. 10. Matth. 2. 14. But if any man
deſire more particularly to be informed, in ye ſpecial cauſes that
moued theſe godly men, to make ſute to the B. of Rome, let him
reade that learned anſwer, that Bilſon hath made vnto the ſaid
apologie, & he is too wilfull, if he be not ſatiſfied for this point.
Now ſome B. of Rome, though otherwiſe good men, were pufe
vp with ſome prowd conceit of their authoritie, when they ſaw
ſuch famous and godly men, were driuen to ſeeke for their help,
as it may appeare by their owne words, if they be their words,
which go abroad in their name, for their Epiſtles and decrees.
As Damaſus in his fourth epiſtle, writing vnto proſper the B.

of the firſt ſeat in Numidia,Concil. Tom. 1. and other biſhops, commendeth thē,
that in all matters that may be doubtfull, they refer themſelues
to him,Ad Hemerium Terracon. epum. Concil. Tom. 1. as to the head, to giue them anſwere. And it is no great
maruell though Damaſus woulde write or ſpeake much for the
dignity of his place, for comming to the which he did ſtriue, euen
to the death of a great number of chriſtians.Decret. Innocen. Tom. 1. Concil. 
               Siricius then commeth
next after him, who taketh vpon him to threaten to pronounce
ſentence againſt ſuch, as wil do otherwiſe then he would
haue them. And Innocentius writing to the biſhops of macedony,
findeth himſelfe grieued, and thinketh that that church of
Rome, to which he telleth them they ſhoulde haue regard, as to
their head, is wronged becauſe they did not at the firſt, yeelde to
his iudgement. The like might be ſaid of many other of them.
Whereby appeareth, that they who at the firſt were intreated by
ſome godly men, by ſuch means as God had giuen them to help
them in their need, at the length tooke vpon them to commaund
others, to ſtand to their orders and decrees. Inſomuch as they
alſo gaue out their decrees, which they would binde al to obſerue
as partly appeareth in Siricius and Innocentius, and partly alſo
in others, it will be more plaine.Epiſt. ad Hefich, Tom. Concil. 
                     •
                  . It ſauoureth of too great an
arroga
                  ••
               y, that Zoſimus another pope threatneth ſeuerity, if any
deſpiſe the apoſtolike authority. So did Leo, ſo did pope a afterward.
What ſhould I ſeeke to ſpeak of euery one, their own
decrees and decrxtals, do ſufficently beare witnes that within a
ſhort time they were become ſo imperious ouer others, that they
would not leaue men (farre better and more holy then themſelues,
and better able to direct thoſe biſhops of Rome, then the
B. were to aduiſe them) ſuch I ſay they would not leaue to their
own liberty in any thing, but for euery thing, euen the leaſt matters
that were, they muſt follow the direction of that church of
Rome, & muſt haue a decree for it. Which bondage greater then
that of Egypt,Their bu
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of mens 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ences. howe miſerable a ſlauery it was, let the worlde
iudge, whē a man might iuſtly doubt of euery thing that he did,
& haue ſome ſcruple of cōſcience in al things. For by this means
it came to paſſe, (that the number of their ordinaunces being almoſt
infinite) men ſhould alwaies be in danger to breake ſome of
them. Which was then a means to get them authority, & afterwards
occaſion of great gaine.
            
               
And thus we ſee two ſteppes laide, to help them vp to this their
deſired honour. The one is a voluntary ſubmitting to them for
aide,The two firſt ſteps to the popes ſupremacy. councill, and comfort. The ſecond, a forcible ſubiecting of
others to them, by decrees, and commandements. But yet they
could not get so high by far as they did looke, or at the leaſt ſo
farre as now they haue climed. For as in more then 300. yeares
whileſt they were in perſecution, they had no ſuch proud hearts
for any thing that we can read in any credible authors:) ſo for almoſt
300. yeares more, they did but feede themſelues in their
own honour, and got what credit and authority they coulde by
their own deuiſes and pollicies. Howbeit they could not get any
vniuerſal or general conſent of other biſhops, to giue them that
authoritie.
            But contrary wiſe not onely ſome councils as that which is
called Mileuitanum and that ſixt of Carthage,
               Conncils againſt ſupremacy. and that other of
Chalcedon, did ſtiffely withſtand him therein, but alſo the biſhop
or patriarch of Conſtantinople, who in ye council of Chalcedon,
was made of equal authority with the biſhop of Rome,
did earneſtly ſtriue to get the ſupremacy,Conſtantinople ſtroue for it. ouer Rome and all others.
And by al likelihood he had preuailed, if Mauritius the
the Emperour, (who as ſome ſtories report tooke part with the
patriarch of Conſtantinople) had not beene cut of cruelly, by
Phocas that did ſucceede him in the empire. So that hereby the
pride of the biſhops of Rome was ſomewhat hindered, and this
authority which nowe he claimeth was almoſt taken from him.
And he that ſoone after, did write himſelfe vniuerſall biſhop, or
rather biſhop of the vniuerſal church, and head of the church,
had almoſt beene ſubiect to the patriarch of Conſtantinople.
So that in good time did the popes thinke, that that vnnaturall
and ſauage bloud ſheader Phocas, did cut his maiſters throate:
ſeeing that by Phocas his meanes,Ph
                     ••
                  as his decre 
                     〈…〉
                  
                they got that ſupremacy decreed
on their ſide, that the biſhops of Rome ſhould be called and
counted, ſupreme heads of the church. So now this proud decree
of this cruel Emperour,The 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſtep vnto the popes ſupremacy. is the third ſtep vnto their intollerable
pride. The biſhop of Rome hauing thus gotten, ſome ſure footing
in this proud chaire, controlleth biſhops, calleth councils
which before the Emperour had wont to doe, and in all othe
ſuch things, doth ſhewe his authority, in his writings and letters,

for the moſt part calling himſelfe the head of the vniuerſal
church, ſtil creeping thus higher and higher, yet not openly but
couertly and by little and little: vntill at the length he got him a
fourth ſtep.The fourth ſtep. He depriueth the Emperour of hauing any thing to doe in the popes election. For hauing as much authority as he could yet ouer
biſhops, and that by the Emperours decree, he ſought to pull
his necke out of the coller, wherein the Emperour did hold him.
For he thought it was a burden to bee in ſuch ſubiection to the
Emperour, that vnleſſe he would confirme the election, he could
not be pope.
            Therefore whereas Conſtantine the fourth Emperour of
that name, being moued (as the ſtories report) by the godlineſſe
of Benedict the ſecond, biſhop of Rome ſo called, did ordaine
that he that was choſen pope, by the cleargy, people and army of
Romans, without any confirmation of the emperour or his lieutenant,
ſhould be accompted pope: whereas before it might not
be without the emperours leaue, who had, as alſo the kings of
France eſpecially, a chuſing voice in the electing of the pope, if
we wil beleeue a ſtory written by a Frier,Ioh Rioche compend. Hiſt, a faſt friend to the
church of Rome, called Rioche who wrote in our times: afterwards
the Emperours would haue reſumed their own right againe,
perchance becauſe that after Benedict they found none
ſuch, but ſome ſucceſſours of his, that behaued themſelues too
arrogantly and inſolently, againſt their Lorde and maiſter, but
they coulde by no meanes get it into their handes to keepe it,
though Leo the viii. and ſome other yeelded vnto him. For the
ſucceeding popes many of them did ſtil incroche more and more,
debarring the Emperour of his right in their election, vntill about
400. yeares after that the biſhops of Rome had gotten
this from the Emperour, Alexander the 2. pope not willing to
ſtriue againſt his maiſter,Benno a Card. of the life and acts of Hildebrand. did publikely proteſt in the pulpit,
that he would not be pope vnleſſe the Emperour woulde confirme
him, whereof he ſaid he would write vnto the Emperour.
When Hildebrand who was after pope and called Gregory
the ſeuenth heard this, hardly being able to hold his hands, whileſt
maſſe was in doing immediatly maſſe being ended, before
the pope could put of his maſſing garments, he taketh him into
a ſecret place, and buffeteth him well fauouredly, and tooke ſuch
order, that within a while Alexander the ſecond died, and made

roome for Hildebrand to ſit in his chaire. And this reward did
pope Gregory the ſeuenth, beſtow vpon his predeceſſour Alexander
the ſecond, becauſe he would reſtore to the emperour, that
which wrongfully they kept from him, and performe vnto him
ſome piece of duty. And yet they thought they were not high enough,
neither yet that this their authority was ſure enough vnto
them. And therefore they thought good to deuiſe ſome means
how this authority which already they had might be confirmed
to them, minding yet to mount higher, as God willing ſhall after
be declared.
            But to make ſure that they had done,The profe of the ſupremacy out of gods wo
                     •
                  d weake and ſuſpected. ſometimes they would
ſeeme to haue this authority from Chriſt. But their proofe is
nothing plaine, & although they alleadge ſome words of Chriſt
for proofe, yet, the apoſtles did neuer make any mention of anie
ſupremacy, the fathers of the firſt times, did neuer commende it
vnto vs, in the councils they ſeeme rather to fetch their authority
from the ordinance of man, then from Gods word. For
what meaneth it els, that the legates to the B. of Rome, both in
the councill of Carthage and Chalcedon, doe ſo earneſtly vrge
the decrees of the Nicen councill, if that which now they bring
out of Gods booke, had beene knowen to be ſufficient proofe of
the ſupremacy? What needed they ſo notoriouſly to falſifie the
council? What needed the fathers to take ſuch paines, and to be
at ſuch coſt, as to ſend for true copies of that council, to Conſtantinople,
Alexandria, and Antioche, to trie whether the fathers
in that council of Nice, had giuen ſuch power to the biſhop
of Rome, if in theſe words, To thee will I giue the keies
of the kingdome of heauen, Chriſt had promiſed, or in theſe, feed
my ſheepe. Chriſt had giuen, ſuch fulnes of power ouer all others,
to the biſhop of Rome? Seeing therefore that proofe ſeemed
not ſtrong enough in thoſe times, the graunt which they
had from Phocas, did them no great good, to ſhewe what right
they had to that ſupremacy, (although thereby they got poſſeſſion
thereof:) For if by his gift they claimed, then they confeſſed
this their authority to be from man,Phocas his decree they thought a reaſon ſcarce homeſt enough. and that from too wickes
and bloudy a murdering man, to doe any great good in Chriſt
his church, or for ſetting downe of any order whereby all ſhould
be ruled. Then alſo it might haue beene called in queſtion, whether

he by his authoritie, could ſubiect all men for euer, to that
church of Rome or not. To make their title therefore as good
as they could, they deuiſed another helpe.
            They fained this gift to be from Conſtantine,
               The donation Conſtantine. the firſt emperour
that publickly allowed of chriſtian profeſſion. And they
make him to giue, not onely his palace of Lateran, and many
other temporallties, to the biſhop of Rome, as maſter Bellarmine
would haue it thought, but they bring him in ſpeaking
theſe words,Ce pontif. Rom. Lib. 4. cap. 17. & lib. 5. cap. 9. 
               We decreeing doe ordaine that he (the biſhop
of Rome) ſhall haue the ſupremacie as well ouer the foure
principall ſeates of Antioch, Alexandria, Conſtantinople,
and Ieruſalem, as alſo ouer, all churches in the whole earth.
And that the pope for the time being, of that holy church of
Rome, ſhall be hier, and Prince of all princes in the world.
Is this onely to giue temporalties? But the falſhood of the
donation of Conſtantine, doth ſhine more bright then the noone
day, although the papiſts make great account of the ſame. Yea
Melchior Canus altogether a papiſt, yet he did either ſee more,
or dealt plaiulier, in this matter then did maſter Bellarmine.
For although he be loth to denie it, or to diminiſh the credit of it,
yet he bringeth moe reaſons againſt it, then hee with all his
felowes can be able to anſwere. So that we neede not ſeeke for
arguments out of Laurentius Valla, or others to confute it.
For euen hee hath giuen it a more deadly wound, then can be
healed againe. He confeſſeth that the lawyers take it to be but
a fained matter, and therfore cal it chaffe, for it is indeed ſo called
in their owne diſtinctions. He acknowledgeth that Euſebius,
Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomenus, Eutropius,
Victor, and other authors of credit, who moſt diligently wrote
all that Conſtantine did, haue not onely made no mention of
that donation, but alſo doe affirme that he ſo deuided his empire
among his three ſonnes, as that the one of them had Italie.
And that Ammianus Marcellinus in his fifteenth booke
writeth, that Conſtantius (Conſtantines ſonne) had the rule
of the citie (of Rome) and made Leontius his liuetenant
there. And laſtly, that all Hiſtories record, that many Emperours
after that time ruled in Italie, yea and in Rome. What
can be more plaine? Their owne Lawyeares confeſſe it to be

fained, no good ſtory recordeth it but ye contrary. Rome after this
gift, was the imperial citty and ſeat. Therefore either Conſtantine
gaue no ſuch thing from him and his heires, or his gift was
nothing worth. Melch
                     •
                   or Canus alſo doubteth of the very foundation
of this fable,Ibidem. which is the leproſie whereof they faine that
Conſtantine was healed, plainly affirming, that in any good
author he readeth no ſuch thing. But not he only doubteth hereof,
but long before him, it hath beene ſpied by Anthonius B. of
Florence in his hiſtory,Pant. 1. Tit. 8. c. 1. L. 3. of catholike concord. by Volateran writing of Conſtantine, &
by the cardinal Nicolas Cuſam a faſt friend and faithful to that
Romiſh church, that this donation was not in the old coppies of
Grecians decrees. And therfore when it was added, themſelues
accompted it but chaffe and no good corne. And theſe and ſuch
reaſons made Pius the ſecond pope of that name, to maruell in a
certaine dialogue, written by him being a Cardinall, that the
Lawyers were ſo mad, as to make any queſtion of that matter,
which neuer was.
            And that wee may ſee,Themſelues agree not to what pope it was giuen. how all things in this donation of
Conſtantine are but fained, whereas the donation maketh
Silueſter the Pope to whome this gift was giuen, yet in
another place,Cauſ. 12. q. 1. ca. faturam. the ſame thing is ſaid to be giuen vnto Melchiades,
that was biſhop before Silueſter. And he is made to ſpeake,
as though it had beene done before his time alſo. And yet this
Melchiades was pope, about two or three yeares, before Conſtantine
was Emperour,Cron. Euſeb. and died long before he gaue peace
and quietnes to Chriſtians, as in the Cronicle of Euſebius, who
lined in thoſe daies, it may appeare. What needeth this point
of their doctrine any aduerſary. Themſelues doe fully confute
one another, And the prouerb is in this found true, when theeues
fal out, true men come by their goods. For theſe decrees if they
be well conſidered, it is not hard to ſpie falſhood in them both.
And therefore we may take heede how we truſt them, ſeeing that
in theſe two we ſee plainly, how the one is contrarie to the other,
and both contrary to the truth. There are alſo ſome impoſſibilities
in the ſaid donation, which doe ſufficiently prooue it, to
be but a fraudulent deede.Impoſsibilities in the donation. For the occaſion of this gift is there
ſet downe. Namely that Conſtantine beeing baptiſed is healed
of his leproſie, and thereupon giueth theſe things to Silueſter,
               
of whome he was baptiſed. And yet beſids many other ancient
hiſtories of good credit, Saint Hierom doth plainly write, that
he was baptiſed at the latter end of his life, and that not of Silueſter
biſhop of Rome, for hee was dead and alſo Marke that
ſucceded him, but of Euſebius biſhop of Nicomedia, ſome ſix or
ſeauen yeares after Silueſter was dead. How then could theſe
things be giuen to Silueſter at the baptiſme of Conſtantine,
Silueſter being dead ſo long before? Or howe at his baptiſme
in Rome, when he was baptiſed in Nicomedia, the chiefe citie
of Bithinia, many hundred miles diſtant from Rome? But it
is ſtrange that they are ſo impudent, as to name Conſtantinople
at this time for one of the principall ſeats of biſhops, as in
this donation they do, which was called not by that name before
Conſtantine in the tenth yeare of his raigne did build it, but
while Silueſter and Marke his ſucceſſor liued it was called Bizance.
            And about twentie or thirty yeares after the death of Conſtantine,
was there a councill at Conſtantinople,
               Conci. Conſtant. 1. cap. 2. wherein
yt ſea of Conſtantinople obtained to be next in account to Rome
which before yt time was no patriarchal church. And it is plaine
by ſtories that at Conſtantinople, ther was either no church at
all, or elſe very ſecret, vntill about the latter end of Conſtantines
time. For that very yeare that he was baptiſed many of
Conſtantinople were baptiſed in ſomuch as Nicephorus maketh
mention of aboue twelue thouſand men beſides women and
children,Niceph. li. 7. c. 34. that were baptiſed there at once. And Conſtantine
himſelfe doth much reioyce,Theod. li. 1. ca. 16 in a letter that he writeth to Euſebius,
that in that citie which himſelfe did build, and did beare
his name, a very great mumber were become chriſtians, and for
that cauſe hee taketh care, that they might haue churches built
for them. So that as yet wee ſee they had not their churches
much leſſe can wee imagine, that then they had any Biſhops,
that would looke for ſo high a place among others. And
therefore euen hereby appeareth the falſhood and folly of this
forged donation.
            There are alſo in the ſame donation ſome things that ſauor
of the pride that afterwardes appeareth in the biſhop of Rome,
but was not then in them. For that donation falſely attributed

to Conſtantine, doth giue vnto the biſhop of Rome, greater
principality of power, then this kingly or roial maieſty had, and
an Imperiall authority.
            Nowe howe manifeſtly falſe this is, wee may very eaſily
marke, if we doe conſider either the ſtile, that the Biſhoppes of
Rome that then were, did vſe, when they wrote vnto their bretheren,
or their maner of behauionr, when they came amongſt
them, or the authoritie which the Nicen council, that was in the
time of Conſtantine gaue vnto them, but equall with the patriarches
of Alexandria and Antioch, and euery one of them to
looke to their owne charge (among whome if there were any inequalitie,
the priuiledges of the biſhop of Rome, had not ſo
large a compaſſe by far, as the other patriarches) or the ſoueraignty
which Conſtantine the emperour did ſtill keepe and exercciſe,
in, and ouer, not Rome onely, but the whole church,
not in ciuil matters onely, but in calling of councils, commanding
the biſhops, comforting the godly, reprouing the hereticks,
and in directing how and after what maner, they would debate
and determine matters in the council. To be ſhort, if we remember
how ſome of the councils, of which I haue often ſpoken
alreadie, did ſtifly denie to the biſhop of Rome, for leſſe ſuperioritie
then by this graunt they might challenge, it will eaſily
appeare, that they knewe not then of any ſuch priuiledges, that
Conſtantine had graunted vnto that ſeat. For if then any ſuch
ſuperioritie or ſupremacie had beene due vnto them, the fatheres
of thoſe times, who often ſtoode in neede of their helpe,
would neuer ſo flatly haue withſtoode their indeuours. And
themſelues alſo would haue beene as readie by themſelues or
their legats, to haue pleaded the donation of Conſtantine, if
then it had beene thought vpon, as they were to coine new
canons of the Nicen council. They pride therefore that in this
grant appeareth, doth proclaime to the world, that it ſauoureth
not of that chriſtian modeſtie, that was for the moſt part in the
biſhops of thoſe times, but it is ſome baſtard of a later breede.
And of that ſpirit of ambition, doth that alſo ſauour, that is ſaid
that the pope ſhould be prince of al prieſts, and aboue al churches
in the world. But this is confuted in that which before hath vin
ſpoken. For long after this the biſhop of Rome, yea and that by

vnlawful meanes ſometime, did ſeeke for that preheminence, but
it would not be graunted vnto them: how beit one thing in this
donation I cannot but remember you of, becauſe it ſheweth in
my iudgement, that this forgery was committed but of late
yeares in compariſon, euen after that they had brought the emperours
vnder their ſubiection, and did beare all the ſway in the
citie of Rome. And that is this, that they bring in the emperour
yelding the imperiall citie into the popes hands, and that as
though it were not fitt or ſeemely, that the earthly emperour
ſhould dwell there, where the heauenly emperour (ſaith he) hath
placed the head of chriſtian religion. Can there be any greater
diſgrace to worldly princes, then to make them vnworthie to be
neighbours to that proud prieſt of Rome? Can they lift vp
themſelues by any meanes hier in pride againſt man, then ſo to
aduaunce and eſteeme of themſelues, aboue the greateſt monarches
in the world? Did Conſtantine vſe to ſpeake or write ſo?
Did he thinke himſelfe vnworthie to be neere them? They that
are but indifferently acquainted with the ſtories of Conſtantine,
doe know that he loued ful wel, to be not only neere to biſhops,
but euen among them alſo. But they that forged this fable,
would haue the world to thinke, that either they are more holy,
then euer were the leuiticall prieſts: or elſe that that good emperour
his ſcepter, ſworde, and crowne, were more vnholy and
prophane, then thoſe enſignes of gouernment that belonged to
the kings ouer the Iewes. And what elſe doe all thoſe imperiall
ornaments, crownes, ſcepters, miter, coller, clocke, cote,
banners, and ſuch like ſignifie, which there they ſay are giuen
to them, but that this forgerie was committed, after that the
proud popes did ſo ouercrow the emperours, that they became
but as it were their ſeruants? For it was far from Conſtantines
minde to make him ſelfe their ſeruant as afterwards the
emperours were. And the popes that then were had other matters
to doe, and other thoughts poſſeſſed their hearts, then that
they could be caried away, to ſuch vaine deuiſes. They were
ſcarſly out of one perſecution, being freed from it by Conſtantine
but that they fell into another that troubled the church
maruelouſly, namely the Arrian hereſie, againſt which the good
biſhops, did then oppoſe themſelues with might and maine.

And as theſe things doe ſauour of the pride of latter times, ſo
ſome things alſo ſauour of ſuperſtition, more then as yet was
crept into the church. For Conſtantine, in this his donation
which they impudently aſcribe vnto him, doth giue for the maintenance
of lights in the church of ſaint Peter and Paul, his poſſeſſions
in the eaſt, weſt, north and ſouth, and by name he reckoneth
vp many countries, where he had giuen his poſſeſſions, for
the maintenaunce of thoſe lights. But in deed it appeareth that
he did beſtow his reuenues vpon more neceſſary things as in the
building of churches, whereunto chriſtians might reſorte to
ſerue God, and in calling the Nicen council, for the determining
of ſome queſtions in religion. As for lights if then they vſed any
yet ſuch large deuotion in ſuch toies and trifles is a plaine fruit
of latter daies of ignorance.
            Thus there is almoſt no kinde of thing granted vnto themThe imitation of the emperours court for officers
in that dotation, but is a good argument to conuince their falſhoode.
The apiſh imitation of the emperours court, for officers
and attendants, that is there graunted, doth alſo ſhew that
it was not deuiſed in the daies of the humble popes: & the proud
cardinalles, who are theſe their ſtately officers were not yet
found.
            Many other exceptions might be made to that pretended donation,
and many moe reaſons might haue beene brought againſt
it, but this that is ſaid, had beene more then enough, in
ſo plaine a matter, had it not beene that many of the popiſh
writers, haue pleaſed themſelues ſo well in their forged follie.
            Hetherto we haue ſeene howe the popes haue made of the
voluntarie ſuites that the godly made to the biſhops of Rome,
beeing forced thereto by ſome extremities, neceſſarie ſubiection,
and out of their requeſts, they gather a profeſſion
of obedience. Then alſo how they gote the decree of Phocas
one their ſide. And laſtly, howe they got the right of
confirming the biſhops of Rome, out of the emperours hands,
pretending for theſe and all other their fulneſſe of power, ſometimes
the words of our Sauiour Chriſt. But to ſupply the
want of helpe which there they find (for in trueth they make not
for that exceſſiue pride of the Biſhop of Rome) they pretend

(although without any colour of truth) a gift of theſe and other
their priuiledges, from Conſtantine the great.
            But nowe let vs looke further into their practiſes. Did
they now content themſelues, when they had the commaunding
of all biſhops, and had gotten this name, that is vnfitte for
any man to be called, Head of the vniuerſall Churches? Could
they content themſelues with this exceſſiue honour? No. They
muſt yet goe one ſteppe higher. For hitherto the Biſhoppes of
Rome were ſubiect to the Emperours, as may very well bee
prooued by their owne epiſtles. Gregory, who did ſo bitterly
inueigh againſt the proude name of vniuerſall biſhop, that Iohn
patriarch of Conſtantinople tooke vpon him, him ſelfe being a
biſhop of Rome, giueth many euident teſtimonies of this ſubiection,
which the popes did acknowledge to the emperors.Lib, 2. epiſt. 100, As
moſt notably in an Epiſtle to Mauritius the emperour, hee
calleth the emperour his lord very often, yea he abaſeth himſelfe
as vnworthie to ſpeake to his lord, he being but duſt and a very
worme. He acknowledgeth himſelfe ſubiect to the emperours
commanndement, that he oweth him duetie and obedience, his
vnworthie ſuppliant and ſeruant. I omit many other that were
afore him.
            And out of an infinite number of teſtimonies that hee doth
afforde, I haue taken but one, and yet that ſuch a one as
doeth ſufficiently prooue what reckoning the biſhops of Rome,
at that time made of the emperours. And yet now we ſee ſome
pride beganne to ſhew it ſelfe in the church. For euen now was
that a great ſtrife for the name of vniuerſall Biſhop. And that
yet euen then did this learned father and Biſhoppe of Rome
acknowledge himſelfe to bee an vnderling to the Emperours,
yea, and after that Phocas had giuen the Biſhop of Rome
that priuiledge to bee head of the Church, almoſt a hundreth
yeeres,Tom. concil. 2. concil. 6. Act. 4. 
               Agatho a Biſhop of Rome doeth write two godly
Letters vnto Conſtantine the fourth, Heraclius and Tyberius
Emperours, wherein very often hee calleth them his
Lordes,Epiſt. 2. profeſſeth his obedience, excuſeth their not ſending
ſome from the Councill to them, as they had commaunded,
yea, and themſelues to bee vnto the Emperours ſeely
or ſimple ſeruants. But in the end this ſeemed a grieuous yoke

and a heavy burden.The ſift ſtep to ſupremacy, the debaſing of princes. They ſaid within themſelues we will not
haue this Emperour to rule ouer vs, we are they that ought to
ſpeake, who is Lord ouer vs. But this becauſe it was a very
hard attempt, it muſt needes be long in working. As in deede it
was, many hundred yeares.
            The firſt that I remember, that did diſgrace in any reſpect
the Emperour,Platina in conſt. was pope Conſtantine who was not aſhamed
to ſuffer Iuſtinian the Emperour to kiſſe his feete, which after
grewe to be the greateſt office of curteſie that the pope woulde
ſhew to the greateſt monarchs, to admit them to that baſe intertainment,
which alſo continueth to this day.In Conſtantin. Of him writeth
Onuphrius in his annotations vpon Platina. Conſtantine firſt
of any biſhop of Rome, durſt withſtand Philippicus the greeke
Emperour to his face openly.
            Perchance becauſe Iuſtinian that was Emperour next before
Philippicus, had kiſſed his feete, it made him the bolder with his
ſucceſſour. The pretence that Conſtantine tooke holde vpon to
withſtand the emperour was this. Philippicus vpon good warrant
out of Gods word,The controuerſie concerning images. did forbid images, and commande them
to be aboliſhed, in which the idolatrous biſhop Conſtantine did
withſtand him. Afterward Leo the third being Emperour, and
maintaining that good cauſe againſt images, Gregory the ſecond
that was ſucceſſour vnto Conſtantine, tooke greater matters
in hand againſt the emperour. For he tooke from Leo whatſoeuer
belonging to the empire, the Longobards had left in all
Italy An. 729. I report theſe ſtories out of Onuphrius, a great
friend to the pope, and Romiſh church. He alſo in the ſame place
ſpeaking of another pope Gregory the third who was next after
the ſecond telleth how he ſought for aide of the French, againſt
thoſe Longobards. For indeede he reiecting his natural prince,
to whom in duty he was bound, the Emperour, did ſeeke as already
he had gotten to be aboue al biſhops, ſo in the end, to be aboue
al princes and potentates in the earth. Whereof Gregory
the third in this place layeth a good foundation, in reiecting an
old maiſter, for a new friend. Yea he doth excommunicat Leo
the Emperour, and depriue him to his empire, as Platina reporteth.
Thus we ſee how the pope hath by little and little,In Greg. 3. gotten
to maſter the Emperour himſelfe. For as in theſe popes, the beginning

hereof was laid, ſo afterwards it grewe more and more
vntil at the length the emperours were but their vaſſals and at
their commandement. But how they vſed this their immoderat
power muſt be afterwards declared, if God wil. Now as this
vnſatiable ambition, muſt needs be odious vnto, and hated of
that mightieſt monarch,Reuel. 19. 16. Math. 28. 18. King of Kings and Lorde of Lordes,
to whom al power in heauen and earth is giuen (for if he could
not abide that his apoſtles ſhould ſo much as reaſon among thē
               ſeluesMark. 9. 33. 35.
who ſhould be chiefe, howe much leſſe can he abide that
they ſhould deſpiſe his lieutenants,Their practiſes to keepe them great ſtill. to aduance themſelus?) ſo did
they aſſure themſelues, that it would be enuied at, and ſpited of
men. And here therefore they want not their practiſes, to keepe
them in this higheſt eſtate, to controll and command euen whom
they wil, at their pleaſures.
            Firſt becauſe none ſhould be ſo bold as to ſpeake any thingEpitom. Eron.
againſt their pride, it was made by pope Pius the ſecond periury
or againſt the oath of a biſhop,Pcriury to ſpeake truth of the pope to ſpeake and thing againſt the
pope be it neuer ſo true. It may be alſo that his meaning was to
make the pope to be eſteemed as neere of kinne to God himſelfePreſat. in Expoſ. Simbol. Apoſtol.
as might be. For the expounder of the creede in Ciprians works
ſaith the like of God, that it is dangerous to ſpeake the truth of
him. But his meaning is that our weaknes and wants will not
let vs ſo ſpeake of him as we ſhould: And the popes feare is,
that if we ſpeake truth of him we muſt ſpeake otherwiſe then he
would haue vs, or were for his honeſty. Nowe biſhops hauing
their tongues and pens thus bridled, who durſt venture to finde
any fault? If for them to ſpeak the truth be periury what ſhould
it be thought in others? And thus becauſe he ſaw, that to haue
the truth of popes doings known, it would be a burning ſhame,
he full wiſely laieth this blocke in that way, and thus maketh vp
that gappe.
            And after commeth in to ſerue their turne that fulneſſe of authority,Power of the keies.
and power of the keies, which they would ſo ſeeme to
haue from Chriſt as that none but they ſhould rule that ſterne,
none but they, ſhould haue that iuriſdiction. So that if they
curſe none can bleſſe, if they excommunicate, none may abſolue,
if they binde, no man may looſe.
            Wherein they challenge ſo great priuiledge, that they can

worke thereby againſt the law of God, the lawe of nature, the
law of nations.Releaſing ſubiects of their duty of obedience. They can (if you will that they will tell you)
releaſe the ſubiectes, from the bond of obedience, which they owe
to their magiſtrates, and the children, they can cauſe to rebell againſt
their parents.
            A perilons practiſe is this for all princes eſtates, thus to lead
the people on the blind ſide, as to make them beleeue, that to rebel
is to obey and to diſhonour their ſuperiours, is an acceptable
ſacrifice to God.
            By theſe their powerfull keies,Immunities of the clergy. they alſo open the dore of immunities
and priuiledges of the clergy, whereby they are exempt
from all corrections and puniſhmentes, vnleſſe forſooth it pleaſe
his holines, to deliuer them to the ſecular power, to make them
his hangmen.
            But of their owne authority they may not touch him, becauſe
they are (ſay they) the Lordes annointed. By which meanes
they grew to great ſawcines, and the ſtate was not a little indangered
thereby in many places.
            They had alſo another practiſe to maintaine their pride,Shrift. and
hold them in their high ſeate: That is auricular confeſſion, or
that which we call ſhrift. For vnder colour of being ghoſtly fathers,
the Popes ſubtill and ſworne friendes, had acceſſe to princes,
had conference with their counſellours, had knowledge of
their ſecrets, had opportunity to practiſe with their falſe and
faithleſſe ſubiectes, and they might, and did take al occaſions, by
terrifying the conſciences of princes, in reſpect of their ſinnes,
which they made knowne to them, as if there were no hope of
mercy at the hands of God, if firſt they were not reconciled to the
Holy Father the Pope, and the holy mother the Church of
Rome.
            And thus were they euery way diſtreſſed, their conſciences
being intangled, and their eſtates indangered. But one of their
moſt ſubtill ſhiftes was the taking away of knowledge from the
people. Whereby they became as men, that walked in the
darke,Ignorance. in an vnknowne way. They neuer knewe whether they
did right or wrong. They knew not their own duty. They were
taught to beleeue as the church beleeued.
            Now although they heard much of the church of Rome, yet

for the moſt parte they were not acquainted with it. So that
the church that muſt be their direction,What it is in the Romiſh language to beleeue the church. muſt be their parſon or
vicar or perchance their biſhop. Who if he would leade them
out of the way, they muſt needs go wrong. Becauſe their light
of knowledge, was quite put out.
            The Scriptures were either quite taken from them,The ſcriptures ether quite taken away, or corrupted. and
mens dreames and deuiſes deliuered, to the lay people inſteede
of them: or els they were ſo corrupted, with fooliſh gloſes, and
ſo mingled, with mens traditions, that the true ſence and meaning
of them was ſtil vnder a buſhell, ſo that it gaue no light at
all to them.
            Nowe they not knowing their duty, which God had commaunded
them to performe to magiſtrates, howe eaſily might
they be drawen aſide from the ſame? Yea they through ignorance,
not beeing able to put a difference betweene trueth
and falſehoode, howe readily might they be moued to thinke
it to be true that they doe ſay vnto them, who were onely reputed
and taken for holy Church, that the Pope is Chriſtes
Vicar: that he is ſo much more excellent then any worldly potentate,
as the ſoule is better then the body: that there is no
leſſe difference betweene the glory of the Emperour and the
pope, then is betweene the brightneſſe of the Sunne and of the
Moone. The pope being like the Sunne, and the Emperour
compared to the. Moone which hath her light from the
Sunne.
            Theſe and other ſuch like blaſphemies againſt the maieſty,
whome God hath placed vpon earth, were accompted
good doctrine, and ſtrong proofes through want of knowledge.
And this very effect that ignorance did worke, whereby the very
brokers for the church of Rome, did ſee themſelues and their
maſters eſteemed halfe as Gods, and their meſſages receiued
more readily, and more conſtantly kept, and more willingly obeied,
then gods word by a great deale, made them to proclaime
ſo lowde, and ſo ſtiffly to maintaine, that ignorance is the mother
of deuotion.
            And why ſhould they not,Ignorance ſay they mother of deuotion. when they ſee that princes
are readye, by reaſon of their ignoraunce in Gods trueth,

to be led and guided by ſuch blind guides, euen to the hazarding
of their kingdoms? And the people therby are withdrawen from
al duty, ſo that they may leade both prince and people, as Eliſha
led the Syrians euen into their enemies hands.
                  
                     •
                  . Kings 6, 19.
            
            And as this ignorance hath beene a great cauſe that the pope
hath mightily preuailed, and aduaunced his ſeate farre higher
than became one of his coate, and yet his pride was neuer
ſpied of many:Ignorance at this day cauſe of much euill. euen ſo at this day for want of knowledge the
people are moſt eaſily drawen, to worſhip euen the very name
of Holy Father, and to ſucke the breaſts of the holy mother the
Romiſh church. Whoſe doctrines, if they could examine, whoſe
ſpirites if they coulde trie, whoſe horrible blaſphemies againſt
Gods trueth, and vnnaturall cruelties againſt Gods ſaints, if
they could with indifferent iudgement conſider of, if (I ſay)
the Lord in mercy would vouchſafe them that knowledge, they
would euen hate the name of a Romiſh catholike, and feare to
be of that company and crew, that ſo plainely, and ſtubburnely
reiecteth Gods commaundement, deſpiſeth Gods magiſtrates,
deceiueth Gods people, and leadeth them in the waies of death
and damnation: There are alſo ſome other meanes and practiſes,
whereby the popes drawe the people into great admiration
of them.Pardons and agnus deis. Namely, their pardons and indulgences, their agnus
Dei, and ſuch other traſh and trumpery, whereby they perſwade
the ſimple ones, that they can effectually and really pardon their
ſinnes, which is Gods office onely, take away their iniquities,
deliuer them from damnation, and ſhield them from all euill.
And who would not giue all that he hath, if he might attaine to
theſe benefites? who would not ſell the whole earth to winne
heauen? Who would not looſe his life, to ſaue his ſoule? But
the ſunne-ſhine of knowledge would eaſily driue away all ſuch
miſts. And they who in their blindeneſſe do eſteeme that man
of ſinne that ſitteth at Rome, to be more then halfe a god, and
ſee nothing but greatneſſe in him,Marke 8. 24. as the blinde man of Bethſaida,
who before he ſaw perfectly ſaw men walking like trees,
(ſo great they ſeemed in his eies▪) yet when God ſhall take away
that veile of blindneſſe, and heale that infirmitie in them,
they ſhall then ſee, the biſhop of Rome as he is indeede, to be an
enemy to God and man, a ſubuerter of eſtates, a foe to princes,

a ſnare to ſubiects, and a very corrupter of true chriſtianitie
and godlines.
            And thus much of the ſhifts and ſleights that the Biſhop of
Rome vſed to come to his greatneſſe, by little and little, growing
to that that now we ſee. Sometime vſing flattery, falſhood
and forgery, yea, and afterwards bringing the emperour vnder
by plaine force and feare: alwaies taking aduantages and oportunities,
when emperors were either otherwiſe imployed in affaires,
or hated for their life, or ſome way ſo diſtreſſed, that they
could not withſtand him and his partakers, then would hee moſt
earneſtly purſue and perſecute them, vntill he had his wil, which
I truſt will appeare plainely in the diſcourſe that now I am to
enter into, which is as it were a trial and ſearch of the doings of
the biſhop of Rome and of his behauiour, after that he beganne
to be ſo mightie.
            Now to take a good and ſufficient ſuruey of the popes Supremacie,
it is not inough to trie his Title, to ſee his euidence,
and conſider of his proof, neither yet to acquaint our ſelues with
his ſhifts and practiſes, wherby he hath gotten himſelf into that
very high ſeate and fulnes of power,Declarat. contra Nauar. & Con
                     ••
                  . (as Sixtus Quintus ſpeaketh)
which they would ſeeeme to claime by right, and wherein
now they play more than rex, of which two points I haue ſpoken
before: but it is alſo (in my iudgement) very neceſſary, that
we looke ſomewhat into his doings, and examine how hee hath
ruled and raigned, what good he hath done to the church, what
profit he hath brought to the chriſtian common-wealth. When
God did ſee the continuall rebellion of his people, that they
would by no meanes be reclaimed from ſinne, and howe little
good it had wrought in them, that they had beene very lately in
a grieuous captiuitie: he then by his prophet Zachary chapter
11. verſe. 16. threatneth vnto them this great and grieuous
plague, that he will raiſe vp a ſheepeheard in the land, which
ſhall not looke for the thing that is loſt, nor ſeeke the tender
lambes, nor heale that that is hurt, nor feede that that ſtandeth
vp, but he ſhall eate the fleſh of the fat, and teare their clawes in
peeces. And that there were ſuch ſheepeheardes amongſt the
people of Iſrael, and that wo and deſtruction belonges to them,
God by his prophet Ezechiel chapter 34. verſes 2, 3, 4. doeth

teſtifie, pronouncing wo to the ſhepheards that feed themſelues,
eate the fat,A potterne of the holy father of Rome. cloth thēſelues with the wooll, kil them that are fed,
but feed them not, they ſtrengthen not the weake, they heale not
the ſicke, binde not vp the broken, bring not againe that which
was driuen away, ſeeke not the loſt, but rule them with crueltie
and rigor: I neuer reade or thinke of this deſcription of an euill
ſhepheard, but I ſee (me thinkes) therein a right paterne of popiſh
gouernment. Neither doe I at any time earneſtly enter
into ſcanning of that regiment, that is vnder that moſt holy father,
but I remember how the holy ghoſt painteth out theſe
proude, cruel and idoll ſhepeheards. The one ſeemeth to bee ſo
right a paterne of the other, as if they were all one thing, and no
difference at all betweene them: or as if the Spirite of God did
both foreſee and foreſhew the moſt holy father, in that glaſſe of
the moſt vnholy ſhepheard. But that it may the better appeare
that he that would be accounted the herd of Chriſts flocke, doth
but ſeek for to ſatiſfie his own pride, profit and pleaſure, not hauing
any due regard, either to Gods glorie, or the good of them
whom he calleth his ſheepe: let vs conſider, how violently and
impotently, his immoderat affection doth carry him, to ſay & do
as himſelf liketh beſt, both againſt God and man, and how inſolently
he beareth ſway in Chriſt his church. And firſt to beginne
with his names and titles,Lib. 2. cap. 31. out of the which M. Bellarmine wil
prooue, that the Biſhop of Rome is Peters ſucceſſour, in the
whole or vniuerſall church. For that he tooke in hand to proue,
But I on the contrary by thoſe names ſhall (by Gods grace)
plainely prooue,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. cap. 12. that he robbeth Chriſt of his ornaments, and
taketh from him his titles that belong to him onely. And firſt he
calleth himſelfe head of the vniuerſall church, which name ſo
properly belongeth vnto Chriſt, that we cannot giue it to any other,
without great wrong, both to the head and the body of the
church. To the head, in that the office which God the father laid
vpon Chriſt, in appointing him ouer all things the head to the
church,Epheſ. 1. ſhuld be beſtowed vpon a ſinful man: to the body which
is Chriſts church, becauſe by that meanes it ſhould haue but an
idle head, euery way vnable to performe the dueties of a head.
I deny not but the church of Rome, for 4 or 5 hundred yeres after
Chriſt, might iuſtly be called the head of the church, that is a

ring leader to other churches in reſpect of religion which remained
more ſincere there then elſewhere for many yeares, neither
was that church ſo troubled with hereſies as were others. I
confes alſo that ſom of the biſhops of Rome, for their forwardneſſe,
learning, and paines, imployed to the benefit of the church,
might worthely be called in ſome ſence heads of the church, as in
the firſt parte of this treatiſe I haue ſhewed. Then will ſome
man ſay, what is then the fault which you charge the biſhop of
Rome withall, in calling himſelfe the head of the vniuerſall
church? Firſt that he maketh that name proper to him and his
ſeate, which many times more iuſtly belonged vnto others, who
for their learning and trauel, for the church of God, deſerued
much better of Gods church then any pope of them al.
            Further alſo that it is not, that ſignification of the name
head, that will ſatiſfie the popes ambitious humour, thereby
to be counted a man, onely able or fit to guide and direct others,
but he will ſo be a head, that hee muſt commaund, forbid, bind,
looſe, retaine, remit, diſpence, denie, doe, and vndoe, as his
vnbridled affection, ſhould carie him. Which ſoueraigne power
ouer the church or any parte of the church, we cannot find that
God gaue vnto any man, either Peter, or Paul, yea or to Chriſt
himſelfe as man onely (for he was taught of his father what to
doe, and what to ſay) much leſſe then would his vicar of Rome,
if he had but one ſparke of chriſtian humilitie, claime ſuch abſolute
power, ouer the whole earth. Seeing therefore by this
name head, hee chalengeth greater power then either any good
man would haue in Gods church (for the godly can be content to
ſpeake of God as God teacheth them, and to doe as hee woulde
haue them) or is fit for any man to haue, as his vnruly doings
do ſufficiently declare: we iuſtly denie, that euer any biſhop of
Rome, was of the godly called the head of the church, in that
ſence that it is now vſed, as their doings doe plainly teach vs.
As for the name Papa or pope it was a common name to all
biſhops as is confeſſed by Baronius, yea and graunted alſo in
this place by maſter Bellarmine himſelfe. And it ſignifieth as
much as father or grandfather, ſo that it ſeemeth, that it was
firſt giuen vnto biſhops by godly chriſtians, who did honour
and reuerence them for their calling. And why may not this

name, be aptly giuen to any diligent biſhoppe or paſtour, in the
church of god?Lib. 2. cap. 31. No maſter Bellarmine wil haue this name after
a more particular maner to be giuen to the biſhop of Rome, then
to any other.Match. 23. 9. Then we muſt learne of Chriſt not to call any man
our father vpon earth. For there is but one, our father which is
in heauen. And therefore if he wil otherwiſe be our father then
man may be our father, let him ſeeke for other children, for to
ſuch a father we owe no obedience.
            The name of vniuerſal biſhop,Vniuerſall biſh. Actione. 3. was giuen in the councill of
Chalcedon to the biſhop of Rome, maiſter Bellarmine telleth
vs. We deny it not. But without a fauourable and good vnderſtanding,
that title may be very odious. For euen Gregory himſelfe
a biſhop of Rome, and no man more vehemently, inueieth
againſt that proud title in many plaids. His places are ſo commonly
alleadged that I neede not come to any particular.Bellar anſ. to that we obiect out of the odious name of vninerſal biſhop. But
Bellarmine going about to deliuer this title, from all ſuſpition
of antichriſtian ambition, telleth vs that this name vniuerſall biſhop
may be taken in two ſorts. One way that a vniuerſall biſhop
ſhould ſignifie an only biſhop,Vniuerſal biſhop an only biſhop. that is ſuch a one as woulde
haue none to be biſhop but himfelfe onely. And ſuch a vniuerſall
biſhop ſaith maſter Bellarmine Saint Gregory condemneth.
And doth he not otherwiſe condemne Iohn of Conſtantinople
his pride, but becauſe he would haue no biſhop but himſelfe? No
maſter Bellarmine the ſtories are more plaine,A reply againſt that anſwere. then that ſuch
ſhifts may go for currant. The controuerſie was, whether the
biſhop of Conſtantinople ſhould be as now the biſhop of Rome
is in his owne account, a biſhop aboue al biſhops.
            Read all the hiſtories and it wil eaſily appeare, his indeuour
was only to haue the commanding of other biſhops. Neither
could he be called vniuerſal, if he were the only biſhop but rather
the ſingular biſhop. But maſter Bellarmine bringeth two
or three teſtimonies out of Gregory wherein he complaineth
that Iohn patriarch of Conſtantinople would be biſhop alone.
Gregories meaning is plaine enough, that he ſaith he would only
be biſhop, becauſe he only would haue the commanding of all,
that others ſhould indeede be his ſuffraganes, and at his commandement
which reaſon of Gregory againſt that title of vniuerſall
biſhop, if it be wel marked, giueth I thinke a wound vncurable

to the church of Rome. A ſoueraigne authoritie in one
to commaund all (ſaith he) is to take away all biſhops but that
one onely, but ſuch ſoueraigne authoritie ouer biſhops the pope
doth chalenge in this name of vniuerſall biſhop, as experience
teacheth: therefore he maketh him ſelfe the onely biſhop. And
this is the thing that Gregorie ſo miſlyketh in Iohn biſhop of
Conſtantinople, therefore I cannot ſee how it can be tolerable
in him of Rome. But one may be called a vniuerſall biſhop
(ſaith he) in another ſence, as he hath a care of the whole church,
and ſo the Pope may be called a vniuerſall Biſhop. But herein
maſter Bellarmine giueth very litle authoritie to the biſhop
of Rome.Tom 2. anno 187 For this generall care belongeth not onely to euery
Biſhop, but alſo to euery Chriſtian as Caeſar Paronius doeth
plainly confeſſe,De bonis operib. in part. li. 2. c. 24. of whom maſter Bellarmine doth write, that he
is a ſingular good man, and without all doubt moſt learned.
And therefore I truſt hee will by him be perſwaded, to let this
name of vniuerſall biſhop be a name that may belong to mo then
to him of Rome, and ſo not to make it his peculiar title. A
fourth name of his,Moſt holy, is that hee is called moſt holy. And here
maſter Bellarmine doth maruelouſly inſult ouer maſter Luther
for inſinuating that the names of moſt high, and moſt holy, had
not beene hard of in the dayes of Gregorie. Maſter Luther ſaid
not ſo, maſter Bellarmine onely feared that he ment ſome ſuch
matter, and therefore quareleth with him and telleth him that
he lieth.Conc. Chale. actione 3. obiect. Anſwer. Well, Leo the pope is called moſt holy in three ſeuerall
titles, that three Graecians wrote to him. It is true maſter
Bellarmine, and in the ſame action in a great number of places
beſids, the biſhops yelding their conſent, do call him moſt holy.
He is there alſo called holy, and why would not that name holy,
which is there alſo giuen to him,The title of Moſt holy giuen to ſundry. as well content the biſhop of
Rome now, as to be called moſt holy? Or why ſhould that be a
peculiare name to him alone, that was giuen in that place as
well to others as to him? For Anatolius the patriarch of Conſtantinople,
is often called moſt holy. Yea and the council
writeth vnto Dioſcorus patriarch of Alexandria, whome
they depriued of his dignitie, becauſe he was a manitainer of
Futiches that notable heretick, yet I ſay, the conncill writing
vnto him, doe call him alſo moſt holy. And whoſoeuer marketh

that councill, ſhall ſee no titles more common, then moſt holy,
moſt bleſſed or happie, mow beloued of God, and ſuch like.
Neither were theſe things giuen vnto them as names to continue
to them and their ſeate, but onely ſuch titles, as they thought
well beſtowed vpon ſuch perſons, as they vſed them to. As Leo
biſhop of Rome, who although he were not without his infirmiries,
yet ſure he was a man of great gifts. And they in aboundance
of affection towardes him, called him moſt holy. Muſt
it therefore be a name hereditary to that ſinfull and ſhameleſſe
broode that ſince hath ſprong vp in that place? It were abſurd
to thinke, that coniurers, inchaunters, poyſeners, adulterers,
and ſuch ruffians and rakehelles, ſhould be called by right of
their ſeat moſt holy. And yet now nothing more common then
this title. His fauourites muſt not ſpeake of him, but with this
tearme of moſt holy. Looke all his bulles and writings, and
you ſhall ſee, that hee that is moſt vnholy before God and men,
yet by a lying ſtile muſt be called moſt holy. Yea to doubt
whether it be a fit name for his holineſſe forſooth or not, is a
ſinne more to be puniſhed then the breach of Gods lawe if it be
true that Gentiletus writing againſt the council of Trent reporteth
of a biſhop that was put out of his biſhopricke,Li. 5. Nullitate 11 becauſe
in that council he miſliked that the pope ſhould be called moſt
holy, and God in the ſcriptures is called but holie. And indeede
he might iuſtly miſlike it, if he duely conſidered that in God hee
could not ſee any thing like vnto ſinne, in the pope almoſt no
ſparke of goodneſſe in theſe latter ages. And, this I take to be
the reaſon why maſter Bellarmine, doth not place among the
fifteene names that he hath found out for the pope, this name
moſt holy, becauſe in reſpect of his vnholineſſe, he thinketh it
pitie to beſtow that name vpon him. And therefore he ſhould
the rather haue borne with maſter Luther, if hee did maruell
that the popes flatterers, would ſo prophane that holy title,
in beſtowing it vpon ſo vnholy men, as for the moſt parte
they haue all beene, which theſe many hundred of yeares
haue ſit in that ſeate. Or at the leaſt hee would not haue giuen
the lie to maſter Luther, for ſignifying that Saint Gregorie
would haue miſliked the abuſe of that name in theſe dayes.
As for the name of Chriſts vicar,Chriſts vicor. which is alſo one of his common

title, wee would not much ſticke to beſtow it vpon him
our ſelues,Chriſt hath many vicars. if he would content himſelfe with that place wherein
he is, or elſe ſhould be (if he were as he ought to be) the vicar
of Chriſt. For euerie paſtor is in his owne charge, Chriſts
vicar,2. Cor. 5. 
                     •
                  0. and muſt in Chriſts ſteede be a meſſenger from God, and
pray the people to be reconciled to God. But this is too ſmall a
benefice for this prowd prelate, too litle a compaſſe for his ambitious
minde. He will be vicar generall. All the world muſt be
his dioceſſe, all people are his flocke. But wee cannot yeeld
him that title, we cannot diſplace him whome Chriſt hath aſſigned
to that Rome, euen whileſt he was vpon earth, and promiſed
to ſend in his place,The ſpirit Chriſt vicat generall. Ioh. 14. 16, 17. euen the ſpirit of truth, that euer abiding
comforter. His eies ſee our wants, his eares heare all our
cries, yea our ſighes, and groanes, are not hidden from him.
He is worthie to be Chriſts vicar generall, becauſe hee is with
the church in all places, yea if it bee in priſons and dungeons.
But this vicar of Rome, as he can not be euery where if he
would, ſo in ſuch places he will not be if he could. His predeceſſors
indeede, that neuer ſought ſo proud titles, ſuffered much
for Chriſtes ſake.
            But now the caſe is altered.Father. All men muſt ſuffer his wrongs
and violence. His name of father how it can be beſtowed vpon
him I cannot ſee, vnleſſe it be for getting of baſtards and ſo
their own ſtories will report vnto vs, that many of them haue
beene fathers as Iohn. 12. Alexander the ſixt, and many other.
But ſeeing ſpirituall fathers,Iames 1. 18. 1. Pet. 1. 23. muſt beget children to God by the
word of truth, and by the ſeede not mortall, but by the immortall
ſeede of the worde of God which ſeede they loue not to ſowe (for
a preaching pope in our dayes is as a blacke ſwan) they cannot
therefore get ſpirituall children vnto God, & therefore as I ſaid
before I cannot ſee, that they can be ſpirituall fathers. If they be
called fathers in reſpect of their age, and ſo it be vſed as a name
of reuernce, wee enuie then not that name in ſuch ſort, ſo that
they take it not from other, to make it proper to them. And theſe
are the names which are commonly giuen in our days to the B.
of Rome. As for the reſt of his titles becauſe we hear them not
attributed to popes now, I omit. Sauing that I muſt put you
in remembrance of one blaſphemous name, which although it

be not a name by which he is commonly called, yet it is giuen to
him as his due, and maſter Bellarmine becauſe he would not
haue him to leeſe it, doth tel vs it is his name. He is therefore
called the bridegroome of the church.The bridgroome of the church. Vbi peticulum, de electione in ſexto. Which name maſter Bellarmine
ſaith was giuen to him by a generall council holden at
Lyons it was Anno. 1215. more then twelue hundreth yeares
after Chriſt.
            But as it ſeemeth, it was neuer worthy to be reckoned among
the councils. For we haue it not in the tomes of councils.
Yea and the pope Boniface the eight doth challenge to himſelfe
that proud name,Cap. Quoniam de Immunit. m, 6. we not minding to neglect our iuſtice, and the
iuſtice of our ſpouſe or wife the church (ſaith he) what ſhall this
holy church which is likened to a body, becauſe it can haue but
one head, to a houſe, becauſe it can haue but one foundation, to
an army, becauſe it can haue but one captaine or generall, to a
turtle doue, becauſe it can haue but one mate, to a kingdoem, becauſe
it can haue but one king, to a ſheepfold, becauſe it can haue
but one ſheepheard, to a wife, becauſe it can haue but one huſbād,
ſhall ſhee I ſay now forſake the huſband of her youth, or at the
leaſt keepe him and another too? Who euer heard that an honeſt
woman could at one time haue two huſbands? or an honeſt huſband
haue together two wiues ſince Chriſt his time?
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 11. 2. Or how
can the holy church, that chaſt virgine, who is coupled to Chriſt,
be the wife of that vicar of Rome? God is a ielous God, Chriſt
is a ielous huſband, his wife muſt loue none but him. Shee therfore
can haue no other huſband. Saint Bernard telleth pope Eugenius,
that the church is his maſters wife.Epiſt. 237. It is for him enough
to be the friend of the bridegroome, he muſt not call his
maſters beſtebloued, his own prince, but a prince. Yea (ſaith he)
thou muſt challenge in her nothing to be thine.
            But maſter Bellarmine telleth vs,Bellar. anſw. to that place of Bernard. that ſaint Bernard did let
Eugenius to vnderſtand, that he is not the true and chiefe huſband
of the church. We confeſſe it, neither he is, nor any man
excepting Chriſt can be the churches true huſband.The reply againſt his anſwere. And this is
alſo as true, that the church becauſe ſhe is chaſt, can haue but
Chriſt her one only huſband.Ioh. 3. 29. Auguſt. in Ioh. Tract. 13. And this is it, that Iohn the baptiſt
meaneth when he ſaith, that he that hath the bride, is the
bridegroome. I haue her not (ſaith he) what am I then? The

friend of the bridegroome. Thus doth S. Auguſtin bring Iohn
the Baptiſt acknowledging that he hath no right in the bridegoomes
wife, but is only a friend to the bridegroome. As alſo
he maketh the bridegroome him only, that is lord ouer the whole
earth. And he maketh his argument ſtrong againſt Donatus, becauſe
the church hath but one huſband, which is Chriſt, therefore
Donatus is not that huſband, nor can be. But if maſter Bellarmines
diſtinction might ſerue that Chriſt is chiefe and yet there
may be an other vnder him, Donatus might as well haue claimed
to be that huſband then, that the pope doth claime now to
be. But it was not then known, that one honeſt woman, might
haue two huſbands. Chryſoſtome aſſo and Theophilact and
all the ancient fathers make Chriſt the onely huſband, yea and
Chryſoſtome thinketh,Hom. 28. that he needeth fauourably to interpret
that, that Iohn calleth himſelfe the friend of the bridegroome,
ſhewing that he meant not thereby to make himſelfe equall to
Chriſt, but only to expreſſe the greatnes of his ioy. For a friend
reioiceth more then a ſeruant. What would he haue ſaid then to
theſe ſawcy mates, who thinke too baſe a thing for them to be
but friends to the bridegroome, but the bridegroome and they
muſt haue all one wife? I cannot therfore maruel much at their
flattering lawyers, that wil make the pope and Chriſt to haue
but one conſiſtory or ſeat of iudgement.Panorm. in l. licet de electione extra ex hoſtienſi. Marke I pray you the
vicar before his parſon, the pope before Chriſt. The pope and
Chriſt, make but one conſiſtory. But this I take to be ſomewhat
tolerable.The pope and Chriſt haue one wife, make one conſiſtory. If they both haue but one wife, they may ſit in one
ſeat. But I muſe that maſter Bellarmine with great ſilence,
doth paſſe ouer one of the names, that ye pope is now beſt known
by, and is more ancient, then many of the names that he ſpeaketh
of.Seruant of Gods ſeruants. the ſeruant of Gods ſeruants. Which name they learned
of Gregory the firſt to giue themſelues. It may be that
maſter Bellarmine, was aſhamed his maſter ſhould come ſo
neere in name to wicked Ham firſt called ſeruant of ſeruants,Gen. 9. 25. or
that he ſeeth all their doings ſo directly contrary to yt name, that
he thinketh it not a name due to them, or fit for them. For what
mockery is it, to write themſelues ſeruants of Gods ſeruants,
perchance ſometime in the ſelfe ſame letters, wherein they will
command, controll, correct, condemne the mightieſt monarches

vnder heauen, Gregory would thereby haue taught them modeſtie,
humility, meeknes, and ſuch other chriſtian vertues, yea,
and alſo a painefull diligence for the good of the church, as if in
all things they ſhould carefully ſeek, not their own profit or preferment,
but Gods glory, and the benefit of Gods people (for
ſeruants worke not for themſelues but for their maſter.) They
keeping ſtill the name, by that outward profeſſion of lowlineſſe
and induſtry, ſeeke to caſt a miſt before the eies of the ignorant,
that they ſhall not ſee them, when they ſhew themſelues in truth
ſo proude and preſumptuous againe all men, ſo lither and loytering
in their paſtorall functiō as if they were enimies to mankind,
and had no care at al of their owne duty.
            But now let vs ſee to what end M.Why theſe names are giuen to the Pope. 
               Bellarmine doth intitle
the B. of Rome to thoſe names of Head, Pope, vniuerſall Biſhop,
Chriſts vicar, Father and Bridegroome, euen to this end,
that he may prooue him to haue the charge of the whole church.
I on the other ſide ſhew, that theſe are not his titles, they are
not his ornaments, they belong to Chriſt moſt of them, and only
to him, if the be vnderſtoode in peculiar ſorte, as maſter Bellarmine
would haue them. They may be giuen, after ſome ſort,
to all paſtors. But the B. of Rome cannot abide to be but like
others, he muſt be ſigular and fellowleſſe, or elſe nothing can
content him. Therefore I out of theſe names which hee ſo chalengeth
to himſelfe, do prooue his pride and preſumption aboue
men, thus to extoll himſelfe ſo exceſſiuely aboue others, yea, and
blaſphenues againſt Chriſt, thus to wring from him, his office
and priuileges, and to make the world to beleeue, they are his
owne. And this is one of the effects that followed of this fulneſſe
of power which by little and little (as before I ſhewed) the
Pope aſpired and attained vnto. And euer as he grew in power,
ſo did he in pride alſo, vntil he could not tell how to call himſelfe,
or what name he ſhould giue himſelfe, that his greatneſſe
thereby might ſufficiently be expreſſed: yet all theſe proude titles
coulde not ſatiſfie or content the proude humour of many of
theſe Popes, but that they grew to farther impiety and greater,
if greater may be. For, as in theſe names they made the
whole church to be (not Chriſts) but as it were their owne inheritance,
and their owne houſe, with which, and wherein they

thought they might do as themſelues would, and they incroched
alſo exceedingly vpon Chriſt his right: ſo at the length, they
came to that contempt of God and godlines, that their paraſites
would giue vnto them,The Pope god. and they could be content to take the honour
that was due to God only. They wil not ſo much as leaue
to God his name, but euen that is beſtowed vpon the pope. To
beleeue (ſaith one) that our lord god the pope,Extrauag. Iob. 22. could not do this
thing, is to be counted hereſie. And another ſaith, When the
pope diſſolueth a marriage it muſt be thought to be Gods doing
onely, becauſe the pope being choſen according to the cannons,
is god vpon earth. And another, Innocentius the third, The
Pope heere vpon earth ſupplieth the roome, not of pure man,
but of a true God. And leſt it ſhould be thought, that the Canoniſts
did giue more honour vnto the pope herein, then hee
was content to take upon him:Diſt. 96. 
                     •
                  . Satic. pope Nicholas himſelfe, doeth
claime for him and his ſeate, great immunitie and freedome,
becauſe the good emperour Conſtantine (ſaieth he) did call the
pope god. And yet this holy father playeth but the crafty mate,
for that Conſtantine did ſpeake of al biſhops (alluding to that,
I haue ſaid,Pſal. 82, 1, 6. ye are gods: And God ſtandeth in the aſſemblie of
gods, and iudgeth among gods, the prophet ſpeaking there of
Princes and Iudges) that doeth hee applie to himſelfe alone.
Whoſoeuer readeth that which is alleadged out of an Epiſtle
of Gregorie vnto Mauritius the Emperour,Cauſ. 11. q. 1. cap. Sacerdotibus. ſhall find this
falſe dealing of Pope Nicholas to make himſelfe a god after
ſom other ſort, then Conſtantine there calleth al biſhops gods.
The Iewes were ſuperſtitious, ſo as they durſt not name
that name of God Iehouah, for feare of offending that great
god: The popes are ſawcie, that make no ſcruple at all to take
to themſelues that name, of the which we ought not to ſpeake
or thinke, but with great reuerence. Whether nowe are the
honeſter, the Iewes, or the Pope. The Iewes were too ſcrupulous.
But the Popes yet, that haue caſt off all reuerence
of the maieſtie of God, are farre more blame worthy. And
this very name (as I ſuppoſe) that they called themſelues
gods, did ſo imbolden ſome of them, to ſet ſo little by God. As
for example, Pope Iulius. not the ſecond, that was the luſtie
warriour, but the third, that filthie beaſt, if Stories doe

ſpeaketh truely of him. He loueth porke very well, and when
by the commandement of his phiſition,Act Rom. pontif. Ioh. 
                     •
                  a. porke was not ſerued at
his table, being angrie for it, one anſwered that the phyſition
ſaid it was not wholſome for him.Popes ſaucy with God. I will haue it ſaith he in deſpite
of God. At another time miſſing a peacock which he had
commaunded to be kept colde againſt night, hee burſt into extremitie
of choller, whereupon a cardinall mouing him to be
quiet, What ſaid he was God angry for an aple, in ſo much as
he caſt our firſt parents out of paradice for that matter, and may
not I being his vicar, be angrie for my peacock? The irreligious
heart, of this prophane pope, could neuer haue burſt out,
iuto ſuch blaſphemies againſt God, but that in his exceſſe of
pride he eſteemed himſelfe as God, or elſe in affection euen beſotted
with atheiſme, hee ſaid as did the wicked in the prophet
Dauid.
               Pſal. 53. 1. There is no God. And ſo hee proued that to be moſt
true,Pſ
                     •
                  l. 49. 20. that the ſame prophet ſaith in another place, man being in
honour hath no vnderſtanding, he is like to the beaſts that periſh.
And thus we ſee howe the biſhop of Rome, being drunken,
with too wel liking of himſelfe in his authoritie and high eſtate,
did not only exalt himſelfe by his names aboue al men, but made
himſelfe equall euen with the moſt high. But leaſt the biſhop of
Rome, ſhould ſeeme to be but God in name, and not in deede,
as a ſhadow without a bodie, and title without authoritie, (as
were Paul the third his archbiſhops that he ſent to the council of
Trent,Cono. Trident. li, 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1. num. 3. whome he was faine to maintaine with his poore almes,
that he beſtowed vpon them:) he therefore ſheweth his prerogatiue,
and telleth what power and might he hath, that he may
prooue himſelfe, to be like to her, that ſaid in her heart, I will
aſcend aboue the height of the clouds,Eſa. 14. 14. and I will be like the moſt
Higheſt.
            If I would indeuour to ſet downe all that might be ſaid of
the pride of the biſhop of Rome or at the leaſt of his impudent
affection of his claw-backs, it were harder to find an outgate
then an entrance, this field is ſo large to wander in. For what
is it that the Pope can not doe? Yea what can God himſelfe
doe more then hee? If wee will truſt flattering Lawyeares,
in their approued and allowed bookes, he is Chriſts vitar generall
ouer heauen, earth, and hell, ouer angels good and bad,

yea they tell vs, that the pope can doe whatſoeuer God can doe,
except ſinne. It ſeemeth that they meane God can ſinne, but
the pope is ſo clad with holineſſe, and compaſſed about with
righteous dealing as with a garment, that hee can in no wiſe
ſinne, ſuch a ſtaine cannot be in his fleſh, ſuch a clog cannot hang
at his backe. O proud blaſphemie! Can that man of ſinne (for
Saint Paul doubtleſſe ſpeaketh of him) iuſtly ſo called,2. Theſſal, 2. 3. becauſe
he is a ſtumbling block to others, and a cauſe of ſinne to many
thouſands, and himſelfe alſo often a ſeruant or rather a ſincke
of ſinne, can he (I ſay) be without ſinne? Yea they tell vs that
he may,Diſt. 40. cap. Non nor. and that by the authoritie of pope Symmacus, who
doth teſtifie that Saint Peter did bequeath the euerlaſting gift
of Merites, together with the in heritance of innocencie to his
poſteritie. In ſomuch as if they haue not merits enough, yet
that ſufficeth that Saint Peter hath done. He addeth the reaſon,
becauſe he (I thinke he meaneth Saint Peter) either doth
aduaunce them that are worthie, or doth lighten ſuch as are aduaunced.
Now if the pope himſelfe will ſay, that he in reſpect
of his chaire, hath a ſucceſſion of innocencie, it is no great maruel
if his flatterers will ſay he cannot ſinne.
            But if all the popes and their paraſites, would crie it out
neuer ſo loud, yet ſo long as their owne ſtories are remaining
they ſhal be proued liers. Where are now theſe cenſurers
and ſeuere forbidders of Gods writings? Why vſe they not
their authoritie to repreſſe ſuch blaſphemies? The Romiſh
church,Ind. expurgat. can take vpon them to prohibit the writings of godly
men, yea if there be but a note in the margent of the fathers,
word for word out of the fathers, whereby the reader may
perchaunce be directed more readily, to ſee the iudgement
of that father in ſome point in controuerſie, although it change
not the meaning of that place yet our ſeuere cenſurers ſtill commaund
that it be left out. But theſe horrible blaſphemies,
whereof al men may iuſtly be a ſhamed, are not once miſliked of,
ſound not out of time, but are melodius muſicke in the eares of
ſuch holie fathers. Can we hope for any good from them, that
call light darkneſſe, and darkneſſe light, euil good, and good euill?
I feare ſuch bad trees, can bring forth no good fruit. But
to come to ſome particular points.
            
               
Let vs ſee what this petty God, doth take vpon him, and how
he plaieth the God indeede? For as I haue ſaid the bare name of
God (although it be far too much, that it ſhould be giuen him by
others, or acknowledged of himſelfe) wil not pleaſe him, but he
muſt alſo doe as God doth. And firſt whereas Chriſt is our only
lawmaker and maſter, as Chriſt himſelfe telleth vs, and therfore
Saint Iames alſo exhorteth vs that we be not many maſters:Matth. 23. 8. Iam. 3. 1.
yet this Romiſh Rabby will be our maſter alſo, not contenting
himſelfe,The pope teacheth vs of his owne. to deliuer that which he receaued from God, as
did Chriſt and his apoſtles, (whoſe footſteps he ſhould not be aſhamed
to follow) but he will teach vs his owne leſſons, and deliuer
vs his owne doctrines. And although he pretend the direction
of Gods ſpirit,obiection. yet euen hereby it appeareth, that this is
but a lying pretence and coulour, wherewith they would cloke
all their hereſies and ſuperſtitions.Anſwere. Ioh. 16. 13. What the ſpirit teacheth. For the ſpirit ſhal not ſpeake
of himſelfe, but whatſoeuer he ſhall heare, that ſhall he ſpeake.
Aud this reaſon our Sauiour Chriſt yeeldeth why the ſpirite
ſhall lead vs into all truth, becauſe he ſhall teach nothing of his
own, but that which he ſhall heare. Therefore all new doctrines,
euen whatſoeuer hath beene added in ſubſtance of doctrine, vnto
that which Chriſt and his apoſtles left vs, ſauoureth of another
ſpirit, and not of that ſpirit of God, which ſhall teach or ſuggeſt
nothing, but that which he hath heard. What a maſter then,
is that great maſter, not in Iſraell, but in Italy, that bringeth
in huge heapes of doctrine, which themſelues confeſſe onely to
reſt vpon mens traditions, which they call traditions of the
church, and haue no good warrant, or ſure ground in the word
of God? Doeth he not take vpon him Gods office? Doeth he
not make himſelfe herein equall with God? It is moſt plaine,
it cannot be denied. But the infatiable ambition of thoſe holy
fathers, will not ſuffer them to content themſelues with that
exceſſe of pride, in that they take vpon them as God, to make
lawes,The pope controleth gods word. Heb 13. 4. 1. Cor. 7. 2. 9. and giue rules to Gods church, vnleſſe they alſo control
and correct as ſeemeth good to them, thoſe lawes which God
hath ſet downe, and thoſe ordinances which he hath eſtabliſhed
in making that ſin which he calleth honourable, and forbidding
that which he hath commanded, as appeareth in their forbidding
certaine perſons to marry.
            
               
And on the contrary wheras Chriſt reproued Peter for drawing
his ſword, euen in defence of his maſter,Mat. 26. 52. 53. yet Peters ſucceſſor,
and Chriſts vicar, as he tearmeth himſelfe, commendeth it as a
moſt acceptable ſacrifice to God,Killing of princes meritorious in the popes court. and meritorius of the remiſſion
of ſinnes, if in the defence of the pope, or reuenge of his enemies
(and they are all his enemies that will not be his ſlaues) they
fight againgſt chriſtian princes, yea and rebell, againſt their naturall
and ſoueraigne magiſtrates. Of the which becauſe I ſhall
God willing haue better occaſion to ſpeake after, I only would
haue you nowe to remember that furious fellow Iulius the ſecond,Interdictum regni franciae p, 67.
of whom it is written that he gaue forgiuenes of ſinnes to
any that would kill a Frenchman. And it ſeemeth that ſome
cauſe of his deadly hatred againſt the French was this. Iulius
this iolly pope was ſworne when he was choſen pope as many
ſtories teſtifie, that he ſhould call a generall council within two
yeares.
            But he not regarding either oath or duety, was ſo farre from
calling of a councill, that as much as he could he hindered the
ſame. And thereupon nine Cardinals leauing him, came to
Millan, and appointed a councill to be kept at Pyſa, whither
the Emperour and French king did ſend their Ambaſſadours.
Now when otherwiſe hee could not hinder the council, hee purpoſed,
as a friend of his telleth vs,Rioche Compe
                     •
                  
                  ▪ temporum in Iulio. 2. to rule it by warres, ſo that
he made the councill to goe to Millaine for feare. A great
fight beeing vpon Eaſter day betweene the French and this
woorthy warriour: the French men gaue his a great ouerthrowe.
            Whereupon he ſtirred vp againſt them, all that he could, the
Venetians,
               1. Pet. 3. 11. 
               Heluetians, Italians, Spaniards. So wel did he
ſeeke for peace and inſue it, as Saint Peter commandeth him,
whoſe ſucceſſour he calleth himſelfe.
            So much did he regarde that promiſe, that our Sauiour
Chriſt himſelfe,Mat. 5. 9. (whoſe Vicar he would ſeeme to be) did
make. Bleſſed are the peace makers for they ſhalbe called Gods
children. And ſo lightly did he ſet by that commaundement that
Chriſt hath giuen againſt our affectionat and vnlawfull reuenges.
Reſiſt not euill:Mat. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . but whoſoeuer ſhall ſmite thee on the
right cheeke, turne to him the other alſo. So that this pope

doth promiſe the reward of remiſſion of ſinnes, for dooing that,
which Gods law doth flattely forbid, and the law of nature doth
vtterly condemne. Is not this to take vppon him againſt God
himſelfe? Is not this to commaund when he forbiddeth, and to
forbid when he commaundeth? Againe, God hath giuen vs a
plaine and flat commandement,Deuter. 12. 32 that we ſhould doe nothing but
that which he biddeth. Wee muſt not ſo much as turne to the
left hand of our corrupt affections, or ſuperſtitious ſeruices,
which our ſelues condemne, or to the right hand, of our good intentions
and deuotions wherein we pleaſe our naturall man very
well. His word only muſt be our rule and ſquare. Doth not
then the biſhop of Rome controll this and ſuch like commandements
of God, when he ſaith in expreſſe wordes: ye ſhall haue
other rules of religion, other articles of faith, otherwayes to
worſhip God, by traditions of the apoſtles, and of the church,
vnwritten verities,Doctrines beſide the word. decrees, decretalles, briefes and buls, councils
and precepts of the church? Is not this to tranſgreſſe Gods
commandement by our owne traditions, and to make it of none
authoritie?Matth. 15. 3, 6. 9 Is not this to teach as doctrines, mens precepts?
Yea, is not this to ſay with thoſe lawleſſe lordes, wee are they
that ought to ſpeake,Pſalm. 12. 4. who is Lord ouer vs? Thirdly, in that the
pope may (as hee and his fauourites falſely affirme) allowe of
the ſcriptures, whether they ſhall be authenticall or not. Doth
he not thereby take vpon him to be aboue God, whoſe word is
not authentical vnleſſe the pope allow of it. If you doubt whether
the Biſhop of Rome be ſo ſhameleſſe or not, as ſo to ſay,
conſider firſt what Silueſter Prierias a frier, and maiſter of the
popes pallace writeth in his articles or foundations that he ſettethLuth. tom. 1.
downe againſt Luther. Whoſoeuer (ſaith he) reſteth not
vpon the doctrine of the church and biſhop of Rome, as vpon
an iufallible rule of faith, from whence euen the holy ſcripture
doeth drawe ſtrength and authoritie, is an heretike, like vnto
which is that alſo of Eckius,
               Loc. com. de eccl. without the authority of the church,
the very ſcriptures are not authenticall. And let not their doctrine
only be examined, wherein they teach, that the pope is virtually
the church, as doth that frier Prierias in the place before
alleadged in his ſecond foundation, but alſo (yea and that eſpecially)
the practiſe of that church, ſo to refer al things to the pope

in ſuch things, that he according to that fulneſſe of knowledge,
which is in that ſacred caſket of his holy breſt, which pope Paule
the ſecond did firſt boaſt of,Diſt. 40. c. ſi p
                     •
                  p. muſt iudge of all things, ſo that as
he ſaith, ſo it muſt be, and there muſt no reaſon be aſked of his
doing. Whereby it appeareth that the Pope being the church,
and as we ſee, hauing the ful authoritie to do what he will in the
church of Rome, they tell vs that the ſcripture hath no authoritie
or ſtrength but from him? And I pray you then who is greater?
hee that maketh the word authenticall, or hee that hath his
word approoued? Is not he that doth approoue it? ſo God muſt
be vnder the pope, that holy God, vnder a vile ſinfull man.
Fourthly, the pope will take vpon him to diſpence with, or rather
againſt the word of God, and to allow that which God manifeſtly
condemneth, and is expreſly againſt gods holy law. For
proofe whereof, I neede not alleadge the falſe teſtimony of his
flattering lawyers, that giue him that power to diſpenſe againſt
the apoſtle, and ſo againſt gods word: but we may ſee his practiſe,
which doth ſufficiently teſtifie, that he thinketh he may diſpenſe,
with the wicked and vnnaturall vncouering of the ſhame
of them, that are neare of kinne, And he hath done contrary to
this flat commaundement giuen by God againſt marying with
vncle or aunt.Leuit. 20. 20. In which caſe he did diſpenſe in the marriage of
his catholike ſonne Philip King of Spaine, who, as in his vnrighteous
ambition hee hath no meaſure, ſo in his vnnaturall
iuſt, he hath (as it ſeemeth) no ſhame: but to his Lord he ſhall
ſtand or fall, before whome it ſhall be tried one day, whether
the popes bull can ſtand betweene God and him, for breach of
Gods lawe. Yea, pope Martine the fifth (as is alleaged in a
booke called Brutum fulmen, out of Anthony of Florence and
others) did diſpenſe with one, to marry his owne ſiſter, whereas
God ſaieth, thou ſhalt not vncouer the ſhame of thy ſiſter.
But what can not the pope do? He can make wrong right, ſay
they:Leuit. 18. 9. And wee knowe, that hee can make that which is right
wrong. For hee can (as they tell vs) doe all things aboue
right, againſt right, and without right. Yea, hee is lorde of
lordes, and hath the authoritie of the King of kings, ouer his
ſubiects. But what will you more?
            To doubt of the popes power it is no leſſe then ſacrilege. As

alſo it is alleadged out of Thomas of Aquine againſt the errors
of the grecians queſtion 66. That to ſay that the pope hath not
ſupremacy ouer the whole church, is like the errour of them, that
ſay the holighoſt proceeds not from the ſonne. But ſuch are heretickes
againſt the godhead as it cannot be denied,Yo' doubt of the popes ſupremacie is hereſie againſt God. and therefore
doubtleſſe by the iudgement of Thomas of Aquine, they that do
but doubt of the popes ſupremacy are hereticks againſt the godhead.
            And is this that Thomas of Aquine, that glorious Saint
and clarke, whoſe only ſentence weigheth more, then all the proteſtantes
wits and wordes in the worlde,In his inuectiue anſwer to the Engliſh Iuſtice. as ſaith in a ſpitefull
pamphlet our weeping cardinall of England, who can neuer bee
merry, vntill be ſee the ruine and deſolation of his naturall contry.
            In which reſpect I pray God hartely, that hee may nightly
water his bed with teares, and moyſten alwaies his breade with
weeping rather then he ſhould ſee, or his eies behold, the deſtruction
of this land, which he and ſuch other tigers whelps ſo greedely
gape for. And I doubt not, but our good God, which
hath hitherto very often, not mercifully onely, but miraculouſlie
alſo and mightely preſerued and vpholden, the only proppe and
ſtaie of this our flourſhing lande, will ſtill pleade her cauſe
againſt all her foes,our ſins deſerue great plagues. and preſerue her ſoule the ſoule of his
turtle Doue againſt all their ſecret and malitious practiſes. I
confeſle indeede, that our ſinnes which abound daily more and
more, doe iuſtly deſerue, that this pretious iewel, ſhould be taken
from vs. And it is onely Gods mercie, that hath preſerued
vs theſe many yeares, euen his free and great mercie. But if
we could turne to the Lord vnfainedly, we neede neither feare
the ſuites or teares, nor traiterous deuiſes, of ſuch hipocrites,
neither yet the might or malice of all thoſe conſpirators. But
if the Lord ſhould as in iuſtice he may giue vs ouer to be a prey
vnto their teeth, yet the truth of our cauſe is grounded ſtill vpon
Gods word. And the Iſraelites were Gods people ſtill, although
when they rebelled againſt the Lord, hee did ſometimes
deliuer them to be puniſhed, euen of his owne enemies, and
wicked ones.
            And I beſeech the Lorde make vs more patiently to beare

his deſerued wrath if it ſhall pleaſe him to lay it vpon vs, then
we haue vſed thankfully his vndeſerued grace and fauour, which
hetherto he hath ſhewed vnto vs, and continued amongſt vs.
And thus much by occation of that vndue commendation, that
Allen giueth vnto Thomas of Aquin. But him and ſuch like
I leaue to their owne fancies. And to the godly I ſay onely
with Saint Iames, my bretheren haue not the faith of our glorious
Lord Ieſus Chriſt,Iames 2. 1. in reſpect of perſons. Let our cares
be attentiue to marke, and our hearts ready bent to receaue that
which in due examination we find to be well ſpoken, without
beholding of the perſon, or regarding any thing more, then the
word that is taught. And thus haue I briefly ſhewed, how
this vniuſt authoritie which the pope chalengeth and into the
which moſt craftely hee crept, is in part moſt lewdly, by him abuſed,
not onely in that he claimeth to haue a proude name ouer
his bretheren, and the whole church, but alſo that he dare match
himſelfe with God, and directly to oppoſe himſelfe againſt his
will.
            But as in many things much, ſo in nothing more doth the
biſhop of Rome darken Gods glorie, or thruſt himſelfe into
Gods place, then, in that he being himſelfe a ſinfull man, yea a
ſeruant to ſinne, euen ſet and ſold to doe wickedly, dareth yet
take vpon him to forgiue ſinne:The pope forgiueth ſinnes. And that not as one that would
preach and proclame, vnto the penitent ſinners Gods grace
and mercy, but as one that commendeth vnto the people
his owne power to pardon and forgiue men their offences.
Wherein hee firſt offendeth,God onely can pardon ſinnes. in that he taketh more vpon him,
then belongeth to him, or to any man. For, ſeeing our ſinnefull
act, whether it be againſt God or man, is therefore imputed
to vs as ſiune, and is indeede ſinne, becauſe it is a breach of
Gods Lawe; it is very abſurde to imagine that any man can
diſpenſe with vs for this ſinne,1. Iohn 3. 4. but only that good God, againſt
whoſe lawe we haue tranſgreſſed. And for this cauſe the godly
when their ſinne was vnto them a heauy burthen, haue made
their ſuite and mone vnto God, becauſe he onely can heale that
ſore, and helpe that ſickeneſſe, as that one example of Dauid
in ſteed of many, may prooue vnto vs, Pſal. 51. 1. Haue mercy
vpon me O Lord according to thy great mercie, and according

to the multitude of thy compaſſions,Tibi ſoli peceaui. put away mine iniquities.
And although his ſinnes were exceeding great (as after he confeſſeth)
yet becauſe none could pardon them but God only, therfore
euen to him he commeth, againſt whom he had offended, to
him,Iob. 14. 4. he confeſſeth his fault, of him, he ſeeketh for releaſe, to him,
he ſueth for pardon. For of all men it is true that Iob ſaith who
can make that cleane, that is conceiued of vncleane ſeede? there
is not one. And therefore God proclaimeth by his prophet Eſay.
I,Eſa. 43. 25. euen I, am he that putteth away thine iniquities, for
mine owne ſake, and will not remember thy ſinnes. And firſt we
bowe the knees of our heart, to our good God, yeelding vnto
him immortall thankes and praiſe, who dealeth thus gratioufly
with vs vnwoorthy and ſinnefull wretches, as that hee doth
not onely freely forgiue vs, for Chriſt his ſake, all our ſinnes,
and blot out all our offences, and put away all our tranſgreſſions,
with an aſſured purpoſe, neuer to cal them to remembrance,
or to charge vs with them in his iuſt iudgement: but alſo for the
better quieting,The miniſtery of 
                     •
                  econciliation. of our fearefull and troubled conſciences, hath
giuen power and commandement to his miniſters, by proclaiming
to the penitent this his free pardon miniſterially to heale
the ſoule wounded with ſinne, to bind vp the broken and contrite
heart, and to raiſe by form the pit of deſpaire, them whom the
clog of conſcience accuſed of ſinne had preſſed downe. This, euen
this, we acknowledge to be an vneſtimable benefit, and a
great fauour, that God ſheweth to vs vile wretches, that that
mercy which he hath ſealed vp for vs in heauen, he hath cauſed
to be made known here on earth, by the miniſtery of the goſpel.
And this is all the power that is giuen to man, to proclaime vnto
vs that pardon,Eſa. 1. 18. that God only giueth. To tell vs, that if our
ſinnes were as crimſon, they (being for Chriſt his ſake pardoned)
ſhal be as white as ſnow, and if they were like ſcarlet, they
ſhalbe as wooll. But either to thinke or ſay, that any man can
giue any pardon, is too abſurd. I cannot therefore but maruel at
the church of Rome, and the biſhops thereof, tha they ſhame
not, as it were to thruſt themſelues into Gods place, and to take
vpon them to doe, that, which none can doe but God only. They
appo
                  ••
               t their I
                  ••
               ylies, and proclaime pardon of all their ſins,
to ſuth as come to Rome, in the time of that ſolemne feaſt. In

like manner to ſuch as deuoutly ſay ſo many praiers before ſuch
an image, or goe in pilgrimage to ſuch a place. They ſend abroad
into all places, their pardons and indulgences, making of
them plaine marchandies. So that men or women, may for a
litle mony, buie a pardon for their greateſt ſinnes, as they imagine.
Is not this an eaſie way for rich men to get to heauen?Popery a doctrine of licentioſneſſe.
Is not this the very fountaine of all licentious liuing, to teach
that men for mony, may make their peace with God, and ſatiſfie
for their ſinnes? And yet the church of Rome, that ſhameleſſe
harlot, dare charge our doctrine of iuſtification by fayth
(taught firſt by Chriſt himſelfe,Ioh. 3. 1
                     •
                  . Rom. 3. 28. afterwards by his apoſtles
eſpecially Saint Paul in plaine words) to be a doctrine of libertie.
What ſhall we then ſay of this wicked doctine, or rather
of this blaſphemous marchandies, whereby leaue to ſinne, is
ſold as commonly for mony, as old boots and ſhoes are ſold in
London ſtreets, for beeſoms or broome? The firſt I ſuppoſe
that opened this ſhop of theſe popiſh wares was Boniface the
eight,Plat. in Bonif. 8. who gaue full pardon of all ſinnes, marke not of ſome
ſinnes, but of all, to them that viſited the place, where the apoſtles
were. And after the world was filled with ſuch traſh,
pardons were promiſed to them that would fight againſt the
Turke, yea pardons for them that would fight againſt the popes
enemies. But my meaning is not to ſtand vpon theſe points in
particular, but rather to point vnto them. Yet I can not omit
how that Clement the ſixth pope of that name, did perſwade
himſelfe ſo well of his power and authoritie in this behalfe,Sleid. li. 21. that
he gaue commaundement and charge vnto the Angels, that if
any died comming to Rome to the Iubilie, which he had appointed
to be kept euery fifteth yeare, whereas Boniface had
appointed it to be kept but euery hundred yeare,Plat. in Clem. 6 the Angels I
ſay, ſhould carry the ſoules of ſuch ſtraight way to heauen.
What durſt not theſe men preſume to doe, that durſt like Gods
take vpon them, to commaund euen the Angels, to be at their
becke? Well, againſt theſe their blaſphemies which haue no
warrant no colour in the word, I only aſke of them, who can forgiue
ſinne but God onely?Marke 2. 7. 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19. Let them proue it by ſcripture, let
them point vnto him out of Gods worde. If man could doe it,
what neede ſo precious a price, ſo great a ranſom, as not gold

nor ſiluer, but the blood of that vnſpotted Lambe Chriſt Ieſus.
            An other great abuſe there is in this there wicked doctrine.
They promiſe their indulgesnce generall to al that die in the defenceAnother abuſe. The generall promiſe of pardon.
of chriſtians againſt the Turke. Yea they often ſell their
pardons to any that will buie them, as Bale out of Crantzius
reportes,Act. Rom. pontif. Mart. 5. that ſome did in Saxonie, in the time of pope Martine
the firſt. What excuſe can they make, or what pretence can
they vſe, to make this haue any ſhew of lawfulneſſe? God in the
ſcripture ſtill criieth turne vnto me,Pardon to the penitent, and promiſeth forgiueneſſe
to the penitent, hee threatneth the vngodly, that they ſhall haue
no peace.Eſay 48. 22. But not one teſtimonie, not one example cannot be
alleaged, to proue that any man or woman receaue forgiueneſſe
of ſins, vnleſſe they firſt be ſorie for the ſame, which commonly
cannot be in ſodaine death in the wars, and the pardoners rather
require money then amending for the ſame.Luke 7. Luke 19. 8. The ſinful woman
had pardon for her ſins, but ſhee hated them. Zache likewiſe, but
he was become a new man.Matth. 16. 75. 
               Peters denying of Chriſt was forgiuen
him, but by weeping hee teſtified his ſorow for the ſame.
The like may be ſaid of many other, whome I for ſhortneſſe omit.
            Wickedly therefore doeth the Pope giue his pardon of
ſinnes, not ſeeing ſorrow for ſinnes, or purpoſe of amendment
in them, that buy or inioy thoſe their pardons. So Alexander
the fifth did wickedly abuſe the words of Chriſt,Plaeina. being at point
of death: my peace I giue to you, my peace I leaue with you,
as though he could giue that peace.
            But if he haue beeue ſo ſawcie with God, how ſhall he behaue
himſelfe thinke you towards men? For that is another point
which is neeeſſarie to be conſidered. Whereby it will appeare
that as by ſubtilty he entred, ſo with much pride and more then
barbarous cruelty he hath raigned. I told you before, how that
when he had firſt by the emperors means got the biſhops vnder
him, he neuer reſted vntil he had not onely thruſt the emeperour
from hauing any thing to doe in this election: but alſo brought
them vnder his yoke, that they could not be confirmed in the
empire but by him. Now what folowed of this muſt be declared.
Firſt he did ſtriue earneſtly, to keepe all that he had gotten,

and if any emperour hauing indeede in him any noble heart,
would ſeeke to recouer his ancient libertie in ſome part, and to
free himſelfe, from that Romiſh Egypt, and ſlauiſh ſeruitude,
wherein that proud Pharo (vnmindfull of Gods graces to him,
or his duetie to others) did ſeeke to detaine him: then would the
proud pope, viis & modis, by al meanes that poſſible he could
deuiſe, ſo perſecute and afflict ſuch, as if he were ſet vp of God,
to be a pledge to all chriſtian princes, and (as were the Cananits
vnto the Iſraelites) pricks in their eies,Num. 33. 55. and continuall thornes,
and whips in their ſides. And this may euidently appeare out of
innumerable examples. The church of Rauenna did not vpon
Phoeas his decree, ſubmit it ſelfe to the church of Rome, or acknowledge
it to be her head. The patriarch thereof thought
himſelfe to vne as great at Rauenna, as the pope was at
Rome.
            But Theodorus although he willingly would haue kept thatFunct. Cronol an 686.
ancient priuiledge, yet for feare ſubmited himſelfe to Donus
then biſhop of Rome, about the yeare of the Lord ſix hundred
ſeuentie and ſeuen.The popes contention with his brethren. But Felix beeing after patriarch of Rauenna,
and deſirous to ſtand in his auncient priuiledges, mouen
the people to the ſame. So that by all meanes they ſought to
ſhake off the biſhop of Rome his heauie yoke. Leo then biſhop
of Rome ſtirred vp Iuſtinian the ſecond Emperour of that
name, by ſlaughter, ſiege ſpoile, and ſuch violent meanes, to
ſubiect that patriarch to his ſeate. And Felix who ſought to
recouer his liberties, had his eies thruſt out with a hot burning
Iron, as out of Sabelicus and Nauclerus it is reported. But
the pope is not more earneſt, to maintaine his ſupremacie ouer
biſhops (although this hea
                  •
                was too too feruent, that the patriarch,
for this popes pride ſhould haue his eies burnt out) then he
was to hold faſt, aud to increaſe daily, that authoritie which
by moſt impdent and vngodly meanes hee had gotten, not
onely ouer all princes and kings, but euen ouer the Emperour
himſelfe, the greateſt monarch that is in all chriſtendome.
            The emperour had wont in the primitiue churches, to haue a
great ſaying in the choſing of biſhops, eſpecially ſuch as were

biſhops of Rome, as all hiſtories make mention, and is more
euident,The Emperours debarred for hauing any thing to do in the election of the Pope. then that it needeth proofe, and more plaine, then that
it may be doubted of. But when the popes came to their ouer
great authoritie, they began ſomewhat more boldly, to take vpon
them to occupie that roome without leaue of the Emperour.
            
               Adrian the firſt therefore being B. of Rome, and hee thinking
himſelfe much beholding to Charles the great, for defending
him and his church, from the violence of enemies, did in a
council holden at Rome by the emperor and the pope,Sigeb. Cronic. 
                     •
                  nno 773. make this
vniuerſall decree, that the emperour ſhould haue right to chuſe
the pope, and to order the apoſtolike ſeat, and to haue the dignitie
or preheminence of principalitie. I would all our Engliſh
papiſts, and ſpecially the fugitiue traitours, that would for
this cauſe make the happy and quiet gouernment, which England
hath vnder our moſt gratious princeſſe, a long time comfortably
inioyed, (becauſe we giue vnto her maieſtie the title of ſumacie)
ſeeme odiuos to others,A pope acknowledgeth the emperour to haue ſupremacie. and vnlawfull to our ſelues, I
would I ſay they would marke, what pope Adrian and the vniuerſall
council (for ſo doth Sigebert there call it) doe yeeld to
Charles the great, then emperour, that he ſhould haue the principality
and ſupremacie. And further it is there decreed, that the
archbiſhop and biſhop through euery prouince, ſhall be inueſted
by him, and that no man ſhall be once ſo bold as to conſecrate
him, whome the king doth not commend and inſtitute
and that vpon paine of excommunication. And if hee reforme
not himſelfe, his goods to be forfeited, and himſelfe to be baniſhed.
            A neceſſary Lawe doubtleſſe for our dayes, both in reſpect
of the lawe it ſelfe, and alſo in regard of the puniſhment
which is to be layed vpon offendours▪ And the more to
be accounted of, becauſe it is de
                  •
               iſed by ſuch, as I hope they
will not ſaie can erre or cannot ſay they ſeeke their bloud. Wel,
notwithſtanding this decree ſet downe by councill, as you haue
hard, Steuen the fourth biſhop of Rome, and next but one to this
Adrian the firſt (who by a conucil cōfirmed to the emperour this
authoritie)Diſt. 63. C. Quia ſanct. Rom. doth not onely debar the emperour, for medling in
election of the pope, but alſo accurſeth all them, that by the

emperours conſent do obtaine any church. And for the lowder
proclaming of his pride, moſt lewdly hee compareth his vniuſt
and raſh deſanulling of that iuſt decree, made by Adrian and
the council,Pope Steuen the fourth abuſeth ſcripture. with Ezechias his godly aboliſhing of the high
places, the ſerpent, and ſuch other things as were idolatrouſly
abuſed by the Iſraelltes. He alone I ſay without a council, reuoketh
that which the council had commaunded. Pope Paſchalis
the firſt ſucceeding this Steuen, had not the conſent of the emperour,
and therefore ſent his embaſſadours vnto the emperour
Lodouike, to excuſe the matter, and to make him beleeue, that
he was forced by the clergie and people to take the popedome
on him. The emperorbeing of a very mild nature, yet willing to
retaine that priuiledge willed them not afterward to informe the
emperours authoritie, but to keepe in their election the decrees
of their elders. Now the emperour being forced for the repreſſion
of ſome that rebelled againſt him, to ſend Lotharius his
ſonne into Italy there to remaine: Paſchalis the pope inueſted
the ſaid Lotharius in the empire. But hee being gone to his father
into Fraunce for greater aid, ſome of his moſt truſty frends,
were in the meane time killed euen in the palace of Lateran,
               Rioche Compe
                     •
                  , temporum.
their eies firſt put out, onely becauſe they were faſt and faithfull
to Lotharius. The pope was commonly ſuppoſed to be
guiltie, or at the leaſt to be acquainted, with this outragious
dealing of the Romans. And although by other he denied the
fact, yet did he acquite them that had done that deede, and pronounced
them that were ſlaine, to haue beene guiltie of treaſon.
But howſoeuer it was, the emperour ſeeing belike the popes
wholy bent, to depriue him vtterly of any conſent in the election
of the pope, doth himſelfe yeeld it into their hands, making it
lawfull for the popes to take that place vpon them, being choſen
by the clargie and people of Rome,Diſt. 63. C Ego Ludouicus. without the emperours
conſent not long after him commeth Nicholas the firſt, who ſeing
the emperour ſo eaſily to be chruſt from his right, which
was euen by the biſhop of Rome,The emperor put from their councils by the pope. Diſt. 96. C. Vbina
                     •
                  . in a council giuen to him in electing
of the pope, thought hee would incroach ſomewhat further,
and doth wholy debar him, of hauing any thing, to doe,
or being at or in their council, vnleſſe it be when matters of faith
be in handling.Diſt. 28. C. Conſulendum. And further he did decree (to cut his power yet

ſhorter) that no lay man whatſoeuer,Diſt. 28. C. conſu
                     •
                  end 
                     •
                  m 
                     •
                  l
                     ••
                  gie not to be iudged by lay men. Funct. An. 885. ſhould ſomuch as iudge of
Prieſts, or enquire how they liue. And although Nicholas the
firſt, durſt not as yet goe plainlie to worke, but rather by craftie
meanes ſought to diminiſh the Emperours power, yet within
leſſe than thirtie yeares after it was decreed, by Adrian the
third, that the Emperours conſent ſhould not he regarded, in
electing the Biſhop of Rome, but the voices or election of the
Cleargie, and people therein ſhould be free.
            Now by this exemption which the Romans had from the
Emperour, that hee had nothing to doe in their elections: as
they were without feare of his diſpleaſure, ſo were they without
care of doing in their elections as they ought, and by that means
preferred many vnworthie of that place. Wherefore pope Leo
the eight,Diſt. 63. in Synodo. The emperours tight reſtored. in a Synod holden at Rome did decree, that Otho
then Emperour, and his ſucceſſours after him, ſhould elect, not
the pope onely, but alſo the chiefe officers of Rome, or biſhops,
and that onelie with his conſent theſe muſt be counted lawfull.
And if any ſhall goe about to infringe this decree, he is excommunicate.
If he continue therein, he ſhall be perpetually baniſhed,
or haue extreame puniſhment. How long this decree was
kept which was nowe by two Councils at Rome, and by two
popes, Adrian the firſt decreed, & this Leo the eight confirmed,
it is not certaine.The Romiſh ſhif
                     •
                   to debar the emperor for maintaining his right in the elections. But I am ſure that not long after, it was
accounted ſimonie, for anie man to take anie biſhopricke, or benefice,
being inſtituted thereto by anie lay man. And this was
eſpecially laboured by Hildebrand, as ſoone as euer hee came
to haue any thing to doe for the popes, that the Emperour or
lay men, ſhould haue nothing to doe, in the election of the pope.
And becauſe alreadie two Councils had giuen to the Emperours
that authoritie, they that followed would not altogether
and directly, controll the decree of the Councils, but more
craftily they ſo handle the matter, that by a very generall decree,
forbidding all lay men to meddle with elections, or to intteſt
the cleargie, or rather threatning the cleargie, that will receiue
anie eccleſiaſticall promotion at the handes of anie lay man,
they imagine that they annihilate that, which more particularlie,
giueth to the Emperour that power. And indeed moſt buſie to
bring this about, was Hildebrand, (that firebrand of much

miſchiefe) who beeing pope, (for that is hee that was called
Gregorie the ſeuenth) it was almoſt the greateſt ſinne that a
pope could commit, to ſeeke to haue his election confirmed by the
Emperour.
            But before the time of this Gregorie the ſeuenth his papacie,
as Pantalcon reporteth,Panta. ex blondo. 
               Clement the ſecond, went alſo about
to debarre the people of Rome, for hauing anie thing to
doe in electing the Pope. And thus the biſhoppes of Rome,
euer repining and grudging, that the emperour (whoſe power
they feared) might bee a bridle vnto them, or rather a deſerued
ſcourge for their vngodly life, or any other lay man, ſhould haue
anie thing to do in their election, at the length did bring to paſſe,
that neither cleargie nor people,Election by Cardinals. nor emperour ſhould chuſe the
pope: but onely ſuch of the cleargie as were called Cardinals.
And the firſt that euer was choſen pope by the Cardinals, was
Gelaſius the ſecond. For we reade not of anie ſo elected before
him. Paſchalis the ſecond (who was next after him) was,Plat in Paſch. 2. as
Platina writeth of him, deſpiſed of the people, choſen of the
cleargie,Plat. in Gelaſ. 2. praiſed of the Cardinals. But of this he ſaith, that hee
was choſen by generall conſent of the Cardinals, and ſo doeth
Rioche a frier, an hiſtoriographer of our time. Well nowe
the biſhop of Rome hath ſhaken off his yoke, he is now lawleſſe
and peerleſſe, he plaieth now the part of an vntaught and vnruly
iade, that hauing caſt his rider, ſtriketh at him with his heeles.
For, freeing himſelfe from the emperours gouernment, he goeth
about to bring the emperour to be in ſeruitude vnder him. And
therefore firſt,The emperour confirmed by the Pope. Plat. in Innoc. 3. he goeth about to confirme the emperours election,
as it were not ſufficient without his approbation, as Innocent
the third confirmed the election of Otho. Wherin yet by
the way, y• practiſe of theſe prelats is to be noted.A popelike policie. For they would
cōmonly intend themſelues to medle, when by reaſon of ſome diuiſiō,
they hoped their taking part wold be acceptable. As in this
caſe. For there was a diuiſion about chuſing the emperor, ſome
inclining to Frederick, ſome to Otho.
               Acts Rom. pontif. But afterward they came
to that boldneſſe that we reade that godleſſe wretch Iohn 22. or
21. as ſome reckon did excommunicat Lewes of Bauaria emperor,
becauſe he tooke vpō him the empire, without the approbation
of his holineſſe: which was decreed by Clement that was

next before him, as Bale out of Marius alleadgeth. For, although
the electours by their election, might giue him power
to be King of the Romans, yet could he not now haue the name
of an Emperour, but by the pope. And thus wee ſee how vpon
a ſudden, he that but a litle before, could not be pope, but by
the approbation of the emperour, is now ſo great, as that the
emperour can not be emperour, but by his leaue. Now hauing
gotten thus high, his ambition yet had no end, his pride had no
meaſure, his rage had no bridle. For, as he had now either fraudulently,
or violently, or rather both waies obtained thus much,
that he muſt confirme the emperour before he might haue that
title: ſo did he alſo take vpon him (O intollerable preſumption)
ſoone after,The popes controll emperours. Brut, 
                     •
                  ulmen ex Nau
                     •
                  l. Eſ
                     •
                  c. 28. 
                     •
                  
                to controll him euen this higheſt maieſtie in this
worlde, if he did but write his name before the pope, as Adrian
the fourth did Fred▪
                the ſecond.
            Thus we ſee the pope hath ſet himſelfe in Gods ſeate, as
Tyrus ſaieth of her ſelfe, His throne is placed in the cloudes,
and his neſt made very high. Now what means haue they vſed
to clime vp into the ſame? For you muſt vnderſtand, that impotent
affections haue driuen them forward, ſo impudently to ſeek
for this honor. Which if it do not appeare, in that which hath already
bin ſaid: yet in that that foloweth, I truſt it wil be as clear
as the noone day. For many vngodly & vnlawfull practiſe they
haue vſed, (but what doe I giue them ſuch termes, as doe nothing
expreſſe their doings?)Many vile means to get the papacy Many deteſtable and deuiliſh deuiſes
they haue had, to intrude themſelues into that ſeate, and
to ſetle themſelues in that throne. Yea I may (I ſuppoſe)
boldly affirme, that a man ſhal not reade in any hiſtories, or finde
in any records, of any ſtate or ſort of men, be they neuer ſo prophane,
that haue vſed more vile and vilanous wayes to obtaine
their deſire, then the popes haue doone to mount into that chaire.
It ſhould not be ſo I confeſſe, but yet it is ſo: The greater is
their ſinne, the more is their ſhame. No man ſhall take vnto
him any honour and eſpecially ſo great honour, but he that is
called of God as was Aron. And whoſoeuer doth not enter
in by the doore into the ſheepfold,Hebr. 5. 4. None ſhould without calling take any place. Ioh. 10. 1, 10. but climeth vp another way, is
but a theefe and a robber. And the theefe commeth not but to
ſteale, and to kill, and to deſtroie. God by his prophet Ieremie
               
doth often complaine of ſuch prophets, as would runne, when
they were not ſent,Ier. 14. 13. Ier. 23. 21. Ier. 29. 8. and would prophecie, although the Lorde
ſpake not to them. And therefore that which they ſaid vnto the
people, was but lies, a falſe viſion, and the deceitfulnes of their
owne heart. But the true prophets neuer came but when God
ſent them. And therefore they doe commonly publiſh and proclaime
their commiſſion in theſe words, The word of the Lord
came to me, which is more common in the ſermons of the prophets,
then that I neede to point vnto the particular places.
Our Sauiour Chriſt,Ioh. 6. 38. Ioh. 1. 19 when hee came, was ſent of the Father.
And for that cauſe, the Iewes ſent prieſts and Leuites to Iohn
the Baptiſt, to know what he was, what calling hee had in the
church, and by what authoritie he did that which he did. And
as Chriſt himſelfe was ſent of the Father, ſo he ſendeth his Apoſtles,
As my Father ſent me,Ioh. 20. 21. ſo ſend I you. As for Paule
who was then a perſecuter, when the other Apoſtles were ſent
to preach, yet when Chriſt purpoſed to haue his ſeruice in the
miniſtery, he called him, and that not ſtrangely onely, ſaying to
him from heauen,Act. 9. 4. 1. Cor. 15. 10. 
               Saul, Saul, why perſecuteſt thou me? but effectually
alſo, inſomuch as he afterwards laboured more aboundantly
than they all. Whereby it is plaine, that God would
neuer haue the miniſtery of any in his church, but that he called
them lawfully thereunto. Neither is it enough for a man to
knowe that his calling is good, I meane his office or function
which hee taketh in hand, vnleſſe hee haue within him the teſtimonie
of his owne conſcience to aſſure him, that hee is called to
that function, not onely by the outward calling lawfully, but
alſo by the inward calling of the ſpirit effectually. And this is
the meaning of thoſe Canoniſts, (who otherwiſe are ſhameleſſe
in flattering the pope) who dare thus affirme,Bald. In 6. l. Impetrata C. Sententiam reſcindi non poſſe. Num. 
                     •
                  
                as doth Bald.
The pope (ſaith he) being choſen according to the canons, is a
God vpon earth, but not being choſen canonically, is a diuel,
not hauing the keis of the kingdome of heauen, but of hell. And
as Felinus ſaith,
                  
                     •
                  elin. in l. 4. de iureiuran. extra in principio. Diſt. 79 C. Si quis pecunia. Plat. in Nico
                     •
                  . he is not apoſtolicall, but apoſtaticall: which
words Felinus hath borrowed out of Gratian his decrees, and
Gratian out of pope Nicholas the ſecond. For pope Nicholas
hauing depoſed pope Benedict the tenth, who as he alleadgeth
came in by ſymony, called a councill at Laterane, and doeth

there ordaine, that he ſhall be accounted apoſtaticall, and not apoſtolicall,
who by mony, fauour of men, tumult of the people,
or of the ſoldiers, or by any other way then by the agreeing, and
canonicall election, of the cardinals, is made pope. We ſee then
what manner of election there ſhould be. What manner of elections
they haue, and after what ſort they come to be popes it
is now to be declared, which ſhall be performed God willing out
of auncient hiſtories: that the world may ſee, not what Luther
or Caluine, or any of vs in theſe our dayes, doe ſay of their
wicked practiſes, but what hath beene ſpoken and written of
them, that by violence and intruſion, haue entered into that
ſeate.
            
               Platina himſelfe (no Lutheran) telleth vs that when Damaſus
was choſen pope,Plat. in Damaſo. there was a great ſchiſme in the church: for
one Vrſicinius,
               Li. 4. oiſt. c. 29 li. 6. cap. 23. or as Socrates calleth him Vrſinus or as Sozomen
in his eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie calleth him Vrſatius being at
that time in election, gote himſelfe to be made pope, by the
meanes of his frends.
            And whileſt neither of them would giue place to the other,
but both deſired that place, they fell firſt to words, and after
words to blowes, in ſuch ſort, that euen in the church many
were ſlaine on both ſides (ſome ſay to the number of one hundred
thirtie ſeuen. And as there was no regarde of the place (for
this inocent blod was ſhed in the church) ſo neither ſpared they
the very women or any ſexe.Hieron. in cron. The diſorder was ſo notorious,
as that Maximinus at that time gouernour of the citie, did for
the ſame put to death many both of the laitie, and of the clargie
alſo.
            Howe ſhall wee find heere the agreeing or conſenting
election that before I haue ſpoken of,Socrat. hiſt. eccl. li. 4. ca. 62. where we ſee ſuch not
diſſenting in words onely, but alſo ſuch diſorder in blowes, yea
bloud, by ſtriuing to get into that glorious chaire? Not long
after Boniface the firſt being choſen by ſome to be pope,Plat. in Bonif. 1. Sigeb. Crou. another
ſort did chuſe in another church of Rome, another pope,
one Eulalius. And ſo litle agreement there was in that election,
nay ſo great diſſention and ſo much diſcord afterwards,
that Honorius the emperour for feare of greater inconuenience,
was forced to turne them both out of the citie.
                  
                     •
                  aſ
                     •
                  ie. tempor.
               
Afterwards when Symachus was by ſome choſen pope, other
did chuſe one Laurence:
               Plat. in Sy
                     •
                  . Bergom. the contention was very great, and
made a very great diuiſion betweene the ſenators of Rome, and
the people alſo.
            
               Theodoricus then being King of the eaſt Gothes, and
at this time ruler in Italy,A king maketh a pope. placed Symachus pope. But within
four yeares after, this Laurence ſeeking to diſplace Symachus,
and to be pope as before he would haue beene, Theodorick
ſent one Peter a biſhop to to diſplace them both, and to ſit
in that chaire himſelfe. Simachus found meanes that both Laurence
and Peter, were condemned to be baniſhed. Whereupon
there was amongſt them a great ſlaughter, wherein neither virgines
nor prieſts were ſpared as the ſtories report. Yea ſome report,
namely Rioch a papiſt,Rioche. a frier, and a late writer, that this
ſedition and murder continued three yeares, betweene him that
was, and that other that would haue beene pope. Neither was
Boniface the ſecond choſen pope by a conſonant conſent,Plat. in Bonif. 
                     •
                  . but
great contention there was for eight and twentie dayes,faſcic. tempor. or as
ſome write for eight and thirtie dayes: vntill at length by the
death of Dioſcorus (who was choſen by a contrarie faction) the
ſtrife was ended.
            
               Sergius the firſt was alſo choſen very hardly, as writeth
Bergomates,
               Bergomates faſcicul. tempor. and as an other ſtory ſaith, in his election, there
was great diſſention. For ſome would haue Paſchalis, other
would chuſe Theodore. But the gouernour of the citie and of
the ſouldiers,A pope made by the gouernour. to pretient further miſchiefe, did appoint Sergius
to be pope. Conſtantine the ſecond of that name, was by force
put into that ſeate,Bergomates Stella. by the helpe of Deſiderius king of Lombardy,
and others: who bringing to Rome an army made him pope,
being a meere lay man,A lay man made pope. and not hauing taken any orders before.
But perchaunce they will readily except againſt him,
becauſe that Platina and others account him not in the number
of popes.
            It is true that Platina doeth not reckon him amongeſt the
Popes, although he was in that place more than a yeare. But
it ſeemed that they did not call in queſtion his manner of chuſing
(for that had beene a thing growen very common before,
not to haue conſent of them that vſed to chooſe them) but as

               Platina reporteth, is was obiected vnto him, that he not hauing
taken order,Plat. in Steph. 3. was content to take vpon him to be pope, when he
anſwered that the people forced him thereto, the council ſeemed
to pitie him. But when the next day he defended himſelfe, by
the examples of Sergius who was made archbiſhop of Rauenna,
and Stephan biſhop of Naples, being meere lay men, then
they were angry at him, and proceeded againſt him. Becauſe
therefore we ſee not any miſlike that they had of him, but onely
that he was not within orders: I ſee not but that he may well
enough be reckoned among them, that by violence poſſeſſed that
ſeate,Bargom. faſcic. tempor. and therefore not lawfully. What ſhould I ſpeake of
Eugenius the ſecond, that in a ſchiſme was made pope? Or of
Martin the ſecond, (whome Oniforus calleth Marius) who by
euil meanes came to be pope, and as Platina ſeemeth to report,
by mouing ſedition againſt Iohn the ninth.Blat. in M. 2. Whether he
were ſuſpected of the death of the ſaid Iohn or not I knowe not.Abbas Vrſp.
But the Abbat of vrſperg reporteth that the pope had poyſon
giuen him and alſo a blowe with a beetle or mall, whereof he
died.
            Nowe whether theſe be the euill meanes whereof the hiſtories
ſpeake, by which pope Martin came to be pope I cannot
affirme. But many popes haue vſed as had meanes as
afterwards (God willing) ſhall appeare. Not long after pope
Chriſtopher,
               Platina Bergomat. Rioche. thought it was too long before he could get into
that proude ſet. For feare therefore leſt he might goe quite
without it, if he quickely got it not, he traiterouſly moued
ſedition againſt pope Leo the fifth, that made great account
of him, and tooke the ſaid Leo when he had beene pope but
fortie dayes, and ſo gote into the place, as Rioche affirmeth
by contention, and euill meanes. But nowe theſe Romiſh
rabbies I would haue to open me one riddle. Platina hauing
ſet downe this hiſtorie learneth by this experience that it
is moſt true,Platina in Leo. 5. that dignities are rather dignified or commended
by men, then men by them. As the Cenſorſhip
(ſaith hee) of Rome at the firſt as a meane office, was nothing
ſet by, but when the chiefe men of the citie, tooke that
office vpon them, then the greateſt citizens thought themſelues
almoſt vnhappie, if in their life they inioied not that office.

What Platina meaneth by this I cannot tell, vnleſſe he thinketh
the biſhop of Rome at the firſt, was not in ſuch eſtimation or
account as afterwads hee grew to. But that ſo it was I haue
before declared. For from mean beginning he is now growen to
be a captions controler of the greateſt princes. And this (as it
ſeemeth) Platina thinketh to be the reaſon, why the biſhopricke
of Rome (which was perchance in the beginning not worth
ſuing for) was afterwards by ſo great contention and fighting
ſought for. And ſo men haue dignified that ſeat, and not that
ſeat the men. And the place hath gotten authoritie by the
biſhops, not the biſhops by the place. Which in my iudgement
doth ſomewhat ouerthwart that fulneſſe of power, and that continuall
ſpring of ſpirituall graces, which they would make vs
beleeue, floweth from that chaire and that power which they ſay
it hath from Chriſt himſelfe.
            Next after Chriſtopher commeth Sergius the third.Rioche. faſcic. tempor. He
diſplaced Chriſtopher by the helpe of Lotharuis the king and
ſate in his place and caſt him into priſon. Now how himſelfe
was made pope, Platina can tell you, who ſaith that he perſecuted
Formoſus his faction,Platina in Serg. by whome he was before hindred,
from being pope (for hee thought he waited to long for ſo good
a place.) And thereupon Platina comparing the popes then,
with the firſt that were, findeth them nothing like. For in
times paſt, they refuſed that place being offered vnto them. But
now ſaith he, they ſeeke it by briberie, and ambition, and euill
meanes. They gaue themſelues to prayer, and to teach.
Theſe not regarding Gods ſeruice giue themſelues to tyranous
crueltie, that after they may the more freely fulfill their
luſts, whē no man dare control thē. Thus ſaith Platina of them.
Not long after commeth Iohn the eleuenth a worthie prelate
for ſuch a place. He was baſtard ſonne to pope Laudo,
howe holy his ellection was,Bale ex Petro Premonſtratenſ. howe canonically hee was
choſen is worth the hearing. Theodora a ſhameleſſe harlot,
that ruled all Rome, was greatly in loue with this Iohn, as
ſoone as ſhee ſaw him. And ſhee hauing for a time inioyed
his companie and liking well of the ſame, firſt made him biſhop
of Bondnia, after archbiſhop of Raue
                  ••
               a, and laſtly biſhop
of Rome, and was not this thinke you a canonicall election.

But whether this harlot Theodore did violently place this
pope (which eſpecially belongeth to my matter in hand) or that
ſhe by fauour obtained conſent of the electours, it is not certain.
But by lawfull meanes, it is certaine he came not to it. There
was alſo another pope Iohn after him, thruſt into that rowme,
who although he be not numbred among the popes, yet becauſe
he was baſtard ſonne to pope Sergius the third, hee is woorth
ſpeaking of, in reſpect of the good ſtocke he came of. Therefore
Theodora that famous harlot, had a daughter maried to Guy
Marques of Thuſcia, her name was Marozia. Who following
the good conditions of her mother, by pope Sergius had a baſtard,
whom ſhe and her huſband (hauing diſpatched pope Iohn
the eleuenth by ſtopping his mouth with a pillow) made pope,
and hee was called Iohn the twelfth. Thus did Marozia kill
her mothers paramour, that ſhee might make her huſbands
baſtard ſonne (by pope Sergius) pope in his roume. And thus
we ſee howe this ſeat, wherein they will make vs beleeue, that
none can ſit but moſt holy fathers, is become a denne for moſt
prophane and godleſſe ruffians and rakehels.
            
               Iohn the twelfth by the their owne account,Rioche faſci, t
                     •
                  m, 
                     •
                  ergom. was alſo intruded
into that place, by meanes of his father, who was thought
to bee Albert, or Albericke king of Italie. But howſoeuer
he came to it, he when he was in it, was ſuch a ruffianly companion,
and ſo vicious, as that it is written, that euen from his
youth he was ſtarke naught, and was not aſhamed openly to
keepe harlots. So youthfull he was, that in him began that
by-worde, As merrie as pope Iohn. He came of a good race.
For Marozia (of whom before I ſpake) was his grandmother,Act. Roman, pontif.
And as his entrance was not good, ſo yet his going out was
too bad: for ſome ſay the diuell killed him euen in his adulterie,
being in bed with an other mans wife:Faſciul. temp. Bergom. Rioche. ſome affirme it
was the womans huſband, but that hee was killed euen in his
filthineſſe, all agree. And was not this a holy Father? Neither
did Boniface the ſeuenth get into this ſeate the right
way, but malis artibus, by euill meanes, as all ſtories almoſt
ſpeake.
            And of the popes that were about this time doeth the ſtoriePlat. faſcicul. temp.
called Faſciculus temporum giue this note, That in

theſe daies the biſhops of Rome were ſlaine,Platina. faſcicul temp. Popes murthered, but not mar
                     •
                  ired. as well as in the
primitiue Church, but yet they are not Martyrs, as were the
other. Their deathes were like, but the cauſe vnlike. And
of this pope Boniface the ſeuenth manie ſtories report,A pope, a theefe. that
hee committed theft, and ſacriledge, ſtealing from Saint
Peters Church, all the Treaſure and Iewels, and ſold them
at Conſtantinople, to make money thereof, wherewith hee
procured ſome friendſhip at his returne, with more ſafetie to
ſit in that proude ſeate.
            Among theſe alſo,Rioche. may Gregorie the fifth be reckoned, who
for fauour of the Emperour was made pope, or as Platina
ſaieth, by the othoritie of Otho the Emperour, and as Faſciculus
temporum ſaieth, at his requeſt, Bergomates ſaieth the
Emperour did will and commaund him to take it vpon him.
Benedict the ninth entred vniuſtly,faſcicul. temp. and fearing that hee could
not keepe the papacie, hee ſolde it to Iohn the Archdeacon.
But of him I muſt ſpeake after Silueſter the third was intruded
either by Symonie or ambition,Rioche. or for hatred of Benedict
the ninth.
            
               Benedict the tenth entered by force and briberie.B
                     •
                  rgom. As for Gregorie
the tenth, how canonicallie he was choſen, it may be ſeene
by the olde verſes that were made of his election, whereby it
appeareth that the diſcorde of the brethren, made him (who
was an Archdeacon before) father of fathers. For the place
(I meana the popedome) was nowe ſo much deſired, and ſo
ambitiouſlie ſought for, that the Cardinals manie times, would
for a long time bee diuided, and could not agree about the
chuſing of the holie father.
            As immediatelie after the death of Innocent the fourth,Rioche,
and alſo after the death of Clement the fourth, they diſſented
almoſt two full yeares at either time, before they coulde
agree of one. And this latter time doubtleſſe they had ſtaied
longer, but that for ſhame they were forced to chooſe one, becauſe
Philip the French king, and Charles were they preſent.
            So likewiſe, before Nicholas, the 3. could he choſen, the cardinals
were diuided 6.Rioche. months, & he being dead, the 2. families of
ye Vrſins & Annibals, did for 5. mōths ſpace make ſuch a breach

among them, as that they could not agree of any. And before
Celeſtine the fift could be choſen pope, the cardinals diſagreed
two yeeres and three moneths, or, as other ſay, two yeeres and
ſix moneths.Bergomate
                     •
                   faſcicul. tempor. And when he was choſen Bergomates ſaith, it was
in ſcorne & diſdaine of Nicholas that was next before him. And
indeed his ſimplicitie is ſaid to be ſuch, by al yt write of him, that
themſelues could not be ignorant, that he was not likely, to be
the fitteſt for that place. After the death of Benedict the eleuenth
the cardinalles were more then a whole yeere before they could
chuſe an other.faſcicu. tempor. Rioche. Elections in worldly reſpects. For they did not ſeeke to chuſe the fitteſt, but
ſom deſired to haue an Italian, yt would be friendly to Boniface
his friends. Other would haue one that ſhould be friendly to the
French King. Thus we ſee how in their election, they maintained
a faction. And at the laſt by fauour of the French king,
and at his requeſt,Rioche. was Clement the fift. Next after Clement
the fift commeth Iohn the two and twentieth. The cardinalles
hauing beene diuided two yeeres and three moneths, when they
could not agree of any, they gaue power to him, to name him
that ſhould be pope. But he contrary to their expectation, did
name or chuſe himſelfe, and ſo was made pope. How canonically
he was choſen let the Reader iudge. Becauſe others would
not,Bergomates Stella. he ſet himſelfe in that ſeate. And ſo did Iohn the three and
twentieth: for lying at Bononia, more like a lord then a legate,
and hauing with him a great army, he threatned the cardinals to
be euen with them, vnleſſe they choſe ſuch a one as hee liked of.
They naming ſundry, he would like of none. Then they deſired
him to tell them whom he would haue. Bring mee, ſaith
he, Peters cloake, and I will giue it to him that ſhall be pope.
They did ſo. He caſt it vpon his own ſhoulders and ſaid, I am
pope. I omit to ſpeake of the great ſchiſme and contention that
was for the papacie, that beganne betweene Clement the ſeuenth
and Vrban the ſixt,faſcicul. tempor. which continued 39. yeeres, Faſciculus
temporum ſaith 40. which alſo was occaſiō of great bloodſhed
among chriſtians. Wherein chriſtendome was ſo diuided,
that the moſt godly and learned did not knowe which was that
pope, whom they might acknowledge for the head of the church.
In what a diſtreſſed caſe was the church at that time, when it imagined,
it muſt needes haue a pope for a head, and could not

tell where to haue him:De authorie. co
                     •
                  
                  cil li. 2. cap. 19. The church ſome time headleſſe. for a doubtfull pope is no pope ſaith
maſter Bellarmine. As alſo before I haue ſhewed that many
times there was no pope for many moneths, yea ſometimes for
ſome yeres, becauſe the cardinals could not agree among themſelues.
Yea after Nicholas the firſt there was no pope as ſome
ſay for eight yeeres and almoſt eight months:Platina. Iacob. Bergom. how then did the
church for want of a head.
            Thus haue I briefly runne ouer many of them, whome in
ancient hiſtories I find by fighting or force, or other hard means
to haue intruded themſelues, or elſe by contention and ſtrife to
haue beene placed by other in the popedome. And not one that
ſo climeth vp by the window, can be ſaide lawfully to be choſen
to the ſame.
            But as theſe by force, ſo by falſhoode other came to the
ſame.Platina. 
               Vigilius was made pope at the earneſt ſuite of Theodora
the empreſſe, with this promiſe, that when hee was made
pope, hee woulde reuoke Anthemius, making him againe
the patriarch of Conſtantinople, and diſplace Menas a godly
biſhop. Now Anthemiu was an Eutychian, and ſo did defend,
that there was in Chriſt but one nature. True it is, that
he being made pope would not performe that promiſe, wherein
he did well. But if hee had not by ſuch ſubtile ſhifts ſought
to be pope he had done better. But it ſeemeth, howſoeuer he
afterwardes conſtantly refuſed to do that euill (perchance being
put in minde of his offence by Siluerius) yet hee had a very
ambitious minde, and ſought long before to haue beene
pope,Epiſt. Siluer. Tom. concil. 2. in principio. Bergom. Platina. as appeareth by a letter that Siluerius the pope his next
predeceſſour wrote vnto him. Wherein he chargeth him, that
contrary to the Canons he ſought to be ſucceſſour vnto Boniface.
            
            
               Martine alſo the ſecond, a proude pope and ambitious,
by moouing trouble to Iohn his predeceſſour, and getting him
caſt in priſon, thought (perchance) the ſooner to get into that
place. But howſoeuer it was, it is written of him, that by euill
and indirect meanes he came to that place, and by craft or
deceit (as Bale writeth.)
            As for Honorius the ſecond, Platina telleth vs how he came
to that ſeate.
            
               
For Leo Breake-bread, a great man in Rome (Calixtus
the ſecond being dead) gaue charge vnto the Cardinals,Platina. Act. Rom pontif. not to be
too haſtie to chuſe a pope, but that they ſhould tarie three daies,
to conſider more deliberately of the matter, and to peruſe the
Canons. He indeuoured in the meane time to procure the place
to one Lambert biſhop of Oſtia. The Cardinals perceiuing his
ſubtiltie, did chuſe one whom they called Celeſtine. The people
were verie deſirous to haue a Saxon the cardinal of S. Steuen,
and alſo the ſaid Break-bread, ſeemed willing to haue the ſame,
the rather to get the people to bee fauourable to him whom he
would haue, ſeeing the Cardinals had choſen one, againſt their
minde. And by this ſubtiltie of Breake-bread was Honorius
made pope. Frier Rioche ſaieth, perchaunce Honorius was
not conſenting to this canuaſing to make him pope. Whether
he were or not it maketh no great matter. I looke not nowe,
what the parties are, but whether the election were lawfull, the
choiſe free, and with willing conſent, and how he entered. But
Platina himſelfe miſliketh the election.
            I had almoſt forgotten Boniface the eight,Platina. Bergom, Rioche. a man as well
worthie to be remembred, for his ſubtill dealing, to get Rome
for him to ſit in the popes ſeat, as any other. For he cauſed a man
ſecretly to hide himſelfe in the chamber of (eleſtine the fifth,
who was a verie ſeellie ſimple man, who in the night time,
ſhould, as if he were an Angell ſent from God to inſtruct him,
admoniſh pope Celeſtine, if he would be ſaued, to giue ouer the
papacie. Celeſtine not miſtruſting any falſhoode, but thinking
it was a voice from God himſelfe, gaue ouer the papacy. Vrban
the ſixt likewiſe was thus choſen,Iacob. Bergom. & The people required an Italian
pope. The Cardinals to pleaſe the people, promiſed to do
what they could, and aſking aduiſe of one Bartholomew biſhop
of Bar, he gaue counſel that they ſhould chooſe one for the preſent,
to pacifie them, that they might haue the name. And then
going to another place, they ſhould chuſe another, that ſhould be
pope in deede. Whereupon they choſe him to be pope in name.
Which when they had done hee kept it in deed. And therefore
Stella and others,
                  
                     •
                  uic. l. 20. in fine call him craftie. But in craft Paul the third
was not inferiour to any, who (as is reported by Francis Guicciardine
a papiſt too in his hiſtorie of Italie) that the Cardinals

might be the more willing to chuſe him to be pope, in hope that
he would ſoone be dead, did by art iucreaſe the opinion of weakneſſe,
which by reaſon of his age, (for he was lxvii. yeares olde)
they had conceiued of him. But for all his feigned weakeneſſe,
he liued pope more then xv. yeares. A longer time then commonly
the popes of theſe latter times are ſuffered to liue.
            An other kind of cunning alſo there is,Popes choſen by ſymony and briberie. when by bribery and
gifts they will buy, that which their deſert can neuer procure vnto
them. And this ſymonicall ſubtiltie, was ſometime their ladder,
whereby they muſt climbe vp into that chaire, which
is ſet higher, then they otherwiſe would be able to get into. Platina
writeth that Formoſus g
                  •
               t to be pope by bribery rather then
vertue.Platina. But what ſpeake I of Formoſus, Bergomates and
Stella, writing vpon Romanus that was pope ſoone after Formoſus,
doe ſhew the practiſe of popes of thoſe times to get the
popedome.Bergom. Stella. For of Romanus they ſay, that he came not to it by
ambition, and briberie, as did many of the popes of thoſe dayes.
I haue ſpoken before of Boniface the ſeuenth, who ſtole the treaſure,
and moſt precious iewels out of S. Peters church, that he
might be the better able to bride, as all ſtories report. As for Benedict
the ninth if he ſolde the popedome, Gregorie the ſixth
bought it. In deed Platina and other doe ſay, that he ſold it, or
gaue it ouer, let the indifferent reader iudge whether is more
likely that he did.Sigeb. Cron. But Sigebert doeth pſaiulie ſay, that this
Benedict was a Symoniacke, or got the popedome by ſimonie.
And in Euſebius his Chronicle it is written,Euſeb. cron. that Theophylact
(belike that was Benedicts name) did ſell the Papacie to Iohn
a Prieſt. And this bargaining and badde dealing made
plentie of Popes at this good time. For ſome write, that
Henrie the Emperour depoſed at this time fiue Popes, and
made a ſixth.
            And that the world may ſee howe good choiſe they made.
It is written that one of them (Sigebert ſaith Benedict, but
Faſciculus temporū
                ſaith Gregorie the ſixt) was ſo vnlearned,
that hee was faine to get one choſen to ſay Maſſe, and play the
Pope in the church,Faſcic. tempot. while himſelfe might play the pope abroad.
Now I pray you which of theſe popes was the heade of the
church: the praying pope, or the playing pope.
            
               
The church that hath ſo bad heades muſt needes be ſicke of
the headach,Eſay 19. 14. and troubled with a phrenſie, or gidi
                  •
               es, as indeede
the Romiſh church is. For it would not otherwiſe ſo manifeſtly
oppoſe it ſelfe againſt Chriſt, as it doth. By what meanes
Clement the third came to be pope I cannot tell. But Richard
the firſt king of England,Act. and Mon. Anno 1190. Mat. Paris. made a great complaint of the pope,
and his court for their ſymonie. And Mathew of Paris reporteth,
how he emptied the bags, and lightned the cariages of
Iohn the biſhop of Norwich, who ſought to him to be diſpenſed
withall for a vowe (as it ſeemeth) that he had made, to go
to the holy land. But of that kinde of ſymonie, that author
complaineth bitterly, in many places, againſt many popes. I
might alſo ſpeake of the euil entrance of Iulius the ſecond, who
by his great power which men feared,Guic. hiſt. Ital. N. 6. and his bribes that he
gaue, and promiſes of biſhopricks and ſuch other promotions
which he made, got to be pope, although otherwiſe a man for
ſturdie and ſurly nature loued of none, miſliked of all. But
let vs ſee what other meanes they haue, when violence, craft,
and ſimonie, will not ſerue. They haue an Italian figge, to
haſten them that are popes to giue place to them that would
be.
            It is reported by the writers of hiſtories,Platina
                     •
                   Rioche. that Damaſus the
ſecond ſent ſuch a haſtie meſſenger, to call away Clement the
ſecond, his predeceſſour. For he thought he taried too long, and
yet he ſtayed in that ſeat ſcarſe nine monthes. A litle before
Clement, was Iohn the ninteenth ſommoned in ſuch ſort,
when he had beene pope litle more then three monethes.bale act. Rom. pontif. But
for Clement Benno the cardinall writeth that hee was rather
poyſoned by Brazutus that godleſſe wretch and that Heldebrand
that firebrand of much miſchiefe,ben. de vita & geſtis Hildeb. procured to doe many
ſuch feats. For within thirteene yeares, he poiſoned ſix popes,
Clement the ſecond Damaſus the ſecond, Leo the ninth, Victor
the ſecond, Steuen the tenth, and Nicolas the ſecond. So
that if any but Gregorie were choſen this Gerard Brazutus
was readie ſtraight way to giue him a drinke that did them
litle good. So 
                  •
               hat poyſoning ſeemeth at that time, to be
but a popelike practiſe,De pontif. Rom. 
                     •
                  . 5. cap. 13. if wee will beleeue Cardinall Benno.
But maſter Bellarmine endeuoureth as much as hee can, to

impaire the credit of that hiſtory. And to that end he gathereth
all that he can find out of other hiſtories,bellar. obiect. againſt benno. either in diſprayſe
of Henry the fourth the emperour, againſt whom pope Gregory
the ſeuenth did vndutifully and vnchriſtianly oppoſe himſelfe.
And alſo picketh out all the prayſes of Gregory the ſeuenth,
to make him ſeeme another manner of man, then Benno
reporteth him to be.Anſwere. But Benno liued in the time of Gregorie
and therefore he could be an eye-witnes of many things.
He was a cardinall and therefore by likelihood, howſoeuer he
miſliked of the doings of the man, yet he would not vntrewly
report any thing, that might be a ſtaine to that church. But if
he had written any thing falſly, it is not to be thought, but
that ſome or other hiſtoriographer of thoſe times, would haue
proued that cardinall Benno had but ſlaundered, and would
haue written againſt him. Which maſter Bellarmine hath not
ſhewed there. And therefore that which he hath ſaid doth onely
prooue, that the emperour had his faults, and that the writers
of thoſe times, would rather lay the cauſe of Gregories immoderate
pride and tyrannie vpon the wicked doings of the
emperour, then vpon the proud and vnruly affections of the
pope. Pope Alexander the ſixth a ſea and ſincke of ſinne, and
as it were nothing but a maſſe of wickedneſſe, was belike very
ſkilfull in this tricke.Guic. hiſt. Ital. li. 1. And yet I neuer heard that euer he
poyſoned any popes, but one onely, and that was himſelfe. He
came to be pope as other in thoſe dayes, by indirect and euill
meanes. For he bought with mony, and obtained, by promiſing
the promotions that he was poſſeſſed of vnto others their voices,
and ſo was made pope. Though he was of ſo bad diſpoſition, as
that Ferdinand king of Naples (though he were neuer ſeem to
weepe, at the death of any of his children) when he heard that he
was choſen pope, wept, and with teares ſaid to his wife, that hee
would be a great enemy not to Italy only, but euē to al chriſtendome.
And thus doth Guicciardine and Italian deſcribe him that
there was in that man no ſincerity,A popelike man. ſhame, truth, faith, religion:
but inſaciableauarice, immoderate ambition, more then barbarous
cruelty, a moſt earneſt deſire to aduaunce by any meanes his
children that were not few, & ſom of them as bad as their father.
Is not this thinke you a popelike prelate? Did not the cardinals

that ſold their voyces, to make him pope, find out a holy father
to ſit in that chaire? And ſuch are, O ye papiſts, ſuch are too too
many of the heads of your church of Rome, of later yeares. But
to returne. For I haue a litle diſgreſſed to ſhew his canonicall
entrance, and his popelike vertues. If he entred not by poyſening,
yet he did practiſe it very much. And hee had a ſonne Valentine
a baſtard as hee had many (ſixe children in all Platina
ſpeaketh of) who was firſt made cardinall by his father,Guic. hiſt. Ita, l. 6 yet
afterwards he turned his cote, and became a duke. His father
and he minding to ſup in a garden (where the ſonne alſo purpoſed
to poyſon Adrian a cardinall, that ought the garden) this
Valentine ſent thether bottels of poyſoned wine, with charge
that none ſhould drinke thereof, before himſelfe came. But the
pope his father being drie, called for wine. And becauſe none
was brought from the popes pallice, Valentines ſeruāt, giueth
to the p
                  •
               pe of that wine, thinking his maſter had forbidden that
any ſhould drinke thereof, becauſe it was ſome principall
wine. As the pope was drinking, his ſonne Valentine commeth
in, his father giueth to him of the ſame wine. The father
died of the ſame. Wee may note in him Gods iuſt iudgement.
For the pope and his ſonne did vſe to poyſon many,A pope a poiſoner poiſoned by his ſonne. not ſo much
for reuenge, or in reſpect of their ſafetie, to diſpatch ſo their enemies
(although euen that is but a cowardly vilanie) but to
get their goods, although they neuer wronged them. As the
rich cardinall of Saint Angelo. Yea euen their deareſt frends,
if they were rich they would ſerue ſo, as they did the cardinals
of Capua, and Mantua. But that kind of death that they had
brought many vnto, the pope himſelfe then taſted of, and the
ſonne very hardly eſcaped, but his being ſicke at that time was a
meruelous ouerthrow of his eſtate. Yea we ſee how they that
were conſpirers together, to poyſon many, did now ſhew their
ſkill, one vpon another. The ſonne poyſoning the father, for
he ſent the poyſoned bottels.The father and ſonne poiſon one another. And the father poyſoning the ſon,
for he gaue him poyſon to drinke. And ſo where ſome other by
poyſoning their predeceſſours made roome for themſelues:
Alexander the ſixth, by poyſoning himſelfe made roome for another.
And if they thinke none of theſe practiſes ſure enough,
then will they fall downe and worſhip him, who when he had

ſhewed Chriſt all the kingdomes of the worlde,Matth. 4. 8, 9. and the glorie
thereof, he ſaid to him, (though they are not his to giue) all theſe
will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worſhip me.Platina. 
               Platina
himſelfe (who is loth to ſpeake the woorſt by Popes, vnleſſe the
truth thereof be ſo plaine, that it cannot well bee denied) reporteth
of Silueſter the ſecond, that he gaue himſelfe to the diuell,
vpon condition the diuell would make him Pope. Muſt it not
needes be a good head of the Church, that is of the diuels owne
chuſing?
            Cardinall Benno writeth the like alſo of Iohn the ninteenth,Ben. de geſt. Hil.
who came next after Siueſter, and of Benedict the 9, who as he
ſaith, was by the diuell choked in a wood. But I of purpoſe let
paſſe many of theſe examples. For I haue beene much longer
then I had purpoſed, in theſe practiſes of the popes, to get into
this chaire. If I ſhould come to the election of popes in theſe
our times is it not as eaſie to ſee, as the ſunne at noon day, that
there is almoſt none choſen to that ſeat, but by fauour, briberie,
ſuite, or to pleaſe and pleaſure ſome princes, or in reſpect of ſome
faction? Is not this the ſpêciall care that they haue in their elections,
who is fitteſt to maintaine their owne pride, and moſt
likelie to ſerue their owne turne? Are all their popes choſen now
canonically, without reſpect of any thing, but to chuſe the fitteſt?
If the greateſt friends that the Romiſh church hath, were ſo
ſhameleſſe that they would ſay ſo, yet their owne heart within
them, would tell them that they lie. Well then, if to bee thruſt
into that place by others, or to intrude themſelues, if to get it by
fighting and brawling, by poiſoning and killing, by bitter contention
and ſtrife, by craft and falſhood, by briberie and gifts, by
murthering and miſchiefe: To bee ſhort, if to climbe into it by
helpe of the diuell, and by ſuch horrible wickedneſſe, as Chriſtian
eares cannot well endure to heare, be to enter in at the doore,
and to be choſen canonically, then we will confeſſe that mame of
the popes haue entered well. But if this be to come as a theefe,
and a murtherer, then what meaneth the church of Rome, ſo to

                  ••
               ag of their ſucceſſion, which euen by their owne lawes (ſet
downe a little before) hath ſo often, and ſo notoriouſly beene interrupted?
What meane theſe factours and brokers for Simon
Magus, that briber and ſorcerer, to vauat themſelues, to be ſucceſſuors

to Simon Peter? Theſe are ſuch heads, as the church
of Rome can affoord vs. Theſe are they, that we muſt call
moſt holy fathers. Theſe, euen theſe are they that cannot erre, if
you will truſt the church of Rome. And yet in all that they doe,
there is nothing but erring, out of the right way. They are
like men, that pretending to ſhoote at a marke, turne their backe
of it, and ſhoote the cleane contrarie way. And as they
are content to vſe any meanes be it neuer ſo vnlawfull, to get
into that ſeat, ſo when they are gotten once into it, they are become
lawleſſe and ſhameleſſe, as by ſome examples ſhall be
ſhewed. Honorius the third, did very ſawcely oppoſe himſelfe
againſt the emperour Fredericke the ſecond (as alſo did ſome
other of his felowes) and did excommunicate him and depriued
him of his imperiall dignitie.Plat. in Honor. 3. Act. Rom. pont. in Honor. 3. And Bale telleth vs that the
cauſe why the pope delt ſo hardly with him, was for that he defended
his owne right in Apulia and Cicily. And out of Marius
he reporteth, that the pope did maintaine and cheriſh, certaine of
the emperours rebels and ſeditious ſubiects ſo that the emperour,
could not puniſh them as they deſerued. The names of
thoſe traiters were Mathew and Thomas, who kept from him
forceably ſome of his caſtels and poſſeſſions,Abbas Vrſperg. in freder. 2. whom when the
emperour had ſubdued they fled to the pope: who intertained
thoſe traiters againſt their lord and maſter. Whereof becauſe
(as he had great cauſe) hee complained it ſeemeth that hereupon
he did excommunicate him. But Gregorie the ninth that came
next after him, was far more cruel then he againſt the emperour,
continuing the ſentence of excommunication againſt him, which
Honorius had pronounced,Plat. in Greg. 9 vpon pretence that al his commaundement,
hee did not goe to the holy land. Neither could any
reaſonable excuſe ſerue to mitigate the mad moode of that Luciferian
pope againſt the emperour. For by the emperours
letters, the contents whereof are to be ſeene in Abbas Vrſpergenſis,
and in Mathew of Paris, it appeareth that the emperour
was ſick, in ſomuch as hauing vndertaken the iorney, by
reaſon of his ſickneſſe, hee was forced to returne againe. But it
is plaine enough to them that marke the ſequel, that the pope
did but picke a quarrel againſt the emperour, that he might inuade
his poſſeſſions. The emperour ſeeing this ſaucie pope,

ſo cruely and couetouſly bent againſt him, conſulted with ſome
of the Romans (with ſuch I ſay as were of principall account among
them) how he might bind the people of Rome, to acknowledge
themſelues to be his ſubiects, which he brought to
pas. Then the pope ſent forth againſt the emperor, another thundercracke
of excommunication. For which his inſolent fact, the
pope by the people was forced to flee out of Rome. And durſt
not returne in two yeares. Now the emperour to pleaſe the
pope went to the holy land as they call it. But the pope doth
now ſhew himſelfe to haue had no other meaning, in ſending
him to fight for the holy land,2. Sam. 1
                     •
                  . then Dauid had, when hee commaunded
Ioab to place Vriah in the ſtrength of the enemies
battel, and that he and his people ſhould flee, leauing Vriah to
be ſlaine of the enemie. So the pope commaunded the emperour
(the ſawcie ſeruant his lord & maſter) to fight againſt ye Turke.
But to what end? Had he any true zeale againſt Gods enemies?
Had he a ſincere heart, and vnfained affection, to increaſe the
kingdome of Chriſt, no no. It ſeemeth he much more deſired
the deſtruction of the emperour and intruding himſelfe into his
dominions, then the recouering of the holy land. For the emperour
being at Acon, hauing paſſed according to the popes pleaſure,
into that land to fight againſt the Turke: the pope by all
meanes poſſible did ſtay his ſoldiers, and ſuch as were to paſſe
ouer to aide the emperour, and fight in that quarrel, not ſuffering
them to goe. And nowe the emperour being where the
pope would haue him, he (the pope I meane) beſtoweth huge
maſſes of mony, in hiring of ſoldiers to inuade the emperours
dominion, ſtirring vp the traitours before mentioned Mathew
and Thomas againſt him, and ſo ſubdueth to himſelfe that
which belonged to the emperour. What a godles and ſhameles
parte was this, by excommunications to force the emperour,
vnder pretence of holy warre, to leaue his dominions, and then
moſt wrongfully to inuade the ſame? And when the emperour
being there, had made an honorable peace betweene the Chriſtians
and the Soldan, hauing gotten reſtitution of certain things,
that the Soldan had woon, he of his good nature wrote vnto the
pope, to certifie him of theſe newes, which he thought, would
haue bin ioyfull to al chriſtians. But that proud prieſt, as he had

before contemptuouſly refuſed to heare, or admit into his preſence
the emperours embaſſadours,The pope a ſhameleſſe liar. ſo did hee nowe reiect his
letters, and caſt them from him. he alſo cauſed it to be publiſhed
abroad that the emperour was dead, thinking thereby the
rather to diſcourage the emperours faithfull ſubiectes, and to
make them yeelde vnto him. And to the end that this lying report
ſhould not be croſſed,A murderer. Act. Rom. pontif. in Greg. 9. the pope cauſed the meſſengers that
brought the letters to be killed. Thus we ſee how Gods vicar
beyond all ſhame, and without all ſhew of reaſon doth whollie
oppoſe himſelfe againſt Gods ordinance, namely the emperor.
Theſe things are largely ſet downe by Abbas Vrſp. before named,
but eſpecially by Mathew of Paris, who in a letter written
to Richard earle of Cornewall by Fredericke the emperor
of the report of all the popes dealing with the ſaide emperour,Mathew Paris. Hen. 3. fol. 676. The cauſes of the popes hatred againſit the emperour fol. 673.
ſheweth the principall cauſe of all this malice that the pope had
againſt him, was, becauſe he refuſed to permit the pope to ſet
downe order concerning Lumbrardy: for the pope deſired to haue
that matter compromitted to him ſimply, without any exception
or reſeruation of any right to himſelfe. Which if the emperor
would haue yeelded vnto, and ſo haue loſt Lumbardy, as there
the emperour doth teſtifie, he might haue wonne the Popes fauour.
For hee promiſed him faithfully (if the faith of a Pope
be any thing worth) that hee woulde not onely doe nothing againſt
him, but he would alſo giue vnto him towards he maintenance
of his warres, the tenth of all chriſtendome. The pope
alſo woulde faine haue beſtowed a neece of his vppon the emperours
ſonne Henry,
               Pariſ. 1107. which becauſe the emperour would not
hearken vnto (for his nobles tooke ſcorne that the pope ſhoulde
make that offer) for this and the other cauſe before alleadged,
the pope miſliking the emperour, did picke all quarrels againſt
him and did thrice excommunicate him,In Greg. 9. and as Iohn Bale out of
this Mat. Paris allegeth, did promiſe eternall life to al them that
would fight againſt the emperour. As if ſo curſed a creature had
it to beſtow at his pleaſure: or as if rebellion againſt Gods ordinance
might looke for ſo good and great a recompence.
            I might enter into a large and wide fielde of the notorious
o
                  •
               ſtinacie and vnlawful dealing which ſundry of the popes haue
vſed againſt their lords & emperors. But I haue ſtaid ſomwhat

long in this example, becauſe it appeareth by the ſtories, that as
their dealing againſt him was lewd and cruel, ſo the cauſe was
their owne priuate matters, which caried them with an vndrideled
affection to do whatſoeuer they could miſchieuouſly deuiſe,
if they had power to put it in execution, not regarding what impietie
they cōmitted againſt God, or what wrong againſt man,
or what diſgrace the brought to themſelues, an their place, ſo
they might worke their wil.The vexation againſt the emperour Henry the fourth. What ſhould I here ſpeake of the
great troubles that Gregorie the 7, Victor the 3, Vrban the
3, and Paſchal the 2 wrought againſt Henry the 4 the emperor
excommunicating him, diſcharging his ſubiects of their obedience
they ought to him, yea ſtirring vp vnnaturally his owne
natural ſonne againſt him? How rude and ſauage crueltie was
that which Gregorie the ſeuenth that vnmanerly fellow, ſhewed
vnto the emperour at the towne called Canuſium,Greg. 7. his barbarous pride. when hee
made the emperour, that was willing to ſubmit himſelfe (being
by extremitie forced therto) to wait at his gates, three daies
continually in the extremitie of a ſharpe winter,Sleid. de mon. l. 
                     •
                   Rioche cempend. hiſtor. barefoote and
bare legged, without meate or drinke, and would not admitte
that great monarch to his ſpeech. The fourth day, with much
adoe, by the intreaty of a gentlewoman (who could do ſomwhat
with the pope) and at the ſuite of ſome others, his holineſſe forſooth
was content he ſhould be admitted vnto his preſence. And
though this ye emperor his ſubmiſſiō was ſuch, as was thought
too lowly and abiect by the nobles of Italy, inſomuch as they
purpoſed to depoſe Henry the fourth from the empire,Sleid. de mon. l. 
                     •
                  
                as bringing
a ſtaine to the ſame, by his ouer humble yeelding vnto the
popes exceſſiue pride: yet could it not ſatiſfie the pope. For he
notwithſtanding all that the emperour had doone, purpoſed to
beſtow the empire vpon Rafe 
               
                  •
               . of Sweueland. And therefore
ſent to him the crown emperial with this verſe written about it:

                  The Rocke to Peter this crowne gaue,
                  And Peter bids that Rafe it haue.
               
            
            This Henry that was moſt villainouſly abuſed, by that
prowde beaſt and his ſucceſſors, is he of whome Paulus Langius
bringeth the teſtimonie of Otho Friſingenſis, that he was
the firſt emperor of Rome that he could find (although he marked
diligently in reading) that euer was excommunicated, or

depriued of his kingdome by the biſhop of Rome.
                  
                     •
                  geb. Cron. anno 1088. For, as Sigebertus
ſaieth, this onely new doctrine, I wil not call it hereſte
(ſaith he) was not yet bred, that the prieſtes ſhoulde teach
the people, that vnto wicked kings they owe no ſubiection. Yea,
though they haue ſworne fidelitie to them, yet they owe them no
fidelitie, neither that they are not to bet called periured, that
ſtand againſt the king, but whoſoeuer obeyeth the king, is to
be accounted an excommunicate perſon: but he that is againſt
himlis abſolued from all fault and periurie. If Sigebert had liued
in our times, what would he haue ſaid, when hee ſhould ſee
this new hereſie, not onely ſtiffely and ſtubbornly, yet ſlenderly
and verie vnlearnedly maintained for catholike doctrine,The anſwer to engliſh iuſtice cap. 4. by that
vnnaturall traitor Allen and his fellowes, and a new practiſe
alſo agreeable thereunto put in bre and highly commended, to
poiſon, ſhoote, or by any meanes to kill, ſuch as the popes will
ſay are heretikes (as all are that wil not ſtoupe vnder his yoke.)
Wel, about 500. yeres ſince, it was new hereſie (for it is verie
neare ſo long ſince Sigebert did write.) And therefore it is not
that poore proofe of Tho
                     •
                  
                of Aquine, a man that liued in the
dayes of corruption, or of Francis of Toledo, ſome ſeditious papiſt
of our time, or of that late Councill of Lateran, not much aboue
300. yeares ſince, that can make it a Catholike doctrine.
But to end this ſtorie of Henrie the fourth, Paſchalis who was
not long after Gregorie, did not only proſecute the matter with
all extremitie, againſt he ſaid Emperour whileſt hee was aliue,
as did Gregorie before him:Malice againſt the emperour being dead. 
                     •
                  rant. li. 5. c. 24. Abbas Vriperg. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1106. but euen after he was dead, they
who for good will, and that common dutie that we owe to them
that are departed, did burie him, could neuer haue peace or fauour
of pope Paſchalis the ſecond, vntill they had taken vp his
bodie, and caſt it into the fields. Is not this popelike charitie? Is
not this diueliſh enuie, a moſt ſure demonſtration that they are
not led by the ſpirit of God? But to bee ſhort, this one thing I
dare affirme, and I proclaime it to the ſhame of all them that
loue poperie: that if you ſearch all ſtories, and peruſe all Chronicles,
and call to remembrance all things that you haue read,
heard, or ſeene, you ſhall neuer find any that profeſſe the name of
Chriſt, be they neuer ſo rude or ſauage, not any Turke, Iew or
infidell, wil attempt things ſo vnnaturall, ſo contrarie to the law

of God, ſo far beyond the compaſſe of humanitie, as papiſts doe
and wil do, yea and many of the popes themſelues haue don, and
thought they might doe. Our late daies giue vs ſo many examples,
to proue this to be true, that wee need not looke vnto theſe
former ſtories. You ſee how vnereuerently they haue dealt with
theſe moſt honourable princes. And did not pope Alexander the
third as intollerably hehaue himſelfe as any man could do, when
hee making the Emperour lie downe at his feete, did treade vppon
the necke of the Lords annointed, which was woorſe then
to cut off the lap or a peece of his garment,1. Sam. 24. 6. (for doing whereof,
Dauid accuſed himſelfe to haue done wrong.) But this pope, I
ſay,funct. cro. 116
                     •
                  . treading vpon the necke, of Fredericke the firſt of that name
emperour, did moſt prophanely and blaſphemouſly abuſe theſe
words of the Pſalme,
               Pſal. 91. 13. Thou ſhalt walke vpon the lion and aſpe,
the yong lion and the dragon, ſhalt thou tread vnder foot. Thereby
proclaiming that he he neither had any feare of God, or reuerence
of the ſupreme maieſtie in earth. I omit of purpoſe to
ſpeake of Gelaſius the ſecond,Gelaſius. Calixt. 2. againſt Hen. 5. and Calixtus the ſecond, againſt
Henrie the fift, the vnnaturall ſonne of Henrie the fourth. Nether
do I rehearſe the vngodly dealings of theſe and ſome other
againſt manie kings and princes. Yea I paſſe ouer alſo with ſilence,
that villainous treaſon that Alexander the third wrought
and practiſed,Act. Rom. pontif. Alex. 3. with the Turke, againſt this Fredericke the firſt
which had beene the finall deſtruction of the emperour, if the
Turke had not beene more mercifull,The pope a traitor to the emperour. then the pope was faithfull.
For the pope deſiring the death of the emperor, moued the
Turke to diſpatch him, as he loued his owne quietnes: and withall
ſent him a liuely counterfet or picture of the emperor, wherby
he might know him if he came into his hands, by which alſo the
emperor being taken of the Turks, was knowne when he came
before the great Turke. For hee brought forth the ſaid picture
which ye pope had ſent him, therby prouing him to be Frederick,
and withall he ſhewed the popes letter, mouing him to deſtroy
the emperor, and therby did it appeare to all that heard thereof,
that the pope was a traitor to Gods cauſe, & the emperors perſon.
But I am weary of raking in theſe chanels. And this which
is already ſaid, is I truſt, ſufficient to point vnto the vnreuerent
vnhoneſt, & vnchriſtian proceedings which theſe godles and prophane

vgly monſters vſed, after y• once they came to their height
of honor: abuſing the colour and pretence of religion and holines,
to hide their violent and bilanous practiſes: And makng that ſeuere
cenſure and ſharpe chaſticement,Excommunication abuſed. (which is onely to be vſed
in Gods cauſes, and that vpon the greateſt occaſions,) as a
very fooles bable, wherewith they ſtrike euery one, that doth
not folowe their vnbridled wilfullneſſe. But their intollerable
and impotent pride, doth yet more appeare, if we conſider their
dooings nearer home. For you ſee howe after they had gotten
that authoritie which long they ſought, euen as a man that aimeth
at his marke, ſo did they practiſe and deuiſe what they
could, againſt the ſoueraine maieſtie vpon earth, as if all their
care were bent, to bring him lower as indeede they did, ſpoyling
him by litle and litle of his dominions, and ſo leſſening his
power, and at the laſt deſpiſing his authoritie, and wringing it
out of his hands as hath beene ſhewed. And as hee could not abide
any to be his better or ſuperior ſo far of,The popes dealings againſt the regiment in Rome. ſo likewiſe he could
not ſuffer any to haue any gouernment exempt from him, neere
him in the citie of Rome, and therefore were they alſo ſundrie
times repining and ſtriuing againſt thoſe magiſtrats which in
Rome had the gouernment of the citie. For hauing brought
the emperour to hold of him (for the emperour, ſay the Canoniſts
now, holdeth his empier of the pope, and therefore he is
bound to ſwere homage and fealty to the pope, as the vaſſal is
voūd to his lord) hauing I ſay ſo ſubiected the greateſt, he taketh
ſcorne that any ſhould ſit vnder his noſe, and not be vnder him.
And therefore pope Leo the third ſending certaine preſents
vnto Charles the great,Rob. Ba
                     •
                  nes. in Leo 3. The popes ſeeke to ſubiect the citie to them. made vnto him ſuite and obtained it,
that the people of Rome ſhould be ſworne to be ſubiect vnto
him.
            And ſo from that time, which was about the yeare 796.
vntil the time of Innocent the ſecond about the yeare 1139 they
continued in ſubiection to the biſhop of Rome, being gouerned
at his appointment 343 yeares.Ioh. Stella in In. 2. But being warie belike of
his Tyranicall gouernment, they made vnto themſelues a pretor
& ſenators to rule them, concerning their ciuile gouernment,
as in times paſt they had wont to haue. For indeed this Innocent
was a wonderful proud pope, of whom it is writen in a

booke called Burtum Fulmen,
               brutum fulmen ex cron. Hi
                     •
                  ſ. A prowde pope. and alleaged out of two hiſtories,
that in the Lateran church at Rome, he painted Lotharius the
emperour proſtrate at his feete, and his vaſſal or ſeruant
receauing of him the imperiall crowne. And by this picture,
were verſes written, wherein the emperour is made his ſeruant,
and it is ſaid that the pope giueth him the crowne as though he
could not haue it but by his gift. His pride being ſo immoderate
againſt the emperour, it is not like he could keepe any meaſure
with ſuch as were inferiors, and ſo did they ſhake of his intolerable
yoke.
            Nowe the pope not knowing preſently how for to amend
himſelfe or to hinder their purpoſe, yet thought he would ſo bridle
them,C 17. q. 4. cap. 
                     •
                   quis ſuadente. Laying violent hands vpon a clergie man. as that his clergie ſhould be free from their rule. He
gathereth therefore a council in Lateran, where he cauſed it to
be decreed, that whoſoeuer ſhould lay violent hands vpon a
clergieman (though he be but a pſalmiſt ſaith gloſſe there, whom
the Diſt. 23 calleth a ſinger cap. Pſalmiſta. and the Diſt.
21. cap. Cleros maketh next the dog driuer and doorekeeper)
ſhould ſo be accurſed, that (vnleſſe it were in time of death) he
might not be abſolued of any, but the pope onely. For this
cauſe alſo Onuphrius writeth that the people of Rome were
excommunicated,In Innocent. 2. and put for euer from chuſing the popes, and
by that meanes, that the election of the pope came to the cardinals.
But Platina as I haue before noted ſaith, that Gelaſius
the ſecond was choſen by the cardinalles, who was before this
Inocent. Well, Lucius the ſecond pope of that name, although
he had great cauſe to haue though of other matters (for at that
time there was a maruelous great plague,Stella. whereof of his predeceſſor
Celeſtine the ſecond died, as alſo himſelfe was taken
away by it) yet his proude ſtomacke, not being able to beare
the gouernment that then was in Rome,
                  
                     •
                  unct an. 11143. cronolog. by a pretor and ſenators,
ſought to alter it. The pretor or Alderman maior whoſe
name was Iordan told the pope, that al the 
                  •
               egalities belonging
to the citie as well without as within the walles belonged to
him being pretor by reſon of his office, & that ye pope had hitherto
occupied the ſame by meanes of Charles the great. But he demaunded
his owne right, willing the pope to content himſelfe, as
his ancetours had done, with firſt 
                  •
               ruites, tithes and offerings.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
But his holineſſe, being as vnwilling to learne a good
leſſon, of Iorden the pretor or Alderman of Rome, as were
the Phariſes to be taught of him, whom Chriſt made to ſee,
(Thou arte ſay they altogether borne in ſinne,Ioh. 9. 14. and teacheſt
thou vs?) Deuiſed more miſchiefe againſt the Romans
then did the Phariſes againſt that man, that durſt teach them,
for they did but caſt him out of their ſynagogue, that is they did
perchance excommunicate him. But this holy pope, who ſhould
be to others, an example of patience and forgiuing our enemies,
had this deuiſe,Rob. Barnes. The popes cruell and godleſle purpoſe. that watching a time when they were all gathered
together in council, the Pretor, Senators, and all the chiefe
of the citie, the pope gathered his ſoldiers, and ſet vpon the capitoll,
(the place where they were aſſembled) thinking either to
haue deſtroyed them all, or elſe to haue driuen them out of the
citie.
            But the Romanes hearing of this pope-like enterpriſe,Lucius the ſecond ſtoned to death. armed
themſelues vpon a ſodaine, and running to the capitoll, did
ſo pelt with ſtones the pope himſelfe, that within a few dayes
after he died. Whether of the plague as before out of Stella I
aleaged, or of theſe bates it maketh no great matter. For they
were rid as it ſeemeth of a furious foole, and ſaued the liues of
their chiefe men, and for a time retained their libertie. This
doth Robert Barnes reporte out of Naucler. Sum. Anton.
and Iacob. Colum. Now this queſtion betweene the Romans
and the biſhop of Rome continued in doubtfull caſe as appeareth
by frier Rioch and others for a ſeaſon, namely whileſt Eugenius
the third, Anaſlaſius the fourth, and Adrian the fourth liued,
the Romans ſeeking to haue their liberties of chooſing their magiſtrates,
confirmed vnto them by the popes, the popes on the
other ſide repining againſt that which the Romans did. Yet
in the time of Alexander the third they came to this agreement
that the magiſtrates choſen by the Romans, ſhould not meddle
with their office, vntill they had beene ſworne to be faithfull to
the church of Rome and the pope. And thus this controuerſie,
that was betweene the citie of Rome,Rioche. compend. hiſ
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ar. Plat. in Alex. 3. Plat. Stella. and the pope, for fiftie
yeares, was agreed. But Lucius the third being perchance
proude then Alexander his predeceſſor (whoſe pride yet was
intollerable) not content to ſuffer ſo much as the name of Conſuls

in Rome went aboue to aboliſh the ſame, and had gotten to
him ſome of the Romans. But the citizens roſe againſt him,
expelled him out of the citie and put out the eies of certaine, that
fauoured his attempt.
            Thus we ſee, how the biſhops of Rome, to the end that their
authoritie might the more ſmoothly proceede without controlment,
did ſeeke to take theſe rubs out of their waie. Hitherto we
haue in part ſeene, in what ſort the biſhops of Rome being come
to their hieght haue deale with their betters, and how roughly
they haue handled them. But perchance their friends wil excuſe
them, becauſe that by doing as they haue done, they haue defended
(will they ſay) the rights and priuileges of the church of
Rome. But howe will they excuſe the ſlauiſh ſeruitude, wherunto
they brought the greateſt princes?Reuel. 19. 10. an
                     •
                   21. Saint Iohn offered to
fall downe before the Angell, but the angell would not ſuffer
him to worſhip him, I am (ſaith he) thy fellow ſeruant, worſhip
God. But theſe vile wretches, will ſuffer kings and emperours
to kiſſe their feete. Conſtantine the pope was the firſt
that euer accepted of this honour done to him by Iuſtinian the
emperour.Plat. in Conſtan. 1. papa. And then Stephan the ſecond, whoſe feete Pipin
the french king did kiſſe. But afterwards this grew to be ſo ordinarie
a matter, that the kiſſing of an old fooles foule feete, is
the greateſt honour that can be done to the greateſt prince at
Rome.
            And Pope Steuen hauing gotten into his handes the exarchie
of Rauenna,plat. in Steph. 2. & Zachar. whereby he became great in Italy, and al by
the meanes of the ſaid Pipin, whom he alſo rewarded by making
him king of Fraunce,Abbas Vrſperg. in Pipino. an. 754. thruſting Childrick the true lawfull king
into a monaſtery, and intruding Pipin in his roome, he now in
triumphing manner is carried vpon mens ſhoulders. And he
is the firſt that I knew of any of the popes, that thought the
earth too good, to beare ſo wicked a lumpe as himſelfe was.
For I truſt hee thought it not too baſe to touch his ſacred feet.
Well, the reaſon of his doings is not for vs to ſearch, but
he was firſt carried of mens ſhoulders.Epit. hiſtor. Neither will I here
inquire of the cauſe of depoſing the right king of Fraunce,
whether it were iuſt or not, although no cauſe could make it a iuſt
fact in him, that had nothing to doe with it. Onely this will I

ſay, that where maſter Bellar. would make the inſufficiencie of
the French kings,Lib. 2. de pont. Rom. cap. 17. to be the cauſe why either Zachary, or Steuen
that was next after him, did depoſe the French king from
his rightfull crowne, yet Platina whoſe words I rather beleeue
then maſter Bellarmine,
               Plat. in Zachar. confeſſeth that Pipin being greedie of
a kingdome, ſent his embaſſadours to the pope, that he would
by his authoritie, confirme vnto him the kingdome of Fraunce.
Whereunto the pope agreed, in reſpect of ſuch former good
turnes, as hee had receiued of that houſe. And ſo by the popes
authoritie the kingdome of Fraunce is adiudged to Pipin the
yeare of our Lord ſeuen hundred fiftie and three. Thus much
Platina. Whereby it appeareth that the ambition of Pipin, and
wrong dealing of the biſhop of Rome, was a cauſe that Childerick
was depoſed. But to returne to my matter againe, we ſee
what pope it was,The pope caried on mens ſhoulders. that was firſt ſo proude, that he could not let
his owne legs carrie him. But it was ſet downe afterwards
for a lawe, vnto which the emperour muſt be alſo obedient if he
will not be rebellious to the decrees of the church. And it is decreed
that the emperour himſelfe, if he be by, muſt helpe to carry
that loytring lubber. For thus I reade it cited out of their owne
booke of ceremonies.The emperour muſt carry him. Although the emperour, or any other be
he neuer ſo great a perſonage, be by, hee ſhall carry vpon his
ſhoulders a litle while,Cer. l. ſect. 2. fol. 35. a. Fol. 26. b. the chaire and the pope. And againe it
is decreed in the ſame place, that the moſt noble lay man ſhall
carry the end or traine of the pluuiall that the pope weareth, be
it the emperour or any king. What a ſlauerie is this, that he
by his vngodly and wicked ordinances, doth tie princes vnto, as
though they were his very ſtaues. Why ſhould he looke that
emperours ſhould be his hacknie horſes, to cadge him vp and
downe? Or what reaſon hath he, what warrant out of the
ſcripture? What example in Gods booke, or of any good man
ſo to diſg
                  •
               ace and deface the anointed of the Lord, whom he as
well as others, ſhould ſeeke by all meanes to honour and reuerence?
            Yet let vs ſee what more reuerence theſe proud prelats
can ſuffer to be done vnto them.Princes leade his horſe. 
               Pipin the new made Frence
king, did teach the pope a very euill vſe. For he ſlattering
the pope, that hee might make him more frendly to him, in

aſſuring him of his kingdome, meeting him three miles from
his lodging,plat. in Steph. 2. alighteth from his horſe, and leadeth the popes
horſe all the way, not leauing him vntill he had brought the pope
to his lodging.
            It is alſo recorded that another time the king of England
on the one ſide, and the French king on the other performed
him that ſeruice.Bale in Ale. 3. ex Rob Mont. cion. Sigeb. an. 1164. Sacrar. Carem. l. 1. ſect. 5. & ſect. 2. fol. 35. But what neede I ſeeke for the particular
examples? This is alſo a booke caſe, It is alreadie ordered.
That the emperour ſhall leade his horſe, and kings
ſhall goe before him, as performing their ſeruice to this earthly
God, or God on earth. But yet we haue not ſeene his
fullneſſe in pride.Holding the ſtirtop to the pope. Emperours holde the popes ſtirrep Rob. Barns. Ioh. Bale. For the emperour if he be by when the pope
alighteth, muſt hold his ſtirop. So did Frederick Barbaroſſa
the emperour vnto the pope Adrian the fourth, although he had
no great thankes for his labour.The emperour held the wrong ſtirrop. For hee chanced to hold the
the wrong ſtirop, the pope was ſo offended thereat, that when
the biſhop of Bamberg, in the name of the emperour, had by a
pithy oration ſignified his ioy for the popes preſence,The pope is very angry for it. the pope
replied that he heard indeede words of gladneſſe, but he could
not by deedes perceaue any ſuch thing. And his reaſon was
becauſe the emperour held not his right ſtirrop. The emperour
although angry, yet ſmiling anſwered, that he vſed not to hold
any bodies ſtirrop, and that made him the leſſe ſkilfull. For he
was the firſt, whoſe ſtirrop he held. And for that time they
parted, neither of them being well pleaſed. But the next day
the emperour made amends for his former offence. holding the
right ſtirrop. And the ſame emperour Frederick, did afterwards
alſo hold the ſtirrop to pope Alexander the third, (a
cruel and ſhameleſſe enemie to the ſaid emperour) as appeareth
by a letter which maſter Fox in his Actes and Monuments
aleadgeth out of Roger Houeden and William of Gisborough.
            
            In which Letter it doeth moſt plainely appeare, not onely
that the Emperour did holde his ſtirrop, for the pope confeſſeth
ſo much in writing vnto the Archebiſhoppe of Yorke
and to the Biſhop of Durham, and would haue them to reioyce
for the good ſucceſſe of the church (for the church is much
increaſed when the popes ſtirrop is holden by ſuch) but alſo he

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
cauſe they ſaid to Moſes and Aaron, that they tooke too much
on them, ſeeing all the people were holy: howe great then ſhall
their iudgement be, that abuſe all, euen the mightieſt Monarchees,
at their pleaſure? Doeſt thou ſee (O Peter) thy ſucceſſour,
and thou O ſauing Chriſt, behold thy vicar? Marke
well howe farr the pride of the ſeruant of thy ſeruants, is gone
vp,Vrſperg. ſaith an Abbat long ſince, and therefore I truſt no Lutheran,
no Calueniſt, no Hugonot, but a flat papiſt, and yet ſpeaketh
this in deteſtation of the pride of popes, and namely of
pope Boniface the eight, who the ſecond day of his Iubilie,
apparelled like an Emperour,The pride of Bonif. 8. with a ſword carried before him,
cried aloude,Auguſt. Beneveu. in Alberto. Beholde two ſwordes, as the ſame Abbat reporteth.
Who when Albert Duke of Auſtria, came to him to
be confirmed in the Empire, whereunto he was choſen, tooke
the Crowne and ſet it vpon his owne heade, and tying the
ſworde to his owne ſide,Act. Roman. pontif. Rioche. Beneuenut. ibid. ſayd, I am the Emperour. Or as
Frier Rioche a friend to popes writeth, I onelie am Emperour,
who boaſtingly woulde call him ſelfe key-carryer of
heauen. And therefore hee is worthilie called a famous pope,
and a magnificall tyrant of prieſts.
            Nowe if wee ſearch and trie from whence hee hath anie
warrant for this his Luciferian behauiour againſt God and
man, what can hee anſwere? Hee hath no commaundement,
nor any proofe or approbation of it in Gods worde, no example
of the godlie.obedience to princes. Chriſt and his Apoſtles ſhewed all dutifull obedience
to magiſtrates, and exhorted alſo others to doe the like.
Ceſar muſt haue his due, whether in obedience or tribute, or
feare, or honour, or anie thing elſe, if wee will obey the commaundement
of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, or followe their example,
or beleeue their ſaying, when hee telleth vs that the Apoſtles
ſhoulde not haue ſuch dominion,Matth. 22. 21. matth. 17. 27. Matth. 20, 25, 26 or exerciſe ſuch authoritie,
as the Lordes of the Gentiles did exerciſe ouer them.
He commendeth loue,Ioh. 13. 34, 35. matth. 5. 9. math. 11. 29. Popes ſeeke preheminence. and pronounceth the 
                  •
               eacemakers bleſſed,
and would haue vs to learne of him to bee meeke and lowly
in heart. But the pope finding nothing in all theſe that ſerueth
or fitteth his humour, taketh his patterne of Diotrephes, who
loued to haue the preheminence.3 Ioh 9. matth. 23. 6, 7. Or of the Scribes and Phariſes,
who loued the chiefe place in feaſtes, and to haue the

chiefe ſeate in the aſſemblies, and greetings in the market, and
to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi. Yea, Chriſt and his Apoſtles
tooke great paines in preaching, ſpared not for labour, feared
not for daunger, preaching in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, ſuffered
all things, indured all things, ſeeking Gods glorie and
not their owne.Popes no preachers. Whereas on the contrarie, the popes cannot,
or will not vſe to preach. They haue inough to doe to deuiſe
howe they may ſubdue Emperours, bring vnder their yoke the
neckes of Kings, ſet vp their chaire of peſtilence, aboue all
the thrones in the earth. This is their care, their ſtudie, their
whole endeour.Plat. in Paſchal. 
                     •
                   Stella. And therefore Paſchalis the ſecond, although
he would not be pope, vnleſſe the people would firſt giue ſome
rare teſtimonie of his diuine election, for they muſt cite three
times Saint Peter hath choſen to bee pope Rainer, for that
was his name before, an excellent good man, O fond hypocrite,
yet when he had taken it vpon him, it was done with many ceremonies,
to make him ſeeme more glorious. For hauing gotten
this double conqueſt,Popelike attire. firſt in that he got to be pope, ſecondly that
hee made the people giue ſuch a teſtimonie of him that he was
ſo worthie a man, he thus addreſſeth himſelfe to his triumph.
            Firſt he putteth on him a crimſon robe,Plat. in Paſch. 2. an ornament vpon his
head, and ſo waited on by the people and cleargie, vpon a white
horſe he rideth to the ſouth gate of the pallace of Laterane, and
entering into the pallace, hee putteth about him a girdle, at
which were hanging ſeuen keies,Plat. in Paul. 2. and ſeuen ſeales, and holdeth
his ſcepter in his hand. But Paul the ſecondthought not this brauerie
ſufficient to ſet forth his glorie,Coſtlines of attire. and therefore he much increaſed
the coſtlines of theſe ornaments, eſpecially for the miter
which hee wore vpon his head, buying the moſt precious ſtones
that he could heare of to adorne and decke the ſame. And leaſt his
withered face, ſhould not be ſomewhat ſutable, he would alſo as
ſome report (for ſo Platina telleth vs) paint it.Paul the ſecond did paint his fa
                     ••
                  . And he alſo ſaith,
that hee had a great delight to ſhewe himſelfe to ſtraungers,
and woulde keepe them manie times in the Citie, that they
might beholde and wonder at him. And indeede they had iuſt
cauſe to wonder at him, that he who by his calling ſhoulde
haue beene an example of modeſtie, a light to ſhine vnto other,
and ſalt to ſeaſon them that were vnſauerie and by his age,

ſhould haue beene paſt thoſe toyes, and childiſh vaine conceits,
ſhould ſo farre forget himſelfe, that he would not only decke his
body with more precious attire then was ſeemely for him, who
ſhould haue beene to other a patterne of all chriſtian humilitie:
but alſo paint his face more like a wanton Ieſabell than a ſober
biſhop.
            And thus I truſt it appeareth, how inſolently and ſtately the
biſhops of Rome haue behaued themſelues, hauing by very vniuſt
meanes gotten to that greatnes wherein they are. I might
by infinite examples haue ſhewed this to be true. For all ſtories
are full of their inſolent doings. But my indeuour is only
to ſhew, that as they claime by an vniuſt title, ſo they do in many
reſpects abuſe their greatneſſe. Which hitherto I haue proued,
becauſe ſo ſaw
                  •
               ily they match themſelues with God, ſpurn
againſt the higheſt authoritie, & magnifie themſelues in al their
behauiour. The ſtories alſo do point out vnto vs their incredible
auarice, and more then greedy couetouſneſſe, which is ſo inſatiable
that no ſummes of money can ſatiſfie, no kingdomes can
ſtanch the ſame. It is a world to conſider, what large and ample
dominions they haue gotten into their hands, what landes
and territories. Whereinto they hauing intruded themſelues,
by ſetting princes together by the eares, or ſuch other ſubtile
practiſes: and yet would ſeeme ſomtime to hold the ſame by the
gift of Conſtantine, ſometime from Charles the great, ſometime
from his ſon Lewes. But from whom they ſhould claime
to holde their poſſeſſions. they are not yet fully reſolued as it
ſeemeth. But how great ſoeuer their poſſeſſions are, or howe
they holde them, I am not purpoſed to examine. My purpoſe
is rather to ſhew how little contented they are with all that they
haue, and how ſtill they haue new deuiſes, and other practiſes,
to get money into their coffers.Barns. Bale. 
                     •
                  inctius. 
               Henry the ſecond (or as ſome
reckon) the third, had built a church in Bamberg, and was deſirous
to haue it made a biſhops ſea: hee requeſted the pope to
do ſo much at his requeſt. Now this pope reſted wholy of the
good will of the emperour Henry. And yet would he not at his
requeſt do ſo much,The popes auarice maketh him vnthankeful. but that alſo he would benefit himſelfe: and
ſo was content to do it vpon couenant, that that church ſhould
giue him yeerely a hundred markes, and a white horſe with his
            
               
But what ſhould we enter into any particulars in this point?
What biſhop could get his alowance or confirmation to any
biſhopricke,Confyrmation to biſhoprikes. without great ſummes of money? Then the archbiſhops
haue their palles not without infinite charges.Archb. palles. Wonderfull
ſums of money,Vacations. haue in the time of vacation of biſhoprickes,
and other ſpirituall promotions, beene carried to Rome,
from Germany, Fraunce, this our country and other places, as
the manifold complaints and greeuances do manifeſtly declare.
And beſides theſe ſummes which they got by eccleſiaſticall
liuings, they had many other wayes to picke mens purſes.
Purgatorie was a gainfull deuiſe,Purgatory. the fire therof, did much good
to the popes kitchin.Pardons. Pardons were good to no vſe, but to make
them rich that gaue them, or carried them. Eſpecially thoſe
pardons which Leo the the tenth ſent abroad. They which caried
them made the world beleeue,Bale in Leone 
                     ••
                   ex chriſt. maſ. that whoſoeuer would giue
tenne ſhillings for a pardon, ſhould for the ſame deliuer what
ſoule ſoeuer he would out of purgatorie.Holy warres or againſt the Tur
                     •
                  
                Vnder pretence alſo of
fighting againſt the Turke, and recouering the holy land, they
gathered great ſummes.Licenſes, &c. What ſhould I ſpeake of licenſes,
qualifications, diſpenſations, and ſuch like meanes to get money?
If I ſhould but out of our Engliſh hiſtories, paint out the
greedie worme of that church of Rome, you would thinke it
were a gulf vnſatiable both the horſleaches daughters in one that
alwayes crieth giue, giue, and can neuer haue enough. It is a
bitter and grieuous complaint that Frederick the ſecond emperour
of that name, maketh againſt the church of Rome, ſhewing
how the fire of her auarice is ſo kindled,Mat. Par. fol. 469. that the goods of the
clargie not being able to ſuffice, they feare not to diſinherit, and
make to pay tribute to them, emperours, kings, and princes.
Whoſe words hee ſaith are ſweete as hony, and as ſoft as oyle,
but they are inſatiable bloudſuckers. He doth put our countrimen
in rememberance of that which Innocent the third a pope
had done, ſwalowing after the Romiſh faſhion, with an vntoward
gaping, whatſoeuer was fatteſt. And with many ſuch
words, hee ſetteth forth the miſerable eſtate of England, which
was (ſaith he) the prince of all prouinces. He ſpeaketh of the
time of king Iohn, as himſelfe ſheweth, of the which dayes alſo
did the nobles of England complaine bitterly, becauſe he did

ſubiect himſelfe to the pope, and ſo brought their land into a miſerable
ſlauerie.Mat. par. fo. 373. And as it were, ſpeaking vnto the pope, they
charge him, that he beareth with king Iohn, to the ende that all
things might be ſwallowed vp of the gulfe of the Romiſh auarice.
Neither is the pope Honorius the third aſhamed to confeſſe
this fault,pariſ 438. Romea greedie gulfe by a popes confeſsion. by his Otho. For in his letters hee confeſſeth,
that there can be no diſpatch in the court of Rome, without
great expences and gifts, and acknowledgeth that this is an
old ſtaine to that church. And for to take away this ſlaunder, he
& his cardinals had deuiſed a good way (as he thought) which
is, that he might haue in euery cathedrall church two prebends,
and ſuch like of abbeis.Gift of eccleſiaſtical preferments. And this is an other way that the pope
hath to inrich himſelfe by. And very often did the biſhoppes of
Rome, ſeeke by ſuch means to prouide for their friends, or ſuch
as would buy their letters. So did Innocent the fourth write
to the abbat of S. Albans, for a kinſman of his, for a benefice
in Lincolne dioceſſe,pariſ. 1085. belonging to the gift of that church of ſaint
Albans, called Wengraue, and for the next beſides it that ſhuld
fall. Yea he did ſometime write for children. Whereupon there
grew a great contention, betweene the biſhop of Lincolne Robert
Groſted,
               A pope a ſeller of benefices. Pariſ. 1206. and the pope Innocent the fourth, whome Alexander
the fourth his next ſucceſſour called the ſeller of benefices.
Pope Innocent was ſo offended with this Biſhop of
Lincolne, for withſtanding his lewd and wicked couetouſneſſe,
that when he heard that the Biſhop of Lincolne was dead,Pariſ. 1178. The popes ſpite againſt the biſh. of Lincolne being dead. hee
purpoſed preſently to write to the king of England, not to ſuffer
him to be buried in the church, but to be caſt out, thereby to
diſgrace him as much as he poſſibly could. Beſides theſe, they
haue yet other wayes to get money. They ſend in their ambaſſadours
or legates,Ben
                     •
                  uolences. which when they are once well ſetled within
the land, they ſend to biſhops, abbates, or ſuch as they knew
to be of wealth, for ſo much money as they thought good to get.
But the leaſt gaine came not to the church of Rome, by that
vniuſt decree of Innocent the fourth,The goods of the clearkes
                     •
                   n
                     •
                  etſtate the popes ſhare pariſ. 959. whereby it was prouided,
that the goods of clarkes that died inteſtate, ſhould go to the biſhop
of Rome. But it were too tedious a matter to come particularly
to euery point, of the popes greedines. It was a thing
generally miſliked and ſpoken againſt: yea this their miſerable

greedineſſe, as Mat. of Paris witneſſeth, was the chiefe cauſe
why the Greeke church departed from the Latine church.pariſ. 622. The popes couetouſnes cauſe of diuiſion between the caſt and weſt churches. For,
an archbiſhop of the Greeke church comming to pope Gregory
the ninth to be confirmed in his archbiſhopricke by him, coulde
not obtaine his deſire, vnleſſe he would promiſe much money.
He ſeeing that, deteſting their greedineſſe departed, and tolde
this to ſundry of the nobilitie. There were other alſo that reported
as euill or worſe of that they had ſeene and knowen
at Rome, and ſo they would haue no more to do with the weſt
church.
            In like manner did the ſame pope behaue himſelfe in hearing
the matter betweene Walter elect archbiſhop of Canterbury
on the one ſide, and the king and ſundry biſhops on the
other ſide. And although it were obiected againſt the archbiſhop
by the king and the biſhops, that in ſundry reſpectes hee
was vnfit,pariſ. 468. namely, that hee had defloured a Nunne, and gotten
children by her, and the king was very earneſtly bent againſt
him, the pope alſo confeſſed that he was vnlearned, yet coulde
not the king and the biſhops get the pope to be fauorable in that
good cauſe,pariſ. 474. Bribeue. vntill ſuch time as the kings embaſſadors, fearing
leſt the pope would make him archbiſhop of Canterbury, that
was altogether vnworthy of ſuch a place, promiſed to the pope
the tenth of all moueables through England. Whereupon the
pope being ſo well hired, was content, not to place a wicked
man in the ſea of Canterbury.pag. 48
                     •
                  . And the pope, to ſhew that it
was the reward that made him, and that he looked for perfourmance
thereof, he ſent into England to demaund the ſame, and
it was graunted according to the promiſe that was made vnto
him.
            Theſe and ſuch other corruptions and extortions of the Biſhops
of Rome, made them ſo odious to the king of England
and his nobles,popes pollute the places where they remaine, pariſ. 1068. that they thought be defiled and polluted the
place where he dwelt. And therefore when pope Innocentius
the fourth, requeſted the king, that hee woulde permit him to
lie at Burdeaur in Gaſcoigne, which then belonged to the king
of England, he and his Nobles thought that it was too neere to
England, and that corruptions would come thence into England.
And Robert Groſted B. of Lincolne durſt boldly ſay to

the pope and in his hearing, O money, money, how much canſt
thou doe eſpecially in the court of Rome,Paril. pa. 1027. which as it is ſaid in
another place,pag. 686. is alwaies gaping, alwaies greedie. But indeed
great ſums haue him gathered out of this realme, which haue
gone to the pope,Tag. 299. inſomuch that king Iohn did affirme to the
pope Innocent the third, almoſt threatning him for ſome euill
dealing, and telleth him that hee hath more commoditie out of
the Realme of England,The pope had much out of England. then out of all countries on this ſide
the Alpes. And therefore Innocent the third had woont to ſay
of England,England the pops garden of delight It is in truth our garden of delight (ſaieth hee)
a well that can neuer be drawne drie, and where there is great
abundance, there of much, much may be gotten. Indeed hee
and his fellowes had gotten out of this garden, manie ſweete
poſes, and were much refreſhed with the water, that they drew
out of this well.
            But where is that paſtorall care, that theſe Biſhoppes
ſhould haue had ouer Chriſts flocke, or which they at the leaſt
pretended to haue, in their Bulles and writings? Where is
their reioycing at the zeale and godlineſſe of the people? As
is their ſtudie, ſo is their ioy. Their ſtudie is how to get and
winne temporall poſſeſſions, they reioyce when they haue gotten
the ſame.
            I haue hitherto proued this eſpecially by our owne ſtories,
becauſe they ſhould moſt moue vs to conſider, what bondage
and ſlauerie we haue beene brought vnto, and giue vs warning
to take heede, how wee ſubiect our ſelues to them, who vnder
pretence of holineſſe, doe not onely deuoure widowes houſes,
but euen infinite treaſures, yea and princes kingdomes alſo.
Other kingdomes were not free from theſe pollings, as may
appeare by the ſtories of Fraunce, and other places. For what
place is there,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   an. 1364. whither the pawes and clawes, of that couetous
Woolfe haue not reached. Charles the fourth, keeping a diet
at Mentz, where were the electours, and other Princes of
Germanie, thither alſo came the Popes Legat, in the name of
Innocentius the ſixth, begging ſome contribution. The Emperour
hauing heard what the Legat demaunded, aunſwered,
that the pope got much money out of Germanie, but he ſought
not to reforme any thing that was amiſſe in the cleargie.
            
               
And not long after, Gregorie the eleuenth demaunded a
tenth of all the cleargie men through the empire,Pataleipom. Viſp. but the biſhops
electours, would not yeeld to the pilling of their cleargie, in
ſuch ſort.fol 321. But yet as the Abbat of Urſperg ſingeth them as it
were a ſong, and willeth them to reioyce, becauſe that money
which ſo well they loue, commeth ſo faſt vnto them, and they
haue ſtore of that which ſo much they thirſted: euen ſo by their
prolling, and pilling in euerie corner, they get into their handes
infinite treaſure.Chriſt and his v
                     •
                  
                  car compared. Nowe if we looke vpon our Sauiour Chriſt,
and compare him and his Vicar of Rome together, wee ſhall
eaſilie finde they are no more like then light and darkeneſſe.
Chriſt hath not whereon to lay his head, he had nothing. They
haue all things,1 Luc. 9. 5
                     •
                  . euen the worlde at will. He tooke great paines
to preach the Goſpell,2 They liue in all eaſe and pleaſure, and
neuer preach the moſt of them.3 He trauelled on foot from place
to place, from the one ſide of Iewrie to the other, The pope if
he goe but to S. Peters church, muſt bee borne vpon the ſhoulders
of the greateſt potentates.4 Chriſt had in his traine but a
fewe fiſhers, or men deſpiſed, Their pallaces and traines exceede
in pompe and pride,Luc. 12. 14. the courts of princes. He being requeſted,
would not meddle with diuiding of land betweene two
brethren,5 The pope intrudeth himſelfe, yea and chalengeth it to
be his right, to haue to doe in temporall dominions, to throwe
downe, to ſet vp, to place and diſplace, not in ſmall inheritances
onelie, but in the greateſt Monarchies. As is ſeene in the
Empire it ſelfe, which he tranſlated from the Grecians, to the
French, and againe from the French to the Germanes, and
woulde nowe if poſſibly he coulde beſtowe the ſame vppon the
Spaniard, taking it from the Germanes, (as it ſeemeth) by
ſuch aydes as hee yeeldeth vnto him, in his moſt ambitious and
tyrannicall attempts.
            To be ſhort,6 our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe did perfourme
all dutie, and honour, vnto princes, by whoſe example, and
of whom, Saint Peter learned that leſſon alſo, which hee
faithfully taught and deliuered to other: Submit your ſelues
to all manner ordinaunce of man for the Lordes ſake,1. Pet. 2. 1
                     •
                  . whether
it be vnto the king, as vnto the ſuperiour or chiefe, or vnto gouernours.
            
               
And againe, in the ſame chapter, Honour the King. But
what doth Chriſts bad vicar,Verſ. 17. and Peters proud ſucceſior? He
ſeeketh by all meanes that he can, to increaſe his owne glorie
and riches, and that with the ſtaine and reproch, with the decay
and impoueriſhing of the mightieſt monarches, as hath alreadie
beene ſufficiently (I truſt) declared, and might be prooued by a
thouſand mo teſtimonies. But if you will behold a true patern
of the affections,fox Act. & Mon. ex 2. hiſt. manuſcrip. that theſe holy fathers beare to the emperours
and kings, ſet before your eies pope Celeſtine the third ſitting
in his chaire of eſtate, making Henry the ſixt the emperour
caſt himſelfe downe at his feete. And he (whoſe hands perchance
were too holy to performe ſo baſe an office) taking the
crowne betweene his feete, (O ſcorne of all ſcornes) did with
his feete, crowne both the emperour, and his wife the empreſſe.
And when he had ſo doone, with his feete he caſt from his
head the crowne againe. For it is meate and drinke to them (not
to doe the will of God as it was to Chriſt to doe the will of him
that ſent him) but ſo to play with princes,Iohn. 4. 34. to bring them into
contempt, and to let the world ſee, howe ſcornefully they can
vſe them.
            Let ſuch as loue the truth, and haue deſire to ſaue their
owne ſoules, thinking earneſtly of theſe matters. If the doings
of the biſhops of Rome for many hundred yeares, be not
plaine contrarie to that which our ſauiour Chriſt and his apoſtles
did and taught, I craue no credit. But if they be, let no
man, no woman be ſo ſimple, in a matter of ſo great importance,
as by ſhew of good words (in which yet there is no truth, no
ſinceritie, nothing but hipocriſie) to be carried away and deuoted
vnto a church, in name holy, but indeede moſt prophane, in
name a mother, but in truth a froward ſtepmother: or to a pope
inſatiable in couetouſneſſe, proude and ambitions, and to all
countries and princes pernitious and peſtilent. Nowe as their
arrogancie (ſince they came to ſuch exceſſiue greatnes) was intolerable,
their greedineſſe vnſatiable, ſo their miſchieuous malice
hath beene vnmeſurable. This appeareth moſt plainly, not only
in their dealings with others,The malice of popes one towards another. but alſo in their had doings one of
them againſt another. Who can without wonder or deteſtation,
heare of the cruel parts that were commited by Steuen the ſixt

againſt the dead body of pope Formoſus? For he was not content
to reuoke his acts, and diſanul his decrees, (although he
preferred him to be a biſhop) but like a cruell and vnthankfull
churle,Rioche. hee cauſed his dead bodie to be taken vp out of the graue
(O holy charitie) and that in his preſence, he drew it about the
citie, put on it popelike aparrel, ſet it in Peters chaire, then he
cauſed to be taken from him his popelike garment, and put vpon
him lay mans clothes, he cut off two of his ſingers Vrſpergenſis
ſaith three, and his head, and caſt them into Tyber, and
commaunded the reſt of his bodie to be buried in the lay mens
buriall.
            All ſtories almoſt with full conſent, doe declare and deteſt
this beaſtly crueltie.Stella. The cauſe that hee pretended was,
that he was periured (I would haue thought a pope might not
haue made ſo foule a fault, and yet becauſe pope Steuen who
cannot erre, hath charged him with it, I muſt beleeue it.) So
there is one periured as is proued by ſubſtanciall witneſſe, and
an other accounted euen barbarous almoſt of all hiſtories. Yea
the ſtories that are moſt addicted vnto poperie and ſuperſtition,
doe much complaine of the diuiſion which this wrought in the
church, and of the crooked dealing of theſe cankered karles.
For Theodore the ſecond, that came next (but one) after this
Steuen, although he was pope but twentie dayes, yet was loth
not to make one in this ſkirmiſh, (for hee had no vertue in him
ſaith the ſtorie) he approued againſt all that Formoſus had done,
and ſo ſet himſelfe againſt Steuen his faction. Then came Iohn
the tenth, who yet tooke great parte with Formoſus. And when
many of the Romans were diſpleaſed thereat, he left Rome,
and went to Rauenna, where he called a councill, and there did
not onely reuiue as it were Formoſus his decrees, diſanulling,
yea caſting into the fire, that which Steuen had done againſt
Formoſus,
               ſunct. anno 900. but he alſo concluded in the council, that Steuen
iudged amis. Now you Romiſh catholiks whether may a pope
erre or not? Steuen did in a council reuoke Formoſus his acts.
Pope Iohn ſaith it was wrongfully done, ſo that by his iudgement,
both Steuen and his council, did erre in iudgement. Yea
and Iohn futher ordained, that they who tooke orders of Steuen
ſhould againe take orders.
            
               
Not long after came Sergius the third who tooke vp the dead
and mangled body of Formoſus and did execution thereupon,Iacob. Bergom. as
if Formolus had beene aliue and commaunded the headleſſe
corps, as not worthie of buriall, to be caſt into the riuer. And
laſtly, hee made the orders that hee gaue to be of none effect.
Iuſtly therefore did Iacob.
               Stella in Be. 4. 
               Bergemenſis complaine and out
of him Iohn Stella of Venice. Such was the euil hap of that
age, that all vertue through mens ſlothfulneſſe, was decayed as
well in the head as in the members. But why was Sergius ſo
mortall an enemie to Formoſus?
               The cauſe of Sergius his enemie againſt Formoſus. 
               Formoſus when he was pope
could not well abide him, and therefore he according to his popiſh
charitie delt thus with his dead bodie. And dare theſe men
tell vs of diuiſion among ſome members of our churches, when
we ſee in their owne ſtories their heads, ſo putting and butting
one of them againſt another with the hornes of the beaſt?Iacob. Bergom. 
               Iohn
the twelfth a wicked wretch euery way, confeſſed to be by all
ſtories, and that euen from his youth he was defiled with all
naughtineſſe (to let paſſe his other popelike qualities too bad to
ſpeake of) becauſe the cardinals complained of him to the emperour,
and deſire his helpe, hee tooke ſome of them, and cut off
one of their noſes, the others had, with the which it was ſuppoſed
he wrote letters againſt the pope, he put out ſome of their
eies,ſunct. an 962. cut out other of their tongues, their members and fingers.
Pope Boniface the twelfth a man qualified much like his
felowes,Platina. ſtole after he was pope all the principall iewels out
of Saint Peters church, and left Rome for a time vntill he had
ſold at Conſtantinople all that he had filched away,A pope a chiefe. and then returning
hoped by money (whereof he had now good ſtore) to pacifie
the citizens that were diſpleaſed with him (for he was for his
wickednes hated of them.)ſ
                     •
                  nctius. But there was one Iohn a cardinall
of good account that hindred him therein, ſome ſay that this Iohn
was choſen pope in his roome. Wherefore him he tooke and put
out his eies. Now where is the vnitie and good agreement, that
our Romiſh catholiks now a dayes do beare vs in hand, hath
bin alwayes in the church of Rome? If by vnitie they meane
chriſtian charitie their ſauage crueltie crieth out their ſhame.
If they meane conſent in doctrine,Papi
                     ••
                  s diſcent
                  
                     •
                   doctrine. their infinit and diuers
opinions, whether the virgin Marie were voide of originall

ſinne, which matter was a great while, full hotly handled. Againe
what it is that is ment by theſe words (this is my body)
what this word (This) hath relation vnto. Thirdly, what is
that, wherein is that which may be ſeene in the bread, as colour
and faſhion, or to ſpeake as they doe, what ſubiect hath thoſe
accidents? Theſe and many other ſach points might be reherſed,
wherein perchance they will neuer agree hereafter, as yet
they haue neuer doone. Well, what malice they haue ſhewed
one towards another we haue ſeene. How they haue done towards
other it may partly appeare in that which I haue ſaid before
in their proud and earneſt purſuing of princes, vnto whom
they would neuer be reconciled vnleſſe the princes would let
them haue their will.The cruel malice of Iohn. 
               Iohn the fifteenth or (if pope Ioan be not
reckoned) the fourteenth was taken of ſome noble men of Rome,
and kept in priſon eleuen monethes. At the length by the helpe
of Otho the emperour being deliuered, and the chiefe of them
being ſharply puniſhed by Otho, Peter the pretor or chiefe
man of the citie, who was in the conſpiracie, the emperour deliuered
to the pope, perchance to trie how readie he would be according
to the commaundement of Chriſt, to loue his enemies
and them that hate him.Bale Act. pontif. Rom. But pope Iohn (although the
emperour had ſharply puniſhed many by death, other by confiſcation
of all their goods, others by baniſhment, and ſo might
ſomewhat haue mittigated the raging furie of the pope) yet I
ſay pope Iohn, deliuereth the priſoner to the tormentor, with
charge to ſhaue his beard (for to diſgrace him) to pull off his garments,
to hang him by the heare of the head, for a whole day together
then was he ſet vpon an aſſe, his face being turned to the
hinder parts, and his hands tied vnder the taile of the aſſe, and ſo
led vp and downe the citie,Platina. well ſcorged with whips, almoſt
vntill he was dead,funct. and ſo baniſhed into Germany. There was
one Gregorie a pope whom Henrie the fifth emperour had
made pope. But Calixtus the ſecond when he came to be pope,
and the emperour and he were agreed, purſueth this Gregorie
not content to depoſe him onely,Rioche in Hen. 5. (for a reaſonable reuenge cannot
ſatiſfie their miſchiuous malice) but let him vpon a Camell
(that this fine ſight might the better be ſeene) turning his face to
the taile, which was to him for a bridle as the author ſaith, and ſo

carried him in triumph to Rome. But to ſhew his proud and
inſolent dealings againſt princes, and his malitious perſecuting
and purſuing of them. What neede we to produce examples of
forraine countries, or former times? We haue amongſt vs, in
our dayes, better proofe thereof, then either we deſire, or they
can denie.
            Is it not too proude and inſolent a part, for either Pius the
fifth,Popes dealings with Princes now. or Sixtus the ſith, to call our ſoueraigne Queene and moſt
gratious prince Elizabeth, whom God hath mercifully placed
amongſt vs, and ouer vs, and mightely and maruelouſly defended,
from innumerable popiſh practiſes: and Henry king of
Nauarre, and nowe alſo the French king, hereticks, ſchiſmaticks,
and I know not by what names of reproch, he not prouing,
no nor daring to offer any reaſonable triall, or lawfull
way to prooue the ſame? Why is hee afraid to haue religion
tried by a free generall council? Why doth he hinder it by all
meanes that he can?Popes religion not catholike The queſtion is whether his religion, that
(I ſay) which he commendeth to chriſtians, and commaundeth
to be onely, (and that vpon paine of death) beleeued is true or
not. We denie it, we ha
                  •
               e vnanſwerable arguments for vs.
The religion that he would haue vs to content our ſelues withall,
is not catholike, that is, it is not preached or taught at all
times, in all places, with full conſent, as he and his frends muſt
confeſſe, when it is examined. It hath not any ſufficient warrant
out of Gods booke, which onely ſhould be the ground of
our relgion. Nay, it is ſo contrarie to Gods written words,
that it is impoſſible that that which God in the ſcripture teacheth
vs, and that which the popiſh church requireth of vs,
ſhould both be true. As for Gods worde we know it cannot lie.
And therfore we haue great cauſe to ſay, that that which is contrarie
to it, cannot be true. Again, the church of Rome (as they al
confeſſe) prooueth many points of their religion by traditions
onely, that is to ſay, by the doctrines of men only. Theſe things
we alleage. Admit that it were not euidently true that we ſay.
Is it not good reaſon yet that we ſhould be heard, howe we can
prooue that we alleage? Were it not fit that before indifferent
iudges the matter ſhould be tried? For why ſhould the pope,
that is a principall partie in this controuerſie, or his legats that

are his ſworne adherents and ſeruants, take vpon them to be
iudges in their owne cauſe? We accuſe them of Idolatrie,
ſuperſtition, many hereſies, manifeſt breach of Gods lawe, deſpiſing
of Gods word, yea of plaine apoſtacie from the true faith.
Shall we euer imagine, that they will pronounce ſentence againſt
themſelues? And confeſſe themſeules guiltie of theſe
great crimes? No no, as we are not ſo fooliſh as once to hope,
that they who with tooth and naile, ſeek to maintaine their owne
pride, will ſo ſubiect themſelues to Chriſts yoke, ſo we are not
ſo mad as to thinke them to be fit iudges, to pronounce whether
the truth be on our ſide or theirs. For we knowe, that they will
not ſpeake for vs, becauſe they will neuer ſpeake againſt themſelues.
            Let them then permitte this queſtion that is amongſt vs to
be tried by a free council. Let the matters in controuerſie be debated,
let the reaſons on both ſides be heard, and wayghed: let
indifferent iudges be appointed, ſuch as ſincerly ſighing, in
ſinglenes of hart, ſeek to know the truth, & ſerue the Lord. Thē
will it appeare who teach the tru religion. But this can neuer be
tried by ſuch ouer-ruled conuenticles as that of Trent, wherein
indeed the proteſtants were admitted to ſpeake. But they might
ſay but placet, wee are content with that you haue done. They
might not ſet downe their reaſons againſt Romiſh errorn, they
might not be heard to diſpute. But that was before concluded in
ſom priuat meeting of a few popiſh diuines, & alowed at Rome
for catholike doctrine, and thence ſent to the council to haue approbatian
of them that durſt not denie it, to that they might ſay
Amen. Yea, and what they could haue ſaid, the council wold not
greatly haue regarded as it ſeemeth. For Clement the ſeuenth,
when the emperour Charles the fift, and the French
king were earneſt with the ſaid Clement, to haue a free generall
conncil permitted,Gentil. examined. wherein matters might maturely be diſcuſſed
on both ſides,Concil. Trident. li. 1. he anſwered, that was a perillous matter and preiudiciall,
that the proteſtants ſhould be ſuffered to diſpute of
thoſe things, that had beene before co
                  •
               cluded by councils. As
though God by his word, were not ſufficient to giue lawes to
his church, or that he ſhould be tied to the iudgements of men.
Not that we thinke the auncient lawfull councils to be againſt

vs: but becauſe that vnder the name of generall Councils, they
bring in their later wicked and vngodly conuenticles, of the
times wherein corruption grew more and more in the Church,
which Councils haue concluded manie things, that were neuer
heard of in the purer age: wee would therefore let them
vnderſtand,How councils muſt be reiected. that as manie of their councils are worthily reiected,
ſo euen the beſt are not to be bleeued, but as they conſent
with Gods vndoubted and infallible worde. And that this was
the bondage of that Councill of Trent, which our aduerſaries
would ſo faine haue ſo much accounted of, it appeareth by Sleydon
in his hiſtorie. Brocard who was one in that councill, writing
vpon the Apocalipſe, Gentillet and Caluin, againſt that
council. How thē dare thoſe arrogant popes, whoſe doctrine can
not abide the touch, whoſe decrees do ſhun the light, condemne
princes for heretikes, or enemies to the catholike faith, & yet will
not permit their faith and religion, to be laid to the rule & ſquare
of the catholike doctrine?Dialog. 3. 
               Theodoret ſaith truly. The decrees
of the church muſt be tried and proued, not pronounced as an ouer
ruled caſe, or as a ſentence of a Iudge. And ſhall we then
receiue as an Oracle from God, that which is deliuered vnto vs
after this maner, the church of Rome, or the biſhop of Rome
hath ſaid it? God forbid. We will trie the ſpirits whether they
bee of God.1. Iohn 4. 1. 1. Theſ. 5. 21. We ſeeke to trie all their doctrines, that we may
holde faſt that which is good. This then, I ſay, is an euident
argument of arrogant inſolencie, in Pius 5. and Sixtus, 5. that
ſo wickedlie they dare preſume, as to giue ſuch ſlaunderous
names, to princes that profeſſe ſo vndoubted a truth, as then
they both did, and yet our moſt gracious Soueraigne dooth.
But to depriue them of their kingdomes, to releaſe their ſubiects
from their bonde of obedience, to diſpoſe of their dominions,
according to their pleaſures, as they would doe if they
could, is as intollerable pride, as their predeceſſours before
did euer vſ to other. And ſo maliciouſlie to proſecute this their
conceiued miſchiefe, as they haue done theſe manie yeares, whi
                  •
               h
open tumult, with ſecrete conſpiracies, with poyſoning of ſome
principall Princes,Popiſh practiſes. with murthering of other by other meanes,
with prepairing the hearts of doubtfull ſubiects, agaynſt the
time of inuaſion to take their part, (for all theſe things are common

to the pope, and his white ſonne the king of Spaine, (they
are their continuall meditations) dooth not this ſufficientlie
proue their cruell malice? So that their proude practiſes, and
cruell purpoſes (which are two of the fruits, of the ſupremacie
of the popes that I haue ſpoken of) are plaine enough, euen
in our dayes, we may ſee with our eyes the proofe of the ſame,
by (almoſt) dayly examples. But their greedie mindes, and
couetous affections, doe not appeare to vs ſo plainely, as vnto
our fathers, vnto whom they were an intollerable burthen, as
I haue ſhewed before. And although we nothing doubt, but the
fat morſels, which they vnderſtand their predeceſſours haue
plucked from this land, doe make the popes that haue beene in
our dayes, more eager to get ſuch like againe: yet God hauing
deliuered vs from the rauening pawes and iawes of that
Romiſh Lion (the Lord make vs truly thankefull, and in life
fruitfull, for this his ineſtimable mercie) we feele not the griefe
of his exactions. But this I truſt, ſufficeth to decalre, that the
power which the pope vnlawfully hath gotten, he vnreaſonably
abuſeth, making it a wicked and vngodly meane to crowe ouer
princes, to fill his coffers, and to execute his reuenges. And
now that the pope was come to that, that hee might doe euen
what he would, to ſatiſfie his proude, greedie and cruell luſts,
he thought it good for him to dwel and continue alwayes, in that
lawleſſe eſtate. And therefore did he, not onely ſtriue by all the
power and policie that he had, and with all his indeuour to maintaine
the ſame, for the time preſent, but alſo did prouide ſome
meanes to maintaine it as hee hoped for euer. And to performe
this they haue had no ſmall helpe by priuileges,Priuileges and immunities. and grauntes
from princes, who at the firſt when biſhops of Rome, and others
alſo, did applie themſelues in ſome meaſure to perfourme
their duetie, were willing to the better incouraging
of them, to goe on forwardes in well doings, and that thoſe
worldly things, ſhould not be to them any let or hinderance in
their callings, that were a burthen vnto other, they were willing
I ſay to exempt them from ſuch ſeruices and duties, as they required
of other to be don vnto them. And becauſe that at the firſt
when Chriſtianity began to increaſe and grow mightie, no doubt
many that were ſecret enemies,Cauſe of many of the immunities. and yet durſt not (when the Emperors

had by law eſtabliſhed the chriſtian profeſſion) accuſe any
man for their religion, would then lay other faults to their charges,
and obiect other crimes to bring the Goſpel into contempt,
as appeareth by Tertullian, Iuſtin the Martyr, and others that
they did, when religion was yet profeſſed in corners. Now it is
not vnlikely, but that godly princes to exempt them from ſuch
flaunders and reproches, would commit the hearing of thoſe accuſations
vnto ſuch as were of beſt credite among themſelues,
that when their enemie did ſee that their accuſations were not
like to be fauoured, vnleſſe they were ſufficiently proued, they
might be diſcouraged, from defaming them with vniuſt reports.
But howſoeuer theſe immunities were graunted vnto them at
the firſt, or on what conſideration, I wil not preciſely ſet downe.
But afterwards I am ſure they tooke them as their owne right,
and that they did alwayes belong vnto them. And therefore when
as the Emperour would haue taken vpon him to haue iudged of
ſome cauſes of cleargie men,Diſt. 96. cap. 
                     •
                  imperator. pope Iohn ſheweth that hee muſt
not ſo doe, and telleth him boldly, but falſely, that the almightie
God will haue the clearkes and prieſts of Chriſtian religion,
to be ordered, examined, and receiued when they returne from errour,
not by publike lawes, or powers of this world, but of biſhops
and prieſts. Chriſtian emperors (ſaith he) muſt ſubmit
their executions to prelates, and not preferre them. Whereupon
the gloſſe doth gather, that the cleargie was neuer vnder the ſecular
power, and therfore that all the conſtitutions that are made,
that clearks ſhould not be iudged by any but by biſhops, are but
declarations,
                  
                     •
                  iſt. 
                     •
                  6. C. Nun
                  
                     •
                  uam. of that their former right. And in the ſame diſtinction
the verie next chapter, that pope Iohn is not aſhamed to affirme,
that Chriſtian princes were woont to be obedient to biſhops,
and to how downe their neckes to them. And afterwards
there is in Gratian a whole treatiſe to this purpoſe,Cauſ. 11. 
                     •
                  . 1. c. Nemo. to proue that
(as is their alledged out of Caius the Pope) no man muſt preſume
ſo much as to accuſe, before a ſecular iudge, a biſhop or any
clearke. I need not alledge to this end many teſtimonies. Theſe
are as plaine as need to be. He that would ſee mo teſtimonies to
this effect, let him looke the firſt queſtion of the eleueuh cauſe in
Gratian, he ſhall ſee it affirmed with full mouth. But how vntruly
in a word may be declared.
            
               
And firſt how falſe that is which he affirmeth,Shameleſſe li
                     ••
                  
                that princes
haue alwaies ſubmitted themſelues vnto prieſts, there is no colour
of truth in it, if we examine the ſhameleſſe lie, either by the
ſcriptures, or by the examples of the emperors and kings in the
primitiue church.Magiſtrates commaund prieſts. Aa
                     •
                  on. For Moſes was the ciuill magiſtrate, and
Aaron was the prieſt. Did Moſes ſubmit himſelfe to Aaron?
No, did he not rather on the contrarie reprooue him, as at other
times, ſo eſpecially concerning the golden calfe,Exod 32. 21. which he cauſed
to be made? And did not Aaron in token of his ſubmiſſion to
Moſes, call him his Lord? And why did God deliuer the law.
and the order for all the ſacrifices and ceremonies, and all the
ſeruices that were commaunded, rather by Moſes to Aaron,
and the people, Moſes being the ciuill magiſtrate, then by the
miniſterie of Aaron, who was appointed to be the prieſt? Did
not God hereby teſtifie,
                  
                     ••
                  od. 28. that he would haue the ciuill magiſtrate
to haue a ſpeciall regard, vnto the things that belong to Gods
ſeruice.Apiathar. Was not Abiathar the high prieſt at the commaundement
of Salomon, when at the commaundement of Salomon
the king,2. Kings 2. 26, 27. he was put from the office of the high prieſt, and the
king made Zadocke high prieſt in his roome. But out of manie
examples let theſe ſuffice,Verſe 35. for the time before Chriſt. S. Paul
when he ſaith,Rom. 13. 1. Let euerie ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers,
teacheth vs, that we muſt not looke that they ſhould ſubmit them
ſelues vnto vs, but how ſincerely we ſhould obey them. And
what is meant by the higher powers ſaint Peter telleth vs, that
the king is chiefe,1. Pet. 2. 13, 14. then other gouernours vnder him. And theſe
are the ſuperiour powers which ſaint Paul meaneth of, as if need
were might hee proued by all antiquitie. If we looke vpon the
biſhops that were in the time of Conſtantine, and a good while
after, their ſtories will teach vs, that they as humbly as they
could ſubmitted themſelues to Emperours and princes, called
them Lordes, intreated them with all ſubmiſſion. Yea, and Leo
the third pope of that name,Plat. in Leone 3. eight hundred yeares after Chriſt,
his life and conuerſation were inquired vpon, by Charles the
great the emperor. All which things do plainly proue, that it is
moſt falſe that Gratian out of many of them doth affirme, that
the Emperours Chriſtian, did alwaies ſubmit themſelues vnto
the biſhops.
            
               
And the ſelfe-ſame examples alſo doe plainly declare, that
the clergie may not be accuſed onely before ciuil magiſtrats, but
puniſhed alſo by them according to the qualitie of their offence.
Neither did our ſauiour Chriſt (whoſe immunities and exemptions
I ſuppoſe they will confeſſe, were as great as any may
claime) when hee was ſtanding before Pilate to be iudge, plead
that they might not meddle with him, neither yet Saint Paul,
when he ſtoode before Feſtus,
               Act. 25. 11. who if there had beene any ſuch
priuiledge belonging vnto clergie men, would at the leaſt haue
claimed it, that others might haue by their examples alleaged
the like.
            But ſaint Paul in appealing vnto Ceſar, dooth giue vs
a ſtrong argument to prooue,Princes may iudge the cleargie. that princes may middle with ſuch
as they call clergie men. But of the matter it ſelfe there is no
iuſt cauſe of doubt. Neither can it be proued, that ſuch immunities
and exemptions are grounded vpon any teſtimonie of
Scripture, but rather are moſt contrarie to that ſubiection, to
magiſtrats, that they commaund, and God requireth. But by
thoſe priuileges there came to the ciuil eſtate dubble damage.The hurt of thoſe exemptions.
Firſt becauſe thereby euil ſubiects were maruelouſly imboldned
to doe whatſoeuer the biſhop of Rome, that very baine of
true chriſtian obedience, would ſet them to doe, for inlarging his
liberties. As among as infinit mumber of examples, that one of
Thomas Becket that archtraitor of England, (and yet forſooth
a Romiſh ſaint and martyr) doth ſufficiently declare. For how
traiterouſly he ſought to in fringe the auncient liberties,Pariſ. pag. 135. of his
and our natiue countrie (to the maintenence whereof he was alſo
ſworne) yea how leudly he ſtoode in defence of the liberties
that they claime vnto clergie men, and that in an vnhoneſt cauſe
(for Philip Brocke, a canon of Bedford being accuſed and tried
of m
                  •
               rder, gaue euil words to the iudges, and the archbiſhop
would not ſuffer him to be puniſhed by the ciuil magiſtrate) how
ſtifly he ſet himſelfe againſt the king, to the miſlike of moſt of the
biſhops in the land,In vita Hen. 3. 
               Mathew of Paris (though otherwiſe a wellwiller
of his) doth plainly ſet downe. Yea what ſafetie may
kings haue to their perſons, or what quietneſſe in their dominions
if they who are called clergie men, may within any princes
dominions, execute againſt them, the popes raſh and vniuſt

decrees, without puniſhment of them that beare the ſword? If
vnquiet heades, and rebellious perſons, may deuiſe and practiſe
what they thinke good, to follow their owne luſt, and get vnto
themſelues the raines of libertie, and when theſe things ſhall any
way breake out, they may not be examined by princes or magiſtrates,
or accuſed before ſuch authoritie? In this reſpect
therefore, that by ſuch immunities bad men were much imboldned,
either to performe the popes commaundements, or their
owne deſires: princes had the leſſe abilitie and oportunitie to
ſhake off that yoke of more than Egyptiacal bondage which the
pope laid vpon them. For, if they once indeuoured to attempt
any ſuch thing, they had within their realm (euen ſuch as ſhuld
by chriſtian duty, and very naturall affection be their ſtrength &
aid) them that vnder pretence of obedience to the vicar of Rome
would make faint the hearts of the princes friends, and mightily
ſtrengthē the hands of his worſt ſort of ſubiects. And no maruell
though in the dayes of deepe darknes or ignorance, this leprouſie
did ſo infect and ſpread, for we, among whom the light
of Gods trueth doth ſhine in ſome reaſonable manner in many
places,Ieſuites and prieſts peril
                     •
                  ous. and in great abundance in ſome, yet cannot be rid of that
ſcabbe. For though God in his tender mercy towards vs, hath
baniſhed out of this land, that prowd authoritie of the pope, and
giuen vnto vs, as an ineſtimable treaſure, the true libertie of
conſcience, and miniſtery of the word: yet becauſe our princes
and magiſtrates are farre ſhort of that zeale that was commended
in godly kings, and ſhould be in chriſtian magiſtrates, and
we our ſelues euen the whole body of the ſubiects, do not walke
according to our calling, or worke according to our profeſſion,
but detaine the trueth in vnrighteouſneſſe:Rom. 1. 18. euen for our ſins I
ſay doubtles it commeth to paſſe, that there are ſo many Cananites
in our land, waiting ſtill, as occaſion may ſerue, to bee
prickes in our eyes,Numb. 33. 55. and thornes to pricke vs in our ſides, ſo that
though their power will not ſerue yet to caſt vs out of the land:
yet they can find meanes enough to grieue vs in the land. It is
our ſinne alſo that bringeth in among vs, theſe that creepe not
into widowes houſes onely, but into the houſes of men, eſpecially
women that are ſimple and ignorant, and laden with ſinne,
many of them withdrawing them from the true knowledge of

God, and duty towards their magiſtrates, I meane the Ieſuits
and ſeminary prieſts, a kind of people as neceſſary and commodious
to liue among good ſubiects, or in any quiet commonwealth,
as the frogges, lice, f
                  •
               ies and graſhoppers of Egypt
were,H
                     •
                  od 8. 
                     ••
                  xod. 10. Ieſuits and Prieſt
                     •
                   the locuſt. Reuil. 9. 3. or as caterpillers are for fruit, corne or graſſe. They ſeeme
to be the very locuſts, that came out of the darke ſmoke that iſſued
out of the botomleſſe pit, whoſe ſting is ſecret like the ſcorpions,
teaching rebellion to princes, vnder colour of obedience
to the pope. They are nimble, and want no courage, like horſes
prepared to the battell.7 They are crowned with the honourable
name of Ieſuites, and haue faces like men in external profeſſion
of obedience and trueth.8 They ſeeme like vnto women
(that is) not like to do hurt, but yet obſtinate and ſtiffe they are,
in that they take in hand, and cruel and mightie to doe much

                  •
               urt,9 among them that receaue them. They are armed with the
habergeon, of authoritie from Rome. They are lifted vp with
the wings of proude conceit of their owne knowledge, whereby
they make a noiſe, as though they could beare downe all before
them.10. Laſtly they haue a king ſet ouer them, for the kings
that are ouer other ſubiects are not good enough to rule this
crowned companie. The pope is their king, him they ſerue, to
him they yeld their obedience. And their trauel is to make other
alſo to become his ſubiects. Whoſe fiue monethes, that is the
time of whoſe contiunance among vs, is not yet expired, becauſe
our ſinnes (as I haue ſaid, and muſt ſay againe and again)
our ſinnes prolong the time of our chaſticement.The multitude of clergie men and women. The ſecond
inconuenience that theſe immunities (granted the clergie men)
did bring vnto ciuil eſtates, was the i
                  •
               finit ſwarmes of ſubiects
that were accounted of that number. For beſides their clarkes,
regular and irregular, which grew to maruelous great multitudes,
they had their leſſer orders which had alſo their part in
theſe priuileges. Which being ſo many in number as they
were, the common welth did not onely find a want of ſuch, as
ſhould help to beare the burthens, that were to be laied vpon the
ſame: but alſo they by their multitude, were able to make a great
party, to attempt any thing that they would take in hand. And by
the large poſſeſſions which many of theſe had, they could draw
many folowers to be on their ſide. And this I take to be the reaſon

that Boniface the eight (as Marcilius Patiuinus writeth)
was ſo deſirousto inlarge and increaſe the number of his clergy,
that he would haue all ſuch as had married a maide, and contented
themſelues but with one wife,Part. 2. 6. 
                     •
                  . ſhould be of his clergie. Now
their exemptions ſtreching to all the clergie, I pray you what
ſubiects ſhould be left vnto the king, for him to commaund and
rule for his owne ſafetie, and the gard of his common wealth?
It was therefore a great poſt and piller of poperie, to bring theſe
immunities to the clergie, and a meane to maintaine it the
better. Both becauſe it imboldned themſelues to doe much miſchiefe,
and alſo it drew many to be of their ſocieties. And ſo as
it was a double dammage to the ciuil eſtate. So was it a
double prop to vphold the kingdome of the pope, and therefore
dangerous moe wayes then one. Well, thus far we are nowe
come in this proofe of popiſh practiſes, that wee ſee their ſub
                  ••
               
ſhiftes to bring themſelues to this high eſtate. It is not vnknowen
to vs how wickedly they haue abuſed their authoritīe,
in pride intollerable, couecouſneſſe inſa
                  •
               iable, and malice vnmeaſurable.
And laſtly their gouernment being ſo very deuiliſh
and deteſted almoſt of al, yet how and by what means they haue
maintained the ſame. That is to ſay, I haue opened their ſubtil
ſhifts, wherby they became ſo great, and ſecondly their practiſes
and proceedings in this their greatneſſe, thirdly their cunning
and compaſſes to keepe themſelues great, the meanes, which for
the moſt part they haue vſed to get into this neſt, which they
haue built ſo high and to 
                  •
               eepe themſelues in the ſame.
            My meaning is not ſo lay open their wickedneſſe of life, ſo
long as it is but their priuate fault,Rom. 14. 4. let them ſtand or 
                  •
               all to their
owne Lord, he againſt whom they offend, ſhall call them to account.
But that onely that belongeth to the queſtion of the
popes ſupremacie, which now I haue taken in hand to ſuruey,
and to the abuſe either in getting, or in vſing of it, that onelie
did I purpoſe to intreate of. And hereunto am I forced by
double neceſſitie. Firſt, becauſe it is one part of the popi
                  •
               h practiſes.
But eſpecially to ſtoppe the mouthes of them whoſe ſight
is ſo quicke towards others, as that they can eſpie a ſmall mote
in their eie. In our church they can find no miniſterie, no ſucceſſion,
no ſacraments, all is wrong, they ſee nothing but faults.
            
               
The great beame that troubleth their owne eye, they cannot ſee.
But as men ſightleſſe and ſenceleſſe, they imagine all is well
with them, all is catholike. Catholike church, catholike faith,
catholike religion, catholike doctrine. And yet, if the matter be
well examined neither their church, neither yet their faith, haue
any ſhew of catholike in them. As (I truſt) it is euident to ſee,
in this Suruey of the Popes Supremacie, that their doctrine
is not catholike, their doings are not chriſtian like. Let vs examine
whether that which they teach vs concerning this point,
haue bene taught likewiſe of al the godly learned, or at the leaſt
of the moſt of them,Whether the doctrine of ſupremacie be catholike. at all times in all places, conſtantly, and
of ſet purpoſe, not by the way (as we terme it) in handling ſome
other matter, often, and plainely. For theſe are the properties
that Viucentius Lyrinenſis an old father, requireth in that doctrine,
that is catholike and true. That Peter was otherwiſe a
foundation in the building of the church of Chriſt, then were other
of the Apoſtles, it is not a catholike doctrine. That Chriſt
gaue to Peter onely the keies of the kingdome of heauen, it is
not by theſe rules a catholike faith. That the feeding of Chriſts
ſheep in the whole world, or the gouernment of the whole church,
was commited to Peter onely, or eſpecially, is moſt catholikely
taught: ſo that not one of all theſe points of their religion,
which are indeede the ground-worke, whereupon they raiſe this
their ſtately building of the popes ſupremacie, can be called catholike
(as is before ſhewed.) But if they could prooue theſe
things to be catholike, as they will neuer be able to doe, yet haue
they not obtained their purpoſe. For, how is this conueyed to
the biſhop of Rome, if it were in Peter. It is not catholikely
beleeued, that he was biſhop of Rome: neither yet that he conueyed
his eſtate or intereſt ouer the whole church (if any ſuch
had beene in him) to the biſhop of Rome. Or if all this could
be proued, yet remaineth one point that were able to ouerthrow
all. For it is not receiued as a catholike doctrine, that the Biſhop
of Rome cannot erre, or that for ſinne and errour, the priuileges
which the church of Rome claimes, if they had any ſuch,
could not be forfeited, as well in them as in other churches.
            In all which pointes, if I haue nor ſufficiently prooued, that
the church of Rome teacheth falſe doctrine and repugnant to

the Scriptures (wherein I ſubmit my ſelfe to the iudgement of
the indifferent Reader:) yet (I truſt) that the aduerſaries them
ſelues muſt needes confeſſe, that theſe cannot be prooued, to be
catholike doctrines. But on the contrary a man may eaſily ſee,
if hee marke the ſtorie of times, that theſe things which are the
only pillers to vphold this popiſh kingdom, were neuer thought
vpon in the Apoſtles times, or the ages next to them, that is to
ſay, in the purer times of the primitiue church. But when hereſies
began to trouble the church, and men began to ſeparat them
ſelues from the vnity of faith, more boldly, and more openly then
at the firſt they did. And it pleaſed God to continue in ſome
reaſonable ſort, ſinceritie and trueth of religion in the church of
Rome:Peters chaire. then beganne that ſeate to be called Peters chaire (not
becauſe Peter ſate there) but becauſe that notable confeſſion
that Peter made, and the faith that he preached, was there eſtabliſhed,
and ſoundly kept and maintained, (as before I haue
ſhewed out of Opta
                     •
                  us and others) that Peters chaire ſignifieth
his doctrine. And as after the ſunne is once ſet, darkeneſſe groweth
ſtill more and more, ſo that the furder from ſunne ſet vntill
it be readie to riſe againe, the greater is the darkneſſe: euen
ſo the farder men were from thoſe purer times, the furder did
they wander, from the wayes of truth, and the groſſer was the
ignorance that they were in. So as that which at the firſt was
not once thought vpon, yet was it at the laſt affirmed of ſome
very conſtantly and boldly. But if they cannot prooue it to be a
doctrine generally receiued at all times euen in the dayes of the
apoſtles, and ſo by continuall ſucceſſion conſtantly taught in the
ages next folowing, and ſo deliuered vs: they do but too much
abuſe the ſimple, to tel them that is catholike & auncient that is
but the dreame or late deuiſe of ſome later teachers. Now I
call them whatſoeuer antiquity they ſeeme to haue, that ſwarue
any thing from that, which the auncient of daies hath taught, or
Chriſt who is our true antiquitie, hath deliuered. It behooueth
therfore al chriſtians to take heede of ſuch, as vnder pretence of
being popiſh catholicks,Ignat. epiſt. ad Philadelph. and vnder or colour of this glorious
name (which belongeth neither to them, neither yet to
their religion) creepe into corners, deceiue the ignorant, ſeeke to
make many of their profeſſion,Beware of ſen
                     •
                  
                  narie prieſts. by hauing onely in their mouths

this worde catholike faith, catholike religion, catholike church,
whereas in truth, as it ſeemeth, that they being neither thought
worthy of preferment at home, neither yet finding that they looked
for abroad, euen as the cormorants gather where the carkas
is, to get their prey: ſo theſe ſeeke their meate and maintenance
by ſeducing ſuch ſimple and ſillie ſoules. Neither doe I
affirme, that all are moued by theſe cauſes, either to leaue their
natiue countrie, either to returne to ſowe amongſt her maieſties
ſubiects, this ſeede of ſeduction and ſedition, but they that doe
trouble this Realme, are for the moſt part ſuch, and moued by
ſuch reaſons. But as they can not proue by an catholike
grounds their title to the ſupremacie to bee good: ſo their practiſe
is too bad, and farre from that chriſtian modeſtie and meekeneſſe,
which ſhould be in Gods children. For if ſaint Peter ſaid
truly, that ſuch as himſelfe was, ſhould not as Lords (beare
rule) ouer the Lords here
                  •
               age,1. P
                     ••
                   5. 3. but be as examples to the flocke:
then howe can the pope claime that ſoueraigne authoritie ouer
all kings,1. Pet. 2. 13. and whom ſaint Peter calleth chiefe. If none can enter
into anie calling, eſpeciallie to haue the charge ouer the flocke
of Chriſt, vnleſſe he be called therevnto, as it is confeſſed by all
men: what reaſon can the biſhops of Rome pretend, why either
they ſhould without any warrant, nay contrarie to the worde, ſo
exalt themſelues aboue all other, or ſo vnlawfully, or rather by
ſo vile practiſes and ſhifts, as by violence and ſtrife, by buing
and ſelling, by falſhood and craft, by poiſoning and murders, by
ſorcerie and the diuels helpe, get to be popes? Or being placed
in that proude place, howe commeth it to paſſe that with ſo great
boldneſſe, without feare, without ſhame, they prophane the maieſtie
of God, and deſpiſe, yea tread vnder foote the excellencie of
man, be he neuer ſo high. Is this the fruit of their catholike doctrine?
Doe ſuch lewde dealings become Chriſts vicar, or Peters
ſucceſſour? But to conclude, ſeeing the popes title vnto the ſupremacie
hath no ſhew of truth:Concluſion. and ſeeing his exerciſe of the
ſame, is almoſt nothing elſe but a blaſpheming of God, and a
defacing of all authoritie ordained by God:Exhortation to ch
                     •
                  iſtian princes. raiſe and rouſe vp
your ſelues after your long ſluggiſhnes (O ye chriſtian princes
and magiſtrates) ſhake off from your neckes this yoke of bondage,
wherein you ſerue that Italian prieſt. Ioine your powers

and ſtrength togither. Gather and call a free Councill in deed,
where the pope as a partie may plead his cauſe, not ſit as iudge.
Force him to content himſelfe with that place which the worde
of God will a
                  •
               foord him. If any more be giuen vnto him, or any
other, yet let not the godly potentats giue vnto any as they haue
done ſuch reines of libertie, but that they may knowe that authoritie
to be but from man, and that their power is not full or abſolute,
but onely limited: and that if they abuſe the ſame, they
may and ſhall anſwere for their boldneſſe, according to the qualitie
of their offence. So ſhall you deliuer chriſtendome from a
heauie bondage, your owne realmes from a moſt daungerous
enemie, and the church of God from a moſt manifeſt Antichriſt.
So ſhall you vſe your authoritie to the comfort of the godly, as
you ſhould doe,Tim. 17. and as in dutie you are bound to Gods glorie,
and eſtabliſhing of the Kingdome of Chriſt. Now
vnto the king euerlaſting, immortall, inuiſible,
vnto God onelie wiſe, be honour and
glorie for euer and euer.
Amen.
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   