
      
         
            
            
            Looke from Adam, And behold THE PROTESTANTS FAITH AND RELIGION, EVIDENTLY PROVED OVT OF the holy Scriptures againſt all Atheiſts, Papiſts, looſe Libertines, and Carnall Goſpellers: and that the Faith which they profeſſe, hath continued from the beginning of the world, and ſo is the true and ancient Faith.
            HEREIN HAST THOU ALSO A SHORT SVMME OF THE WHOLE BIBLE, and a plaine manifeſtation, that all holy men who have pleaſed God, have beene ſaved through this Chriſtian Faith alone.
            LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland, for Thomas Pavier, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Ivie Lane. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               HAving divers times obſerved with my ſelfe (moſt Chriſtian Reader) that the doctrine of the Goſpell, which hath beene now freely preached theſe many yeeres amongst us, in this our flouriſhing Common-wealth, is yet daily and ordinarily, by ſundry perſons, charged with noveltie, as which being an upſtart, were not of ſufficient ſtanding or antiquitie: I thought it not amiſſe in this reſpect, either for the confutation of the obſtinate adverſarie, or for the comfort of the weake and ſimple profeſſour of religion, to publiſh and ſet forth this little worke of Mr. Miles Coverdale, who for his integritie of life, and fame in learning, and other excellent gifts, was ſo renowmed in the Church of Chriſt in his age, that I doubt not, but that his onely name will be a ſufficient credit, (with any man, that is not maliciouſly diſpoſed) for the full allowance, and well-liking of any ſuch monument of his, as he of pure zeale, and good affection, hath commended to us his poſteritie. By which travels of his, as hee

hath generally ſhewed himſelfe a notable member in the Church of God: ſo hath he thereby eſpecially well deſerved of this his native Countrey. Wherefore not willing to detain thee from better matter, I wiſh thee to uſe this booke to thy profit, and with mee to give thanks to our mercifull Father, for this valiant Souldier, as alſo for other worthie Martyrs of his time, which after the battell by themſelves fought, have (by Gods providence) left ſpirituall children, (I meane their good bookes) to make a ſupply, that Chriſts Church may bee encreaſed, to the utter confuſion and overthrow of Antichriſt. Farewell in the Lord.
         
         
            
            Miles Coverdale, TO ALL CHRISTIAN Readers, wiſheth grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, through our Lord and onely Saviour IESVS CHRIST.
            
               LIke as the Almighty eternall God, three in perſons, and one in ſubſtance, of his tender mercy and love, not only created man at the beginning after his owne ſimilitude and likeneſſe, but alſo when he was loſt, moſt graciouſly redeemed him, and brought him out of bond age: Even ſo when man (neither regarding his wonderfull creation, nor his moſt deare redemption) gropeth in darkneſſe, in vice and blindneſſe, lieth in the Devils priſon,
                  The accuſtomed goodneſſe of God.
                and goeth in the way of damnation; God alway ſetteth up his light before him, ſendeth the meſſage of his word unto him, ſheweth him what caſe he is in, giveth him warning, openeth the priſon doore, calleth him out of the Devils ſervice, telleth him what danger it is to be his bondman, or ſervant unto ſinne. This doth God alway afore he puniſh and plague the world. This (I ſay) hath ever beene the worke of God ſince the beginning, as the ſtories and propheſies of all the holy Bible doe teſtifie. And though we had no writing of Gods acts in times paſt, yet hath he practiſed this ſame his wonderfull worke of mercy upon us. So that like as we muſt needs confeſſe,
                  God hath ſhewed no leſſe kindneſſe to us than he did to the old world.
                that we are created of God, and redeemed by his only mercy in his deare Sonne Ieſus Chriſt: So can we not denie, but we have heard his holy meſſage, had no leſſe preachings and warnings of dangers to come, than other have had afore our daies. Yea even the ſame mercifull God that ſent Noe to preach righteouſneſſe unto the wicked world, and converted the Ninivites by his word in the miniſtration of the Prophet Ionas, hath done even ſo with us in every condition. And ſome (thanks be unto him therefore) hath bee brought out of darkneſſe into his wonderfull light, and out of the devils ſervice, into the kingdome of his deare Sonne.
            But alas and woe to this unthankfull world. For like as a great number that be in priſon of Satan, will not come forth when they

are called and the doore ſet open, but goe on ſtill ſtumbling in darkneſſe,
                  They that follow Gods word are laughed to ſcorne.
                when the lanterne of light is offered them: Even ſo if any play a wiſe mans part, and doe as he is warned by Gods word, hee ſhall have a ſort of apiſh people, a number of dizerds and ſcornfull mockers, which (becauſe the man will not dance in the devils morrys with them, nor keepe their company in the bondage of ſinne and vice, neither runne with them unto like confuſion (as S. Peter calleth it) laugh him to ſcorne, and bleare out their tongues at him, even like fooles and cockſcombs of the world. And like as when a poore wretch commeth out of priſon, he ſhall have moe to ſtand gaſing and gaping upon him, than to doe him good, or to helpe him to his fees: Even ſo now that God of his mercy hath called us out of Satans priſon, and from the ſchoole of falſe doctrine, my Lords foole with his companions ſtandeth ſtaring upon us, and mocketh us, becauſe we ſit not ſtill with other priſoners. There goeth a fellow of the new learning (ſaith one) there is one of theſe new-fangled Goſpellers (ſaith another) that is one of the new brethren (ſaith the third) he followeth the new faith, &c.
            
               
                  The doctrine of Chriſt his faith is no new thing.
               Wherefore, in conſideration hereof I have here ſet forth this booke: partly becauſe it ſheweth the antiquitie and ancient age of our holy Chriſtian faith, and partly to give occaſion unto all ſuch as have received it, not to be aſhamed of it, nor to ſhrinke from it, for any opprobrious mockage or ſcornfull deriſion in this world. The Apoſtle ſaith,1 Cor. 1.18. that the preaching or word of Chriſts croſſe, is fooliſhneſſe to them that periſh, and that the thing which appertaineth to the ſpirit of God,1 Cor. 1.14. is fooliſhneſſe to a carnall minded man. Whereby like as we may learne that it is no new thing to be mocked and ſtared upon for holding with the doctrine that maketh ſo much of Chriſt his death, and the true worſhipping of God in the ſpirit: even ſo may we ſee (to the ſingular comfort of our conſcience) that no man mocketh us for it,
                  None but reprobates deride the truth of Gods Goſpell.
                but ſuch as periſh and are carnally minded: and that for all their deriſion and ſcorning, it is yet the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.18. and belongeth to his holy ſpirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. and is not our owne doctrine,
                  To us which are ſaved, it is the power of God.
                neither of any other mans making. This is now to us a comfort and conſolation.
            But becauſe the world is angry with us for our faith, and giveth us ſo euill report for teaching it, it ſhall be expedient for us to declare what faith is, and what faith we meane, when we make mention thereof. Firſt, becauſe we may not deſcribe it after our owne judgement, we will rehearſe the words of the Apoſtle, which writing to the Hebrewes,
                  What faith is. Hebr. 11.1. ſaith after this manner: Faith is a ſubſtance of things to be hoped for, an evidence or certaintie of things which doe not appeare. By the which definition, it is manifeſt, that when we ſet forth or teach this faith, we meane no vaine faith, no falſe opinion of faith, no fond imagination of faith, no dead faith, no

idle faith; but a ſubſtantiall thing, even a ſure beleefe of things that are to be hoped for, and a proofe, experience, or knowledge of things that are not ſeene. This faith then is the inſtrument, whereby we feele and are certaine of heavenly things, that our corporall eye cannot ſee. Now becauſe none other vertue can ſo apprehend the mercy of God, nor certifie us ſo effectually of our ſalvation, as this living faith doth, therefore hath the Scripture imputed our juſtification before God, only unto faith among all other vertues: not without other vertues following, but without any other worke or deed juſtifying. This is the faith of Chriſt,Rom. 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Epheſ. 2.8. Phil. 3.9. Iaco. 2.14. which all the Scripture ſpeaketh of. This is the faith that S. Paul preacheth to juſtifie in the ſight of God: as S. Iames teacheth, that works juſtifie in the ſight of men, and that it is but a dead faith which hath no works. This is the faith, without the which it is impoſſible to pleaſe God, and of the which whatſoever proceedeth not, is ſinne. This is the faith whereby God purifieth our hearts,Heb. 11.6. Rom. 14.23. Act. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.9. Gala. 5.6. 1 Cor. 10.3. Heb. 11.4. and whoſe end is ſalvation. This is the faith that worketh by charitie or godly love, & is of value before God. This is the faith whereby the holy fathers which were afore Chriſts incarnation did in ſpirit eat and drinke & enjoy the ſame mercy of God in Chriſt, that we are partakers of. To be ſhort, this is the ſame faith, whereby God ſaved thoſe his elect, of whō 
               S. Paul maketh mention in the foreſaid epiſtle to the Hebrewes, and rehearſeth many godly fruits of the ſame in their converſation.
            This then is no new-fangled faith, no ſtrange faith, no faith invented by mans braine, but even the ſame that Gods holy ſpirit teacheth in the infallible truth of his Scripture, and that Adam, Abel, Enoch, and all the other ſervants of God were ſaved in. Why doe men therefore either call it a new-fangled faith, or report evill of us, for ſetting it forth? Why? I feare me this is one cauſe: The old faith that all thoſe ſervants of God had, whom the Apoſtle nameth in the eleventh to the Hebrewes,Heb. 11.4, 5. had a life and converſation joyned unto it, which was rich and full of all good works. Therefore ſeeing there be ſo many bablers and pratlers of faith, and ſo few that bring forth the worthy fruits of repentance, it giveth the world occaſion to report of us, that our faith is but new-fangled. They ſee us not fall to labour and taking of paines, as Adam did: They ſee not the righteouſneſſe and thankfulneſſe in us, that was in Abel: They ſee us not walke after the word and will of God, as Enoch did: They ſee us not take Gods warning ſo earneſtly as Noe did: They ſee us not ſo obedient to the voice of God, nor ſo well willing and content to leave our friends, to forſake our owne wils, our owne lands and goods at Gods calling, and dwell in a ſtrange country, to doe Gods pleaſure, as Abraham did: they ſee that wee chuſe not rather to ſuffer adverſitie with the people of God, than to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon: They ſee us not eſteeme

the rebuke of Chriſt, or trouble for his ſake, to be greater riches than all the treaſures of this world, as Moſes did: To be ſhort, they ſee not in our garden thoſe ſweet flowers and fruits of Gods holy Spirit, which were in them that had the old faith.
            Aſhamed may wee be therefore, as many of us as either write, teach, preach, ſpeake or talke of the old faith, if wee endevour not our ſelves to have thoſe old heavenly vertues that were ever plentifull in all Gods true ſervants, in every one (I meane) according to his calling. Not that it is evill, to teach or talke of the true old faith, but this I ſay,Iames 1▪21 becauſe that (according to the doctrine of S. Iames) they are but deceivers of themſelves, that are not doers of Gods word, as well as hearers thereof. And through ſuch ſlender receiving of Chriſts holy Goſpell, it is now come to paſſe, that like as we haue need of ſuch an Apoſtle as was holy S. Paul, to rebuke this vaine confidence that men put in their workes, and to tell us that no worke of our doing (but faith of Gods working, doth juſtifie us in his ſight. Even ſo have wee no leſſe need of ſuch another Apoſtle (as was holy S.
               
                  Would to God we had many ſuch as Iames the Apoſtle was.
                
               Iames) to rebuke this horrible unthankfulneſſe of men, that profeſſing themſelves to bee Chriſtians, and to hold of Chriſts old faith, are yet dead unto all good workes, receive not the word of God in meekeneſſe, caſt not away all uncleanneſſe and malitiouſneſſe, are ſwift to ſpeake, to talke, to jangle, and to take diſpleaſure; are forgetfull hearers of the Word, and not livers thereafter, boaſting themſelves to be of Gods pure and undefiled Religion, and yet refraine nor their tongues from evill, viſit not the poore, the friendleſſe, and the deſolate in their trouble, neither keepe themſelves undefiled from this world. Reade the firſt chapter of his Epiſtle.Iames 1.
            
            What an occaſion might ſuch an Apoſtle (as holy Iames was) have, to write another, yea a ſharper Epiſtle, ſeeing ſo many pretending to be of Ieſus Chriſts old faith, are yet ſo partiall, have ſuch a carnall reſpect of perſons, are not rich in faith, deſpiſe the poore, practiſe not the law of godly love, talke and jangle of faith, not having the workes thereof,
                  O unthankefull world.
                clothe not the naked, helpe not the poore to their living, regard not their neceſſitie, have but a dead faith, declare not by good and godly workes, the true and old faith of Chriſt, are but vaine beleevers, have not the eflectuous, the working and living faith,Iames 2.25. that Abraham and Rahab had. Reade the ſecond chapter of his Epiſtle.
            How would holy Iames reprove theſe bringers up of ſtrange doctrines,
                  Saint Iames would not ſpare to rebuke ſuch.
                blaſphemers, backbiters, belie
                  •
               s of good men, falſe teachers againſt Gods truth, diſſemblers with the ſame, cary fire (as they ſay) with the one hand, and water in the other: pretend to be learned, and yet bring not forth the workes of good converſation in meekeneſſe out of Gods wiſdome, but in frowardneſſe, and out of carnall

doctrine. How would he take up theſe, that delight in malice and ſtrife, belie Gods truth, are given to earthly, fleſhly, and devilliſh wiſdome, are unſtable, full of all evill workes, are not in the ſchoole of Gods wiſdome and learning, are not given to unfainedneſſe of heart, are not peaceable, are churliſh, uneaſie to be intreated, &c. Reade the third chapter of his Epiſtle.Iames 3 17.
            
            What would ſuch an holy Apoſtle ſay to this wicked world,Iames 4.1. wherein a great number (pretending to be Chriſtian men) are given ſo to quarelling and fighting, to voluptuouſneſſe and inordinate luſts,
                  Againſt ſuch groſſe vices would not Saint Iames ſpare to ſpeake.
                to envie and indignation, to unlawfull ſpending and conſuming of that they may get, to advoutrie, to the deſpiſing of holy wedlocke, to ſhamefull uncleanneſſe, either not willing to marry, or elſe putting away their wives for light occaſions, and for ſatisfying of their owne trifling luſts, falling in love with the vaine friendſhip of this world, taking part againſt God: yea whereas by their profeſſion, oath, and allegiance (which they owe to their moſt high Soveraigne the King of heaven) they ſhould in a vertuous converſation maintaine all godlineſſe, are become even enemies, ſuppreſſours and overthrowers thereof, as well through their obſtinate and cruell reſiſting of Gods word, as by other wicked examples of their vicious and filthy living? What would holy S. Iames ſay to ſuch unthankfull bellies, that knowing the truth, live after ſuch a ſort? Would he ſpare them though they were never ſo rich and wealthie? Reade the fourth chapter of his Epiſtle, and the firſt part of his fifth chapter,Iames 4. and yee will judge the contrarie.
            Wherefore, moſt deare Readers, whoſoever of you hath beene ſlacke to follow the good life and godly converſation that S. Iames, and all the other Scripture beſide requireth to be in them, which profeſſe the old faith, let them take better hold, turne againe to the truth, and follow that loving exhortation, which holy S.
               Iames 5.19. 
               Iames maketh in the latter end of his Epiſtle. And if he hath at the firſt not enclined to Gods word, nor received it unfainedly in meekeneſſe,
                  Let every man take the paines to rebuke his owne fault.
               
nor ſubmitted himſelfe to be ordered thereby, and to caſt away all uncleanneſſe, &c. But hath haply ſuffered it, promoted it, ſet it forth, or taken a pretence of favour and love to it, for ſome other purpoſe to obtaine any carnall profit, gaines or libertie by it; let him not put holy S. Iames, or any other true meſſenger of God, to the paines of rebuking him for ſo doing: let him rather enter into himſelfe, reprove his owne fault and abuſe in that behalfe, abhorre it in any wiſe, be angry, diſpleaſed and diſcontent with himſelfe, ſorie and repentant for it, ſhame not to aske God mercie, and by good workes from hence forward to labour, that the glory of God, and worſhip of his truth, may be preferred and ſet up, which he by ſuch his unchriſtian living, hath in times paſt cauſed to be hindred.
            In concluſion: Though there be never ſo many that recant and

deny Gods holy word, either in their living and converſation, or in their words, writing or preaching, yet as many of us as are entered into the ſchoole of that wiſdome which is from aboue, let us be true ſcholers of the ſame, and practiſe it both in our thought, word and deed: let us even enter into the nature and kinde thereof: which (as S.
               Iames 3.17. We muſt put on the nature of Gods doctrine.
                
               Iames ſaith, Iam. 3.) is pure, peaceable, gentle, and eaſie to be intreated, full of mercie and good fruits, without judging and diſſimulation. Which thing if we doe, then ſhall we follow no filthy doctrine nor counterfeited wiſdome, then ſhall we be no breakers of peace, then ſhall we be as glad to forgive, as we would be forgiven, glad to be reformed, rich and plentifull in the workes of mercie and good fruits of the old faith: then ſhall we be no quarrell-pickers or diſſemblers with any man: Then ſhall wee not only be found the maintainers of peace and all good order, but peaceably alſo, and in all gentle manner ſhall we (both in word and deed) ſow, ſpread abroad, and ſhew the fruit of that righteouſneſſe, which commeth only of God through Ieſus Chriſt.
            If any of them that are gone (of high or low eſtate, pretending to be maintainers, favourers, ſetters forth, or ſcholers of Chriſts doctrine) hath in any condition diſſembled therewith, fallen from God, misbehaved himſelfe in the affaires of his Prince, miſgoverned his houſhold, maintained riot, vice and ſinne, or brought the good word of God into any evill report by his ungodly converſation (as I feare me, it be too true) let us beware by ſuch mens fall. Let us not receive the grace of God in vaine. For like as they that harden their hearts at Gods word, and ſpurne wilfully againſt it, are ſure of their damnation,
                  Let the workes of God, which are paſt, be a warning to us.
                except they repent; Even ſo they that diſſemble withall, ſhall finde their judgement. Wherefore let us that have received the old true faith of Chriſt, not only be content to abide any ſtorme or trouble for it (yea to be mocked, ſcorned, perſecuted, and put to death therefore, if it ſo pleaſe God) but alſo unfainedly every man to his power, in his heart by fervent prayer, in his mouth by good words, and in all his bodie by vertuous converſation and good Chriſtian workes, helpe and labour, that the bleſſed word of God may have the due honour belonging thereunto, and that the ſame which it hath loſt through ungodly behaviour of ſome, may through the grace and goodneſſe of God bee wonne againe in our good living: That God may have of us better ſervants, our Prince truer ſubjects, and our neighbours more unfained lovers, than many have been before us. Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN EVIDENT DECLARATION OVT of the Holy Scriptures, that the Chriſtian faith hath endured ſince the beginning of the world, and that through it only all vertuous men pleaſed God and were ſaved.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  I SVPPOSE plainly that many ſimple Chriſtian men will not a little wonder at this mine enterpriſe, they are ſo perſwaded,
                     The Chriſtian faith is elder than 1600. yeeres.
                   and thinke, the Chriſtian faith did firſt beginne under Tiberius the Emperour: for as much as out of the Goſpell of Luke it is certaine, that in the fifteenth yeere of Tiberius, Iohn Baptiſt beganne to preach the Goſpell, and

all hiſtories ſay with one accord, that in the xviij. yeare of Tiberius Ieſus Chriſt did ſuffer.
               Now it is true that all the Prophecies were then firſt fulfilled, and the true ſalvation performed; yea from that time forth were all the glorious treaſures of Chriſt ſo richly declared and powred out among all people, as they never were afore. Notwithſtanding the ſame ſalvation in Chriſt Ieſus was promiſed long afore, and ſo opened to the holy old Fathers, that they have no leſſe ſight of Chriſt Ieſus in the ſpirit than we, and put their truſt in him as well as we: though among us it be cleere and open, or performed and fulfilled, that among them was ſomewhat darker, and therefore looked for with hearts deſire, as a thing for to come. Moreover it is not I that firſt bring forth this meaning concerning the antiquitie or oldneſſe of our Chriſtian faith: for the holy Biſhop Euſebius Ceſarienſ. which lived above eleven hundred yeeres agoe, (and likewiſe many other Chriſtian Doctors) hath alſo taught and written the ſame more cleerely before me.
                     Euſebius.
                   For Euſebius in the firſt booke De Eccleſiaſtica hiſtoria, ſaith plainly: All they that in their eſtate are noted according to their generations, to reckon backward from Abraham unto the firſt man, though they had not the name of Chriſtian men, (for at Antioch certaine yeeres after the aſcenſion of Chriſt, was that name given to the faithfull,
                     Acts 11.26. 
                  Acts 11.) yet as pertaining to the religion and ſubſtance, they were all Chriſtians.
               For if this word Chriſtian, be as much to ſay, as one that putteth his truſt in Chriſt, and through his

doctrine faſtned unto faith, unto the grace and righteouſneſſe of God, doth cleave with all diligence to Gods doctrine, and exerciſeth himſelfe in every thing that is vertuous; then verily thoſe holy men whom we ſpake of firſt, were even the ſame that Chriſtian men boaſt themſelves now to be. All theſe are the words of the foreſaid old Chriſtian Doctors. But to the intent that no man ſhall thinke that we build upon men, and upon a ſtrange foundation, therefore wee will firſt declare our minds out of the Scriptures, and alleage ſomewhat more for the better underſtanding of the matter.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of the goodneſſe of God, and wickedneſſe of man.
               GOd which hath ever beene ſufficient to all perfection, and needeth nothing of the creatures to his perfectneſſe, onely of his owne kinde and nature, which is good, (that is to ſay, of his owne grace and mercy, yea even becauſe he would doe good) created man for himſelfe: But before he created him,
                     The firſt creation of heaven and earth.
                   he provided firſt for him wonderfully, and furniſhed him with unſpeakable riches of his goodneſſe. For when he deviſed the creation of man, and the time was now come, which his godly wiſdome and providence had ordained, he firſt of all appointed a wonderfull lodging for man, and garniſhed the ſame yet much more wonderfully. At the beginning (when the goodly and cleere light was made) the Lord

prepared the inſtruments, which he afterward ſundred one from another, and ordained every one to ſome purpoſe. Over the deepe, that is, over the water and earth (which yet was in the water) made he a firmament, and ſpread out the heaven above as a pavilion. Afterward out of the water he called and brought forth the earth, (as much as ſerved for the habitation of men) and appointed the water his bounds and markes, which it may not overpaſſe. And theſe three things, the water, the earth, and the firmament, (that is to ſay, the aire and cleareneſſe above us unto the height of heaven) are the eſſentiall and ſubſtantiall parcels of the world, and ſerve as an houſe for the habitation of men: Nevertheleſſe as yet all this was but rough and unfiniſhed, and nothing garniſhed at all: Therefore did the wiſe and faithfull maſter put forth his hand wider,
                     The garniſhing of heaven and earth.
                   to performe and pleaſantly to garniſh that wonderfull worke; yea not onely to garniſh it, but alſo to make it fruitfull and profitable for man, which was the gueſt and inhabiter for to come.
               And firſt, in as much as man ſhould inhabit the earth, he garniſhed it aforehand, and cloathed it with a goodly greene garment, that is, with a ſubſtance, which hee deckt firſt with flowers and all manner of herbes, which not onely are pleaſant to looke upon, and wonderfully beautified, of a pleaſant taſte and goodly colour, but alſo profitable for food and all manner of medicine. To the ſame alſo did he firſt adde ſundry trees and plants. Then watered hee the earth with faire ſprings, rivers

and running waters. And the ground made he not like on every ſide, but in many places ſet it up pleaſantly: And hereof have wee the vallies, plaines, mountains and hills: which things all have their due operation, fruit, and pleaſantneſſe.
               After this alſo began he to garniſh the heaven and firmament, and ſet therein the Sunne and the Moone, the Planets and Starres: which things all are goodlier and more wonderfull than mans tongue can expreſſe. As for their office,
                     The office of t
                           •
                        e creatures in t
                           ••
                         firmament.
                   and the cauſe why they are ſet in the heaven, it is to give us light, and (with their up and downe going, or motion) to declare the times, yeares, moneths, and daies, dividing the daies and nights aſunder.
               Thirdly, he laid his hand likewiſe in the water,
                     Fiſhes.
                   in the which hee had wrought no leſſe wonders, than in heaven and upon earth. For in the water (and eſpecially in the ſea) doe the wonderfull workes of God appeare in the fiſhes and marvels of the ſea, if a man conſider the nature and diſpoſition of them.
                     Fowles.
                   And in the aire alſo hath hee created and ordained great tokens of his goodneſſe, power, and wiſdome, even the fowles that pleaſantly (according to divers commodities) doe ſing unto man, and refreſh him.
               At the laſt endued he the earth yet more richly,
                     Beaſts.
                   and filled it with all kinde of profitable and goodly beaſts, and ſundred one from another pleaſantly.
               When the Lord now had prepared this goodly and rich pleaſure, then firſt after theſe hee made man, that he might bee Lord of all theſe things.

Him alſo endued he above all other creatures,
                     The creation of man.
                   and created him after his owne image. He made him of body and ſoule, which ſhould have endured for ever, if he had not fallen into ſinne. Now hath he a fraile bodie, and an immortall everlaſting ſoule. But the firſt man made he altogether perfect and without blemiſh, ſo that verily he was called the image of God not without cauſe. The Lord alſo was not ſufficed in garniſhing the earth goodly, but firſt alſo builded upon the earth a ſpeciall garden of pleaſure, even a Paradiſe: and therein ſet he man his deare beloved creature.
                     The creation of the woman.
                   And for as much as he being ſolitary and alone, could not conveniently dwell without a mate, he appointed him firſt to plant and keepe the Garden of pleaſure, and provided for him a wife, even out of the bones of his owne body, that ſhe might bee the mans helpe. Thus would the goodneſſe of God finiſh and make man perfect, to the intent that he ſhould lacke nothing which ſerved to a right, wholeſome, and perfect life.
               Therefore was it equall, that man, which was endued with reaſon and high underſtanding, ſhould ſhew thankfulneſſe and obedience unto God, for ſuch high gifts. Yea, God himſelfe (which is not onely good, but alſo righteous) requireth the ſame of him, and that by the meanes of the commandement, That he might eat of all the trees of the Garden of pleaſure: Only he ſhould eſchew the fruit of knowing good and evill.
                     The requeſt of the commandement.
                   And this commandement was not grievous nor unreaſonable: Onely it required obedience and love of God the

maker, unto whom only the creature (even man) ſhould have reſpect, and looke for all good at his hand, and not to take the forme of good and evill out of himſelfe, but onely to hold that for evill and forbidden, which God inhibiteth as evill; and to account that as good and righteous, which God alloweth or forbiddeth not. For a repreſentation, viſible token, and ſacrament, God ſhewed him a right viſible and fruitfull tree in the Garden of pleaſure, and forbade him with earneſt threatning, that in what houre ſoever he did eat of the ſame tree, he ſhould die an everlaſting death.
                     The unthankefulneſſe 
                           •
                        nd w
                           •
                        ckedneſſe of man.
                   But untruly dealt man with his faithfull God, tranſgreſſed his commandement, and gave more credit to the perſwaſion of the woman and of the ſerpent, than to the true word of God: which was nothing elſe, but even as much as to take the forme of good and evill out of themſelves, or elſewhere, rather than of God, and not to cleave and be obedient onely unto him, as to ſuch an one as wiſheth good unto every man. For man being deceived through the woman and the Serpent, did beleeve that God was not indifferent, and that hee had withdrawne from him ſome of his godly wiſdome. And for as much as the minde now was departed from God through infidelity▪ and looked not for all good at his hand, therefore tooke the hand the noiſome apple, and the mouth did eat the forbidden meat. And thus thought hee to helpe himſelfe to Gods Majeſty, by another meanes, rather than by God, and ſo to repaire his neceſſitie which he thought hee had. And ſo with infidelity,

unfaithfulneſſe, diſobedience and unthankfulneſſe, he wrought life, and died the death; that is, he offended againſt God, and fell into the puniſhment of everlaſting damnation: Yea he made himſelfe bound unto the devill, whom he was ſo diligent, to beleeve, to follow, and to ſerve: Contrariwiſe he forſooke God, and ſo came he utterly into the bondage of the devill and darkneſſe. And thus have we now the goodneſſe and faithfulneſſe of God. Againe, the wickedneſſe and great unfaithfulneſſe of man.
            
            
               CHAP. III. The firſt and right foundation of our holy Chriſtian faith.
               
                  
                     The righteouſneſſe and mercy of God.
                  HEre now had the juſt God occaſion and right to expell man, to deſtroy him, to damne him, and to leave him utterly to the devill: And the ſame alſo did his righteouſneſſe and truth require.Gen. 2.17. For he had ſaid, In what day ſoever thou eateſt of the fruit, thou ſhalt die the death. Contrariwiſe, the goodneſſe and mercy of God required, not utterly to ſuppreſſe man a poore and naked creature. In the meane ſeaſon was there found a way,
                     The way of ſatisfaction before God is Chriſt.
                   whereby the righteouſneſſe and truth of God ſhould be ſatisfied, and in the which the mercy of God ſhould ſpecially be exerciſed and declare it ſelfe: that is to ſay, Chriſt Ieſus, which is given us by the manifeſt grace of God, was offered for our ſinnes, ſatisfied and recompenced

the righteouſneſſe of God, and ſo delivered us out of the bonds of the Devill. For hee died for us all, in as much as God ſaid: In what day ſoever thou eateſt thereof, thou ſhalt die the death. Therefore died Chriſt for us all, that through his death we might live, and be taken out of the kingdome of darkneſſe, and be ſet in the kingdome of the deare beloved Sonne of God.
               This device of Gods wiſdome (which no doubt was determinate from everlaſting) was alſo directly opened unto Adam, after the fall, in manner following: When man had eaten of the fruit of the forbidden tree, immediatly his eyes were opened; in ſo much that he was aſhamed, when he ſaw that he was naked. Hitherto had hee lived in innocencie, therefore began he now to cover himſelfe, but with ſimple clothing, which they truſted not much to (like as it is all unprofitable, that man of himſelfe will cover his ſinne withall) ſaving that they fled from the Lord, and hid themſelves from him.
                     Sinne.
                   But the Lord followed upon the fugitive, put him in minde of his decay, miſerie, and the life that hee was fallen from, and ſaid; Adam, where art thou? Or knoweſt thou what miſerie thou art fallen into from great felicitie? Now ſhould man have acknowledged his fault, but hee ſhewed himſelfe ſtiffe-necked. And the Lord moveth him ſtill, to ſee if he will acknowledge his ſinne, and ſaid: Who told thee that thou art naked? Yea, to helpe him in the matter, and to make him confeſſe his ſinne, hee ſaith moreover; Haſt thou not eaten of the tree of the which I forbad thee that thou ſhouldeſt not eat?
                  
But man was loth to knowledge his ſinne, and laid it firſt upon the woman his companion; and the ſame did he with ſo froward and unadviſed words,
                     The frowardneſſe of man.
                   that a man may eaſily ſee, that ſecretly in his heart, he wickedly and unreaſonably laid the fault upon God. For hee ſaid not onely, The woman gave me of the tree to eat; but added proudly thereto, The woman which thou gaveſt me, &c. As though he ſhould ſay; Thou thy ſelfe art in the fault; if thou haddeſt not given mee the woman, I had not beene deceived.
                     Why God gave the woman unto man.
                   And yet the righteous God gave him not the woman to deceive him, but to bee an helpe to him. Therefore appeareth it here againe, that the ſinne of man was the more wilfull & grievous.
                     Grace.
                   Yet for all this did the gracious God proceed further, and would prove whether hee might finde any knowledge of the ſinne with the woman, the beginning and occaſion of the ſinne. But nothing at all could he finde. The one perſon was as the other,
                     We all are loth to knowledge our ſelves guiltie.
                   and they both had no power. Therefore like as Adam put all the fault to the woman, even ſo laid the woman all the fault upon the Serpent, that is, upon the Devill. Which nature doth yet, to this day, cleave in man. But what man (which hath well conſidered this foreſaid matter by himſelfe) would now ſay, or durſt thinke, that any part of the promiſe of righteouſneſſe and ſalvation of man were to bee aſcribed to his owne power and deſerving? For as much as it is ſo manifeſt, how unable and loſt a creature man is of himſelfe, which doth nothing but heape ſinne upon ſinne, and diſobedience upon diſobedience.

Againe, who is ſo blinde, but he ſeeth, that all ſalvation is to be aſcribed to the onely meere grace and mercie of God? For now followeth it firſt how God handled this matter.
               Now when all the complaint was made upon the Serpent,
                     Puniſhment.
                   the Lord asketh and examineth the Serpent nothing at all, for the deed was open, neither was the Serpent created of God to ſpeake, and with the Devill was there no truth. Therefore doth the Lord righteouſly curſe the Serpent the Devill. Unto the bodily ſerpent alſo (whom the Devill uſed as an inſtrument) he giveth a ſore curſe, and ſaith; Vpon thy belly ſhalt thou goe,
                  Geneſ. 3.14. 
                  and earth ſhalt thou eat all the dayes of thy life: When this was done, it was ordained now firſt for man, that (according to the righteouſneſſe and truth of God) he ſhould bee puniſhed alſo with the curſe and with eternall death: but for the cauſes expreſſed in the beginning of this chapter, the curſe was directed unto Chriſt, who alſo with cleare words was promiſed, and ſo was life in him promiſed likewiſe.
               Therefore ſaith not the Lord now; And curſed bee thou man, becauſe thou haſt done againſt my Commandement; but, And I will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman,
                  
                     The promiſe. Geneſ. 3.15. 
                  betweene thy ſeed and her ſeed: the ſame ſhall tread thee on the head, and thou ſhalt tread him on the heele. Which is thus much to ſay; Thou haſt uſed the woman to the deſtruction of men, ſo that from henceforth they bring death, and by kinde and nature are damned when they are borne. Therefore will I alſo uſe the woman, but to ſalvation: for of the woman ſhall a ſeed or

childe bee borne,
                     The Serpents head.
                   which ſhall breake thy head, power and kingdome, ſinne, damnation and death: howbeit in his manhood he ſhall be trodden down and bitten. That is, Man with his tranſgreſſion hath deſerved eternall death, ſo that (after the rigour of my juſtice) hee ſhould periſh and belong to the Devill for ever: nevertheleſſe I Will have mercie upon him, and receive him to grace againe. But to the intent that my truth and righteouſneſſe may be ſatisfied, I will cauſe my Sonne to take the verie nature of man upon him. Then will I, that hee take upon himſelfe the curſe and damnation, and die, and with his innocent death to take away that noiſome death and curſe, and ſo to ſet the generation of man out of death into life, out of the dominion of the Devill into his owne kingdome, out of darkneſſe into light.
                     The 
                           ••
                        re foundation of our faith.
                   Thus the right foundation or ground of our holy faith continueth faſt and unmoved: in ſo much as all the generation of man is whole and cleanſed from ſinne, and delivered from the curſe, from the Devill and everlaſting damnation, onely through the mercie and meere grace of God by Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  Rom. 8.3.As touching this, Paul ſaid when hee wrote to the Romans in the 8. Chapter; God ſent his Sonne in the ſimilitude of ſinfull fleſh, and through ſinne, (that is to ſay, through the ſinne-offering and willing death of Chriſt) he condemned ſin in the fleſh. And in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the firſt Chapter,1 Cor. 1.30. the ſame Paul ſaith, Chriſt Ieſus is appointed of God to be our wiſdome, and righteouſneſſe, and ſanctification, and redemption: that as it is written,

who ſo glorieth and rejoyceth, let him glorie and rejoyce in the Lord.
               
               But for as much as this is the firſt promiſe, and the firſt ſure Evangelion, I will now ſpeake of everie word in eſpeciall. Firſt, God calleth his Sonne our Lord Ieſus, the ſeed of the woman. A ſeed, becauſe of the verie nature of man, and becauſe that our Lord ſhould not take upon him a fantaſticall, but a verie true bodie.
               But to theſe words there is added,
                     The Goſpell of Ieſus. Geneſ. 3.15. 
                  Of the woman. For our Lord was not conceived and borne of mans ſeed, but of the Holy Ghoſt out of the Virgine Marie. Therefore cannot this ſentence be underſtood of Eve, but of the Virgine Marie. Now whereas ſhe is called a woman, it is done becauſe of the kinred: For even the daughters alſo and maidens are reckoned in the womens kinred, and yet continue undefiled virgins. God alſo hath ſpoken here diſtinctly, and ſaid not; I will put enmitie betweene thee and this woman, but betweene thee and (haiſchah) the woman, underſtanding ſome ſpeciall woman, no doubt even ſuch an one as he afterward ſet forth cleerely by Eſay, ſaying;Eſay 7.14. 
                  Behold, a virgin ſhall conceive and beare a ſonne, &c. And this word (ſeed) was alway afterward in everie renewing of this promiſe concerning Chriſt Ieſu among all the Patriarks and Prophets, rehearſed, uſed, and expreſſed, untill the time of David. Of whom the Lord afterward was called a flower, the root, ſprowting, or bloſſome of David. The holy Apoſtle Paul expoundeth this word (ſeed) clearely and plainly, and ſaith it is Chriſt, Gal. 3.Gal. 3.16.
                  
Moreover,
                     A praiſe of the virgin Marie.
                   it ſerveth to the praiſe of the Lords mother, that God ſaith, I will put enmitie betweene the woman and thee: for he meaneth the difference of both their natures. The Devill is proud, ſubtill, wicked, falſe, and untrue: but the mother of Chriſt is lowly, ſimple, vertuous, faithfull and upright, chaſte and cleane. And the ſame pure virgin and gracious mother hath borne unto us him that trod downe the Serpents head. The head of the Serpent is the power and kingdome of the Devill, even ſinne, the curſe and damnation. All this hath that bleſſed ſeed broken for his faithfull. All which things the holy Apoſtle Paul alſo hath taught with theſe words:Heb. 2.14. 
                  The Lord is become partaker of our fleſh and bloud, that he through death might take away the power from him, which had the Lordſhip over death, that is to ſay, the Devill; and to deliver them which through feare of death, were all their life time in bondage. For hee tooke not upon him the Angels, but the ſeed of Abraham tooke hee upon him, &c. And to the ſame meaning doth this alſo ſerve that followeth;Geneſ. 2.15. Chriſts heele.
                   
                  And thou ſhalt tread him on the heele. The heele is the loweſt part in man, and here it ſignifieth the moſt inferiour thing in Chriſt, even his fleſh. This hath the old Serpent the Devill perſecuted and trodden downe by his members Caiphas, Annas, Herod, and Pontius Pilate. For Peter ſaith, Chriſt hath ſuffered for us in the fleſh:
                  1 Pet. 4.1. The Godhead is impaſſible, and the ſoule immortall. But by this treading downe of the Lord, hath God trodden downe the kingdome of the Devill, that is to ſay, by his death hath he deſtroyed death, and

brought life againe to all them that beleeve. Hereof commeth it that Chriſt ſaith himſelfe, Ioh. 12. Now is the judgement of the world,
                  Ioh. 12.31, 32. 
                  now ſhall the Prince of this world be thruſt out. And I when I am lift up (that is to ſay, crucified) from the earth, will draw all things to me.
               
               At the laſt ſaith the Lord, that he will put enmitie betweene the Serpent and the womans ſeed. This may wee ſee in the Devill, and his members and acts, how they are contrarie to Chriſt and his members and deeds. But how ſtrong ſoever the Serpent is, yet ſhall he be trodden downe through Chriſt and his faithfull. Hereof commeth it, that Paul ſpake ſo comfortably to the Romans, Rom. 16.Rom. 16.20. 
                  The God of peace ſhall ſhortly tread downe the Devill under your feet. And herewithall is the dutie alſo of the faithfull in Chriſt ſhortly comprehended. For as touching them that ſay,
                     Object.
                   Is it enough then, and is all well, when I knowledge that I am a ſinner, and ſaved through the bleſſed ſeed only? To them it is here anſwered and cleerly given to underſtand,
                     Anſw.
                   that all they which put their truſt in the bleſſed ſeed, take upon them the kinde of the ſeed, and hate the kinde of the Serpent, that is to ſay, ſinne and blaſphemie, and fight alway more and more againſt the world and the Devill as long as they live, yea and occupie themſelves moſt faithfully about that which is Gods will. And hereto now ſerveth it that followeth after. For when the Lord had taken away the everlaſting death, he laid upon man a temporall puniſhment, correction and diſcipline, in the which hee ſhould

be exerciſed as long as hee lived upon earth. And upon the woman he laid trouble, ſorrow, and paine, when ſhe ſhould beare and bring forth children: Subjection alſo and ſervice with feare and obedience, which ſhe oweth to the man. To man, hee enjoyneth labour, for the Lord curſed the earth, and ſaid;Gen. 3.17. 
                  With ſorrow ſhalt thou get thy living all the dayes of thy life. Yea, in the ſweat of thy face ſhalt thou eat thy bread. Moreover, he layeth temporall death upon them both,Gen. 3.19. and ſaith; Earth thou art, and to earth ſhalt thou returne. Of the firſt doth Paul ſpeake alſo,1 Tim. 2.15. 1 Tim. 2. The woman ſhall be ſaved by bearing of children, if ſhe continue in faith, and in love, and in holineſſe, or cleanneſſe, and nurture. Of the ſecond ſpeaketh the ſame Paul likewiſe to the Epheſians and Theſſalonians;1 Theſſal. 4.6. Epheſ. 4.25. 
                  Let no man undermine or deceive his brother in occupying: and who ſo hath uſed falſhood and deceit, let him doe it no more, but let him rather labour with his hands ſome honeſt thing, that he may have to distribute unto ſuch as have need.
                  Heb. 5.17. And as touching death, Paul alſo ſaith to the Hebrewes in the ninth Chapter, How that it is appointed unto men, once to die, and that even ſo Christ Ieſus was offered up and died once for all.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. Of the first faithfull Chriſtians, ADAM and EVE.
               
               ANd hitherto I truſt we have had in the firſt promiſe of God the foundation, and the whole ſumme of our holy Chriſtian faith; namely, that the whole generation of man was but loſt through his owne fault and wickedneſſe, and fallen into death and damnation, ſo that there remaineth nothing in man but it is diſpleaſant to God: Hereof commeth it that there is nothing to be aſcribed unto the power and deſerving of man, ſave ſinne and malediction. But God of his abundant mercy had compaſſion on us, and of very grace promiſed he life unto us againe in his Sonne our Lord Ieſus, whom he would to become man, and to ſuffer death in his fleſh, that thereby hee might tread downe the devill, death, ſinne and hell. Item, he would put enmitie betweene the womans ſeed and the ſerpent, that is, he would endue us (which are the ſeed, that is to ſay, the children of Adam, if wee beleeve) with another heart and power, that we might become enemies unto the devils workes, reſiſt his ſuggeſtion, and hold our ſelves faſt by the bleſſed ſeed, labouring and ſuffering whatſoever God enjoyneth us to worke and ſuffer. Who is it now, which ſeeth not herein, all that is written in the whole Scripture, of beleefe, of love and innocencie, that is to ſay, of a Chriſtian life and faith? Who ſo is diſpoſed, let him looke

upon the 2.3. and 4. chapters of Paul to the Romanes, the firſt and ſecond to the Epheſians: let him compare thoſe chapters toward this ſumme, and he ſhall finde it none otherwiſe.
               For as much then as Adam and Eve had faith in God, and ſtood ſo toward God, that they knowledged themſelves to be ſinners, and truſted to be ſaved only through the bleſſed ſeed, giving themſelves over willingly into the diſcipline and nurture, travell and trouble of this time. No man can ſay contrary, but it followeth, that our firſt elders were Chriſtians. Nevertheleſſe we will declare the ſame yet more clearely, by Moyſes words following:Gen. 3.20. Adams faith.
                  
                  And Adam called his wife Heva, becauſe ſhee ſhould be the mother of all living. For as ſoone as he was now ſtrengthned through the promiſe of God, and beleeved that hee and his poſteritie (which elſe were children of wrath, of the devill, and of death) ſhould live through the bleſſed ſeed, he turned his wives name, and called her Heva, for the remembrance of the matter, and practiſing of his faith: for he beleeved, that ſhee now living in the power of the bleſſed ſeed, ſhould bring forth, not only quicke men temporally as pertaining to this naturall life; (like as we call other creatures living) but living, that is to ſay, children of ſalvation. For Adam had loſt eternall life from himſelfe, and from us his poſteritie: but the ſame is given unto us againe through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Adam for as much as he beleeved, changed his wives name, like as we finde that for great weighty cauſes the names of certaine places, cities and men

were changed: Thus was Iacob called Iſrael; Simon, Peter; Luthz, Bethel. Eve had now a name of life, for Haiah in Hebrew is as much to ſay, as Life. Afore was ſhee called Iſcha, that is to ſay, Woman, becauſe ſhee was taken from out of the man,Gen 2.23. which in the Hebrew is called Iſch, Gen. 2. And thus it is manifeſt, what faith Adam had, whereby we may well ſuppoſe, that Eve had none other faith.
               But God uſed his mercy and loving kindneſſe yet furthermore,
                     Comfort, helpe and loving kindneſſe in the mids of correction.
                   even in the mids of all correction: for when he would now expell man out of paradiſe into miſerie, he doth unto him in every condition, even as a faithfull father, which for ſome miſdeed putteth his ſonne away from him, notwithſtanding leaveth him not utterly comfortleſſe, but provideth him a garment, and comforteth him with friendly words, and then firſt ſendeth him away from him. Even thus doth God the father of heaven alſo. For firſt he cloatheth Adam and Eve againſt the froſt and tempeſt of weather, in as much as (by the meanes of ſinne) the weather, the earth, the aire, and all creatures, were no more ſo ſubject, tame and obedient unto man, as they were afore the fall. Therefore even now at this preſent time whatſoever inconvenience and harme is in the good creatures of God, it commeth by the meanes of our ſinnes. Afterward doth the Lord comfort the miſerable wretched man with very loving words after this manner:Gen. 3.22. 
                  Behold, Adam is become like one of us: or, Loe, Adam ſhall be as one of us, and it ſhall happen unto him, as to

one of us, and he ſhall know good and evill. This doth God ſpeake which is one in ſubſtance, and three in perſons: he propheſieth here unto Adam, that he ſhall know or have experience of good and evill, that is to ſay, that upon earth he muſt feele proſperitie and adverſitie, miſerie and trouble, ſowre and ſweet, and muſt ſuffer neceſſitie, paine and affliction.
                     Comfort and patience in Chriſt.
                   Yet in all this muſt he be conſtant and patient, foraſmuch as nothing ſhall happen unto him, ſave even the ſame that ſhall happen to one of them. And he meaneth the Sonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſecond perſon in the holy Trinitie. With this his paſſion, and through the ſame doth he comfort Adam. As though he would ſay: let the paine, ſorrow and trouble which thou muſt ſuffer upon earth, not vex thee, and conſider that one of us alſo ſhall take upon him the kinde and nature of man, and that the ſerpent (as it is ſaid afore) ſhall tread him on the heele, that is to ſay, he ſhall die, he ſhall be oppreſt and have much affliction and trouble all the daies of his life. In the ſame meaning alſo did the holy Apoſtle Peter ſay:1 Pet. 2.21. 
                  Chriſt ſuffered for our ſakes, and gave us an example, that we ſhould follow him, and goe in his footſteps.
               
               
                  
                     Adams faith.
                  Out of all this is it eaſie to underſtand, what faith and knowledge Adam had of our Lord Chriſt: namely, that he knew in him very Godhead and manhood, and that he ſaw in faith his Paſſion and Croſſe a farre off. Moreover, that the paſſion of Chriſt once done for all, breaketh the kingdome of the devill, and bringeth life againe to ſuch as

faithfully beleeve. Secondly, that it is to our living, an example, at the which wee ought to learne patience in adverſitie, and daily to die from all evill. And hereto now ſerve all doctrines of patience, of bearing the croſſe, of deſpiſing the world, and mortifying or putting off the old Adam, which thing is contained and with many and goodly words handled thorowout the Prophets and Apoſtles. As for Adam and Eve, they lacked none of theſe things, though they had not the matter in writing. For God ſpake it all to them himſelfe, and wrote it in their hearts. Moreover, our firſt Elders had no Church, rites, nor ceremonies, ſave only the bodily offering, a repreſentation of the ſacrificing of Chriſt, and exerciſes or tokens of thankfulneſſe. For how ſhould Cain and Abel elſe have knowne any thing of ſacrifice, if they had not received the ſame at the cuſtome of their father? who with his wife Eva the mother of us all, was ſaved by none other worke or merit of man, but only through and in the bleſſed ſeed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. V. That the holy Patriarks alſo were Chriſtians, and ſaved by Chriſt.
               SUch faith in Chriſt Ieſus as we now have ſpoken of, did the holy father Adam (no doubt) teach his children: that they alſo might plant in their children the promiſe of God, his mercy

and device concerning the Meſſias or Saviour, that was for to come. And truly Abel had ſuch a notable faith in God, that the holy Apoſtle Paul wrote of him after this manner:Heb. 11.4. 
                  Through faith did Abel offer a greater ſacrifice than did Cain, and thereby obtained he witneſſe that he was righteous. For God bare record to his gifts. In as much then as it cannot be denied, but that all they which are juſt and righteous, be made righteous through the bleſſed ſeed. And Abel was juſtified.
                     Outward ſacrifice was a token of thankfulneſſe.
                   It followeth that he was made righteous through faith in Ieſus Chriſt. In that he did ſacrifice, it is a token and fruit of a heart that was thankfull, and feared God. It was no ſuch enterpriſe, that he would clenſe and make himſelfe acceptable unto God through that outward ſacrifice. For certaine it is, that no outward oblation purifieth man within: But the grace of God granted unto us through Jeſus Chriſt, purifieth us aright. And the outward ſacrifices of the old fathers, beſide that they were tokens of thankfulneſſe, praiſe, and magnifying of God, (as it is ſaid afore) were figures of the only perpetuall ſacrifice of our Saviour Chriſt. And in this behalfe they were even as much as ſacraments of things to come. Thus alſo, and in like underſtanding have our firſt fathers done ſacrifice, as hereafter it ſhall follow more largely.
               Now like as in Abel there is ſet forth unto us an example of Gods ſeed, and of a regenerate true faithfull Chriſtian man.
                     Cain the father of wickedneſſe.
                   So is Cain a ſeed of the Serpent, a childe of the Devill, which deſpiſed the inſpiration of God, and harkened to the deceitfull

Serpent. And in theſe two brethren wee may ſee what God meaned, when he ſaid: I will put enmitie betweene the ſeed of the woman and thy ſeed. As though he would ſay: There ſhall be two manner of people, the one ſhall cleave unto Chriſt, the bleſſed ſeed, the other ſhall cleave unto the Devill. And theſe two generations ſhall in no wiſe agree, but be at variance in faith and religion. I will endue my ſeed, that they ſhall cleave only unto me, feare me, honour and worſhip mee, ſeeke all ſalvation in me through the bleſſed ſeed, live vertuouſly, honeſtly, and ſoberly. Then ſhall the Serpent tempt their ſeed with hypocriſie, not to love me nor ſerve mee aright, not to hold of mee as they ſhould, not to truſt in me, but to love the world, and to follow the luſts and temptations thereof: All this finde wee here in theſe two brethren, in whom beginneth the firſt difference of true and falſe beleevers.
                     The firſt diviſion in rel
                           •
                        gion, when it began.
                   For Abel was ſimple, godly, and of a conſtant faith in God. And in as much as he tooke God for his refuge, he brought him gifts of his beſt ſubſtance, no doubt becauſe he had firſt given over his ſoule and all his power unto God, at whom alone hee ſought all good without any hypocriſie. He was alſo innocent, vertuous and friendly, and followed not his owne tentations. And for this faiths ſake did his ſacrifice pleaſe God: but Cains pleaſed him not, for his heart was not right with God: he was a diſſembler, greedie and vnfaithfull perſon, which ſet his heart and minde upon earthly things, alway deſpiſing Gods word, and following his owne tentation. Which thing was evident in this, that he having

no cauſe (only of a wilfull heart, and through the temptation of the ſerpent) murthered his owne brother: Whereby hee hath obtained to be the Arch-father of all murtherers, which perſecute and murther the ſeed of God (that is to ſay, the true beleevers) only for their faiths ſake. Thus became Abel the firſt martyr and inſtrument of God and of Chriſt in the holy Church.
                     Abel the firſt Martyr.
                     
                     
                        The world the citie of the Devill.
                     
                   For theſe two brethren have ſet forth before us, the whole battell and ſtrife, which the world, the citie of the devill, the children and citizens of the curſed citie (wherein the Serpent is head and maſter, and hath the dominion) ſhall make againſt the citie and citizens in whom Chriſt is the head, unto the end of the world. The freemen of the citie of God and of Chriſt, doe cleave only unto God,
                     The difference of true and falſe faith.
                   ſerve him with all their heart, build only upon Chriſt. The citizens of the Serpent deſpiſe God, and yet they boaſt of God, to whom alſo they offer and doe ſervice, but not as they ought to doe. Now when they perceive that their faith is not right, and that their hypocriſie is eſpied and miſliked, then fall they to murthering, to the which God is an enemie, and forbiddeth it with his word. For Cain alſo exhorted hee from his purpoſe, and ſaid, Thou needeſt not to arme thee becauſe of thy brother, for thou haſt none occaſion to be angrie with him. For if thou doeſt right, thou ſhalt finde it, and have joy thereof: but if thou doſt not right, then is thy misfortune, ſinne and treſpaſſe open, and thou ſhalt ſhame and deſtroy thy ſelfe. Thy brother goeth on without fault, he ſhall doe thee no hurt nor harme: he ſhall alſo

not be Lord over thee, nor miniſh thy right: Yea he ſhall have reſpect unto thee, and thou ſhalt have dominion over him, and ſo keepe thy birth-right, and ſtill remaine the firſt borne, although his ſacrifice be acceptable unto mee and not thine. Ceaſe therefore from thy wicked purpoſe, and offend not againſt thy brother.
               But Cain did as all ungodly doe: For he went forth, and ſlew his innocent brother. And afterward when the Lord would have brought him into the knowledge of his great ſinne, and pardon him, he deſpiſed the voice of the Lord with craking and facing.
                     The firſt decay of the faith was by curſed Cain. For the which cauſe the Lord was wroth with him, and curſed him. Then deſpaired he firſt, and went forth and became yet more wicked, dealt altogether ungodly, ſet firſt his minde upon earthly things, thought to exalt his name upon earth, and builded the firſt citie, which he called Hanoch: hee begat ſonnes and daughters, but little feare of God was before their eyes, in ſo much that the Scripture ſaith,Geneſ. 4.25. 
                  Adam lay with his wife againe, and ſhee bare a ſonne, whom ſhee called Seth. For God (ſaid ſhee) hath given me another ſeed for Abel, whom Cain ſlew. Seth alſo had a ſonne, and he called him Enos. And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. Out of the which words it is eaſie to underſtand, that as touching holy Adam,
                  Adam was not of the faith of Cain. hee held no more of Cain, than as though he never had had childe. For Adam feared God: Cain with his progenie deſpiſed God, and became the Serpents generation. Wherefore when Adam had gotten another ſonne, he was of a good hope, that in Abels
                  
ſtead God had given him another ſonne, which ſhould doe right, and of whom the root of the bleſſed ſeed ſhould ſpread out afterward. For the which cauſe alſo he called him Seth, which by vs is called a plant,Seth the fir
                           ••
                         re
                        
                           •••
                        e
                           •
                         of the true faith.
                   meaning, that God had ſet and planted him as a branch, out of which the Meſſias ſhould be borne. For as for Cain, hee doubted of him. And from the ſame Seth proceeded the generation of the righteous untill Noe, and from him to Abraham, and ſo unto David, and from thence forth unto Chriſt. This Seth repaired our holy faith, which received great hurt at the death of Abel.
                  
                     The reparation of our fa
                           •
                        th.
                   This did Seth (I ſay) for as much as he being taught inwardly of God, and by mouth or outwardly of Adam, learned his children and their ſeed, to put their truſt in God, and to comfort themſelves in the bleſſed ſeed, and to cleave unto the ſame.Gen. 4.26. For it is written manifeſtly: And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. Till this time was Adam with Heva his wife only a true friend and ſerver of God.Adams life.
                   The generation of Cain was now well ſpread abroad, and come to two hundred and fiftie yeeres and aboue, but the more part lived without the feare of God, unrepentant and ungodly. Wherefore in as much as the generation of Seth now increaſed, and the feare of God and right beleefe was among them, the Scripture faith well:
                     To call upon the name of God, what it is.
                   
                  And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. And by this calling upon, doth the Scripture meane the true right beleefe and Gods ſervice, that he moſt alloweth. Of the progenie therefore of righteous Seth ſprang the ſervants of God, and

preſidents of our Chriſtian faith. As for the curſed generation of Cain, and of the ungodly, it was deſtroyed and drowned with the Floud.
               To the holy genealogie of the true beleevers, pertaineth the Patriarke Enoch, of whom it is written, that he walked before God, that is, he ordered his life and converſation altogether after the will of God, being conſtant and upright (no doubt) in all that, which God had ſpoken unto Adam. Therefore became he alſo an example of the immortalitie of the ſoule, and reſurrection of the bodie, and that all Gods ſervants ſhall be ſaved after this life. For thus ſaith the Scripture; And in as much as hee applied himſelfe to walke after God, God tooke him away, and he was no more ſeene.
                  Hebr. 11.5. The holy Apoſtle Paul alſo in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrewes ſpeaketh very excellently of Enochs faith, ſo that no man may doubt, but that hee had reſpect to the bleſſed ſeed, and pleaſed God through Chriſt.
               Moreover, the enmitie betweene the children of God and of man (that is, the iſſue of the Serpent) grew ever more and more: ſo that on the one ſide the multitude of God increaſed, and on the other ſide the multitude of the devill:
                     The number of the wicked ever greateſt.
                   Yet at the laſt the multitude of the wicked was greateſt. For when the children of God withheld not themſelves from the children of the world, but tooke wives and huſbands among them, they begat rough people, which had no faith at all, and lived only after their owne luſt and temptation, forgat God utterly, and regarded not the hundred and twentie yeeres which God gave them to amend. Therefore was

God conſtrained, ſo to puniſh the unfaithful world once,
                     The wrath of God upon the wicked.
                   that all poſterities unto the end of the world might have a terrible example of the juſt wrath of God: whereby they might learne, how ungodlineſſe and unrighteouſneſſe diſpleaſeth God. Thus the Lord brought the floud upon all the earth,Noes Floud.
                   overthrew all that ſtood up, and deſtroyed every thing that had life, when the world had ſtood now a thouſand ſix hundred and ſix and fiftie yeeres. For ſo many yeeres finde wee in the fifth and ſeventh of Geneſis, where it is written, that Noe was ſix hundred yeeres old, when the floud came upon the earth. Now if wee reckon the yeeres of the old Fathers in the fifth chapter untill Adam, wee ſhall finde the foreſaid ſumme. And thus the iſſue of the Serpent had an end, and all ungodly and unrighteous living was mightily ſuppreſt and deſtroyed of God.
               And in this horrible deſtruction of the ungodly, was faithfull Noe ſaved (he being the eighth) and preſerved in the Arke through the grace and mercie of God.
                     The firſt triumph of faith in Noe. Here our holy true Chriſtian faith had the victorie, and triumphed. For Noe was of our faith▪ even of the ſeed of God, and put his truſt in the bleſſed ſeed our Lord Jeſus. Yea, the Arke or ſhip of Noe was a figure of Chriſt, as we may eaſily underſtand by the words of S.
                  1 Pet. 3.21. 
                  Peter, 1 Pet. 3. Seeing then that Noe was preſerved through the Arke, it followeth that hee was ſaved by Ieſus Chriſt, therefore is it manifeſt, that hee firſt beleeved in Chriſt. Noe alſo was hee, with whom God firſt renued the covenant made with Adam. For

it is but one covenant onely even the foreſaid promiſe and end made by God unto Adam. Howbeit the ſame covenant was afterward at certaine times renued by reaſon of certaine occaſions. Here might Noe have thought that all the world, and all men, ſhould utterly have beene undone, for as much as the Lord ſaid, I am determined to deſtroy all fleſh. Therefore immediately he addeth moreover, and ſaith,Geneſ. 6.18. 
                  But with thee will I ſet up my covenant, that is to ſay, whatſoever pertaineth to my covenant, and what I have promiſed Adam alreadie, the ſame will I ſurely and conſtantly make good: and though I now deſtroy the world, yet will I performe my truth through thee. For I will preſerve thee alive, that the bleſſed ſeed promiſed afore, may hereafter be borne of thee in his generation. To this did Noe truſt,
                     The ſacrifice of Noe. and was preſerved of God through Chriſt. Moreover, when he was come out of the Arke he did ſacrifice, and thereby declared the thankfulneſſe of his heart, and beleeved, how that he knew that he had all good of God, which ſhould alſo give him a ſeed, that with ſacrificing of himſelfe ſhould reconcile and pacific God. For thus ſaith the Scripture,Geneſ. 8.20. 
                  Noe builded an Altar unto the Lord, and tooke of all manner of cleane beaſts and fowles, and offered burnt ſacrifice unto the Lord: and the Lord ſmelled the ſweet ſavour, and ſaid in his heart, I will no more curſe the earth for mans ſake, &c. So ſaith Paul in the fifth to the Epheſians,Epheſ. 5.2. 
                  Walke yee in love, like as Chriſt hath loved us, and gaue himſelfe for us an offering ſacrifice of a ſweet ſavour unto God. Whereby every man may learne and ſee,

that the ſweet ſmell of the outward ſacrifice of Noe did not chiefly pacifie God,
                     Outward ſacrifice the figure of Chriſts oblation.
                   and was pleaſant; but rather that through the bodily ſacrifice, was figured the ſacrifice of Chriſt, and for his ſake he was mercifull unto the world. For over Chriſt he ſaid at Iordan when Chriſt was baptiſed:Matth 3.17. 
                  This is my deare beloved Sonne in whom I am pacified or reconciled.
               
               
                  
                     The Commandements given unto Noe.Beſides this, the Lord gave unto Noe certaine lawes, but none other than even ſuch as he had given to his fore-fathers, and written in their hearts. The firſt pertaineth to mariage and bringing up of children, in the which is comprehended all that is written concerning nurture, cleanlineſſe and temperance, of care and bringing up of children in the feare of God, vertue, obedience and learning. The ſecond forbiddeth violence and deceit, namely, that no man ſhall eat bloud. For it is a figurative precept commanding, that no man get his living by murther, by oppreſſing the poore, by uſurie, by extortion, by falſhood and deceit. Moreover, all things living were ſubdued unto him, and all meats were permitted him. In concluſion, whatſoever concerned the love of God and their neighbour, the ſame is here renued unto Noe and his children, and required of them.
               
                  
                     Through Noe was the world repleniſhed.
                  Of Noe came afterward all people, yea among his three ſonnes Iaphet, Sem and Cham, he had both the ſeed of God and of the froward ſerpent, that is, ſuch as had reſpect unto God, and them alſo that regarded the devill.Cham the firſt Idolater after the Floud.
                   Of Cham came the Aegyptians, Aſſyrians, Babylonians, by and from whom ſprang

idolatry, offering to images, and from whom falſe religion came up firſt, and was brought in among other nations by the helpe of the old ſerpent, as among the Greekes, Romanes, and other people.
               By this it is good to underſtand, that our holy Chriſtian faith is elder than any other. For here may we ſee clearely, that after a thouſand and certaine hundred yeeres (almoſt in the eight hundreth or nine hundreth yeere) came up the firſt beginning of the Heathens beleefe and offering to Images,
                     The fa
                           •
                        th 
                           •
                        f Heathen 
                           •
                        s idolatry 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Gen. 10.
                        •
                     . and yet came it of wicked curſed men. For curſed Cham was the beginning of the Egyptians, and Nimroth the ungodly extortioner and tyrant was the firſt founder of the kingdom of Babylon, which kingdome with the building of a mighty tower, ſet forth his pride. Nevertheleſſe the hand of God declared it ſelfe immediatly,Gen. 11 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   as it is read in the eleventh chapter of Geneſis. Finally, in the generation of Cham had the ſerpent great power: howbeit in the poſteritie of Iaphet alſo (of whom the Almaines come) and in the poſteritie of Sem, he had his iſſue likewiſe.
               Of the progenie of Sem were borne Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, Gen. 11. And as it is ſaid afore,Gen▪ 11.10.27. Faith d
                           ••
                        kned after the floud.
                   the ſincere faith was ſomewhat darkned in Chaldea: therefore did God call Abraham out from the idolatrie, and renued with him the old true Chriſtian faith begun with Adam, and ſaid, Gen. 12.Gen. 12.1. 
                  Get thee out of thy country and from thy kinred, and from thy fathers houſe unto the land that I will ſhew thee, and I will bleſſe thee, and make a great nation of thee. And in thee ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſſed.
                  
Item in the 22. chapter ſpeaketh God yet more clearely,Geneſ. 22.18. and ſaith, In thy ſeed ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſſed. This doth Paul declare in the third to the Galathians, and ſaith, In thy ſeed which is Chriſt.
                  Galath. 3.8. Therefore was the ſame now another renewing of the promiſe of Chriſt the bleſſed ſeed.
                     The promiſe renewed to Abraham. For firſt was he promiſed unto Adam, afterward was the promiſe renewed with Noe, and now with Abraham. And all this now is but one promiſe,Abrahams faith.
                   one Saviour, and one faith. Abraham alſo beleeved in Ieſus Chriſt, and was ſaved by faith. For Ieſus Chriſt ſaith himſelfe in the eighth chapter of Iohn,
                  Iohn 8.56. 
                  Abraham ſaw my day, and rejoyced. What is now the day of Chriſt but the clearneſſe of the holy Goſpell? This light had he not bodily, but ſaw it with the eyes of faith, and the ſame made him joyfull and ſaved him. For Chriſt is the true joy of troubled conſciences. Thus became Abraham the Father of all faithfull beleevers,Rom. 4.16. Rom. 4. And if we beleeve and doe as Abraham did, then are we Abrahams children, and ſhall reſt with him in his boſome, even in the kingdome of God, Luke 13.28.16.22.19. Mat. 8.11. Paul alſo to the Galathians in the third chapter ſaith,Galath. 3.29. 
                  If ye be Chriſts, then are ye Abrahams ſeed and heires according to the promiſe. Out of this faith in Chriſt,Abrahams Chriſtian workes.
                   did Abraham Chriſtian workes; for with a good will left he his owne native country, all Idols and all Images: all misfortune, hunger and miſerie tooke he patiently: he was not hard againſt Loth his nephew, but did jeopard his body and life for the oppreſſed: he was liberall, mercifull, and harborous: he praied fervently

unto God for the poore ſinners: he ſuffred oppreſſion, violence and wrong, and for Gods ſake alſo he thought to ſacrifice and offer up his owne moſt dearely beloved ſonne Iſaac. Finally, there is no reaſonable good chriſtian worke, but thou ſeeſt it in the life of Abraham. Therefore to us alſo for an example of our faith and converſation, he is ſet forth of the Lord himſelfe & his Apoſtles throughout the New Teſtament.
               Here alſo is it manifeſt,
                     The f
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                         of the Iewe
                           •
                        
                     
                   that our holy faith is elder than the Iewiſh faith. For the Iewes doe boaſt themſelves of the Circumciſion, and becauſe they are called Iewes and Iſrael, and that the Law, the Prieſthood and Gods ſervice was given unto them: And yet, Gen. 15.6. and 17.1. and Rom. 4.18. it is evident, that Abraham was Gods friend and juſtified or made righteous, or ever he was circumciſed. For when he was circumciſed, he was 99. yeere old, Gen. 17.Gen. 17▪24. Now was the promiſe made unto him many yeeres afore. The Scripture alſo ſaith plainly: Abraham beleeved God,
                  Gen. 15.6. 
                  and the ſame was counted unto him for righteouſneſſe, Gen. 15. So was it many yeeres after, or ever Iſrael and Iuda was borne, of whom they have taken their name. The Law alſo was given 430. yeeres after the promiſe, as Paul made the reckoning, Gal. 3. It followeth therefore that our Chriſtian faith is 2048.Gal. 3.17. H
                           •
                         wold the Chriſtian faith i
                           •
                        .
                   yeeres elder than the Circumciſion, and 2449. yeeres elder than the Law, the Prieſthood and ceremonies of the Iewes. For from Adam unto the Floud, were 1656. yeeres. And from the Floud untill the departing of Abraham out of Caldea

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
363. yeeres. From that time are reckoned 430. yeeres untill the departing of Iſrael out of Aegypt. And on the 50. day after the departing, was the Law given unto Iſrael upon Mount Sin
                     •
                  ,Exod. 19.20. Exod. 19.20. And after certaine daies was the Prieſthood and ceremonies appointed them. Whereas God then made a covenant with Abraham, when he ordained the Circumciſion, it ſerveth more to the confirmation of our holy Chriſtian faith, than to the maintenance of the Iewiſh ceremonies.
               
                  Iſaac and Iacob were Abrahams children, not only after the fleſh, but alſo after the ſpirit. For they had the ſaith of their father and grandfather Abraham, put their truſt only in God through Ieſus Chriſt, and lived a ſober and vertuous life. Of this doth the Scripture beare them record thorowout: Yea Iacob,
                  Gen. 32.28. O
                           •
                        
                      Iſrael came the Iſrae
                           ••••
                        s.
                   whom the Lord alſo called otherwiſe Iſrael, (of whom afterward all the people of God received the name Iſrael) had many viſions of the Lord Chriſt,Gen. 28. as with the ladder that ſtood upon the earth, the top reaching to heaven, on the which the Angels of God went up and downe.Iacob ſaw that Chriſt onely is the way to heaven.
                   For herewith was repreſented unto him the Lord Ieſus, which is the way unto heaven, the truth and life, without whom no man commeth unto the Father. Upon the viſion of Iacob, ſaith he alſo himſelfe, Iohn 1. Verily I ſay unto you,
                  Iohn 1.51. 
                  henceforth ſhall yee ſee the heaven open, and the Angels of God going up and downe upon the ſonne of man. And ſo conſtant was Iacob in remembring the ſame, that afterward at the commandement of the Lord, he ſet up in the ſame place an Altar, no doubt (as it is ſaid before) for

a figure of the croſſe and ſacrifice of Chriſt, and there honoured he and worſhipped the Lord:Gen. 35.2. he commanded all his people alſo, that they ſhould forſake ſtrange gods, and give him the Idols that they had brought with them out of Meſopotamia, and he buried them under an Oke that ſtood beſide Sichem, Gen. 35. And when he would now die, he propheſied very clearely of the Lord Chriſt, how he ſhould be borne out of the kinred of Iuda, and that hee ſhould be borne the ſame time that the kingdome ſhould be taken from Iuda. Which thing alſo came to paſſe in Herods time. For in the 32. yeere of the reigne of Herod, was CHRIST borne at Bethleem in Iewry. Whereof the words of Iacob are theſe:Gen. 49.10. 
                  The ſcepter ſhall not be taken away from Iuda, nor a Ruler from his fe
                        •
                     t, till Schilo come (that is to ſay, the Saviour, and he in whom all nations ſhall be bleſſed) and the people ſhall fall unto him. This ſtedfaſt faith of Iacob did Ioſeph follow alſo,
                     The faith of Ioſeph. which mortified his owne fleſh, declared patience in adverſitie and priſon, and exerciſed great juſtice and equitie in his governance.Ioſeph a figure of Ieſus.
                   He was a figure of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who alſo being ſold of his owne unto the Heathen,
                     The continuance of faith before the Law.
                   preſerved his brethren alive. So that from the beginning of the world untill the death of Ioſeph, the right Chriſtian faith endured 2300. yeeres. And thus all holy Patriarks before the Law, were ſawed, not through the Law, nor by their owne ſtrength and deſerving, but through the bleſſed ſeed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. The law of God given by Moſes, leadeth unto Chriſt, and maketh mention of all his doings.
               THe Iſraelites after the death of Ioſeph untill their departing and deliverance out of Aegypt, were in the land 140. yeeres. And like as before in the time of Noe the dwelling among the wicked became occaſion of falling unto the righteous: Even ſo now did the Iſraelites learne idolatry and all unhappineſſe of the Aegyptians. For the which cauſe alſo they were ſore oppreſſed a long ſeaſon, howbeit there remained yet many excellent men which kept ſtill the old faith, and hated the abhominations of the Aegyptians. For of Moſes (which was borne 60. yeeres after the death of Ioſeph) ſaith Paul:
                  Heb 11▪ 24. 
                  Moſes through faith when he grew up and was great, refuſed to bee called the ſonne of Pharaos daughter: and choſe rather to ſuffer adverſity with the people of God, than to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon, and eſteemed the rebuke of Chriſt greater riches than the treaſures of Aegypt,
                  
                     The faith of Moſes.
                   
                  for he had reſpect to the reward, Heb. 11. Now can no man deſire to ſuffer with Chriſt, except hee have knowledge of Chriſts ſuffering. Therefore Moſes in the midds of all perſecution had knowledge of Chriſt, and the faith in Chriſt. So is there no doubt, but more vertuous people had this true faith, which were all oppreſſed and vexed in Aegypt, like as afterward the right faithfull

beleevers were ſomewhat more perſecuted: as among the heathen in the time of the Iudges and Kings of Iuda and Iſrael: under king Antiochus: under the Emperors Nero, Tra
                        ••
                     n
                        •
                     s, Domitianus, Maximianus, Iulianus and other. As for the unbeleevers, they in ſuch miſerable times received the reward of their unthankfulneſſe, diſobedience, idolatry, and blaſphemie.
               But when the appointed time came which God had foreſeene & opened unto Abraham, Gen. 15.Gen. 15.13. he brought the people of Iſrael by Moſes out of Aegypt, with and through great wonders and tokens. By the which he firſt declared his power, then his loving kindneſſe, and mercy toward his owne, and his terrible juſtice and vengeance againſt his enemies: whereby all the world might know, that there was none other juſt and true God ſave the God of Iſrael, in whoſe hand only conſiſteth all things, which alſo of his meere mercie preſerveth his owne, and with right judgement rewardeth his enemies. Specially this is moſt wonderfull, that in this great buſineſſe and worke hee hath ſo mightily ſet forth the redemption performed by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, yea and expreſſed it to be a very mighty redemption. For the ſame night (when they ſhould depart away and be diſpatched in the morning) the Lord commanded them to kill a lambe,
                     The Eaſter lambe.
                   and with the bloud thereof to ſprinkle the doores and poſts of the houſe: So when the Angell that in the ſame night ſlew the firſt borne of the Aegyptians ſaw the bloud, hee ſhould doe no harme, and ſlay no man therein,

Exod. 12.3. Now teſtifieth Paul, 1 Cor. 5.7. that Chriſt Ieſus is our Eaſter Lambe and Paſſeover. So ſaith Saint Iohn,
                  Iohn 1.29. 
                  Behold the Lambe of God, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world. Therefore were not the Iſraelites ſpared, becauſe of the bloud of beaſts,
                     The del
                           •
                        verance out of Aegypt a figu
                           ••
                         of our redemption by Chriſt.
                   but for the blouds ſake of the bleſſed ſeed that was promiſed for to come. And thus the whole deliverance out of Aegypt was a figure of the true redemption, by the which we are delivered from the power of the devill and from everlaſting death through Ieſus Chriſt, and brought into the land of promiſe, even to eternall joy and ſalvation, which God promiſed unto our fathers Adam, Noe, Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob.
               
               Now when the Lord had caried his people out of Aegypt, and brought them thorow the red ſea drie ſhod, and had drowned Pharao with all his people, he commanded his folke to prepare and cleanſe themſelues at mount Sina. For he would binde himſelfe unto them, receive them as his owne people, and give them his law and ordinance.
                     The gi
                           •
                        ing of the law.
                   Which thing he alſo did, and appointed his law himſelfe, ſpake it with his owne mouth, and wrote it with his owne fingers in two tables of ſtone. In the one and firſt table hee ordained foure commandements, concerning the worſhip and love of God;
                     The firſt table.
                   namely, that wee ſhould take him only for the true and right God, and none elſe beſide or except him: That wee ſhould worſhip and honour him only, and in no wiſe to have any other God, comfort, or hope. Item, that we ſhould in no wiſe make any image or picture of any

things, and neither to worſhip them nor ſerve them. Moreover, that wee ſhould not take the name of God in vaine, or lightly. And that wee ſhould hallow the Sabboth day. In the other table ordained he ſix commandements concerning man. And like as the foure firſt are comprehended in theſe words:Matth. 22.37.39 
                  Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. Euen ſo are the ſix contained in theſe words following:
                     The ſecond Table.
                   
                  Thou ſhalt love thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. The commandements are theſe: Thou ſhalt honour father and mother. Thou ſhalt not kill. Thou ſhalt not breake wedlocke. Thou ſhalt not ſteale. Thou ſhalt beare no falſe witneſſe. Thou ſhalt not l
                     •
                  ſt. In all theſe commandements is comprehended all that ſerveth for a godly life, and that any where is written of God, of true ſerving of God, and of right vertue towards this world.
               Who ſo now doth well ponder theſe ten chapters or commandements,
                     The law written in ſtone 
                           〈◊〉
                         no n
                           •
                        w thing.
                   and compareth them to the doings and workes of the holy Patriarks and old Fathers which had no law in writing, he ſhall finde, that the Lord now with this his written law began no new thing, neither ought that was not afore in the world, but rather renewed the old: and the law that he hitherto had written in the hearts of holy men, now when the people had gotten them ſtony hearts, he wrote the ſame in tables of ſtone.
                     The firſt Commandement.
                   For that wee ought to worſhip and ſerve God onely, and to have none other Gods, the ſame did the holy fathers ſo beleeve and keepe, that all their converſation and doing beareth record

                  2.thereof. Concerning images or idols, it is evident, that Iacob buried the Idols of Meſopotamia 
                  3.under an Oke beſide Sichem, Gen. 35.4. We may perceive alſo by the oathes of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, how the name of God was had in reverence 4.among them of old, and not taken in vaine. The Sabbath did not the Lord ordaine here firſt, but on the ſeventh day of the Creation, Gen. 2.3. The ſame did the fathers keepe aright no doubt, Iohn 
                  5.7.22. Whereas Cham had not his father Noe in reverence, 6.he was curſed for it, Gen. 9.25. Advoutry did the heathen rulers forbid under paine of death, 7.as we may ſee, Gen. 26.10, 11. Whereby it is eaſie to underſtand, how the bleſſed friends of God kept holy wedlocke.
               
                  8.How contrary the holy men were unto theft and deceit, it appeareth in the parting of Abraham and Loth, Gen. 13.6, 8, 9. And in Iacobs faithfulneſſe and handling with Laban his father in law, Gen 29.37, 30, 33, 31.6. Lying and falſe dealing was ſo farre from the holy fathers, that for keeping their credit and truth, they obtained very great commendation. Notwithſtanding they were tempted with evill as all men be, but they reſiſted the wicked luſts. For manifeſt is the chaſte act of Ioſeph,
                  Gen. 39.8. which would not touch his maſters wife, nor deſire her.
                     The law written in ſtone was fulfilled afore.
                   Wherefore in theſe commandements is nothing written or required, that was not alſo required of the fathers afore the law, and performed through true faith in Chriſt. The Lord therefore began no new thing with his people, when hee delivered them the tables of the law:

Only he would bring into a ſhort ſumme and ſet in writing all the law that the Fathers had (but not together, nor comprehended in a ſumme) to the intent that they ſhould the leſſe be forgotten of the people, which through their dwelling in Aegypt among Idolaters and falſe beleevers, were brought into ſore offence and ſlander. This muſt now be rectified againe after this manner.
                     The Lawes given after the ten Commandements were by-Lawes.
                   As for all the lawes and ordinances which afterward were added unto theſe two tables, they were not joyned thereunto as principall lawes, but as by-lawes, for the declaration and better underſtanding of the ten Chapters or Commandements. For the perfect ſumme of all lawes, the very right rule of godlineſſe, of Gods ſervice, of righteouſneſſe, of good and evill converſation, is comprehended alreadie in the two tables.
               But here might ſome men make objection and ſay:
                     Objection.
                   If all truth be contained in theſe ten Commandements, how happeneth it, that by no token there is mention made of the bleſſed ſeed promiſed unto the Fathers? Hitherto is it declared and promiſed unto the holy Fathers, that they ſhall be ſaved through the bleſſed ſeed out of the very grace of God, and for none of their owne deſervings: but now are written lawes which command and forbid us, as though we through our owne workes and deſerving (as namely if we keepe theſe Commandements) ſhould be ſaved and acceptable unto God. Where is now Chriſt? Where is the faith of the Patriarkes? Here is nothing heard of faith, but much, yea only of workes?
               
                  
                  
                     Anſwer.
                  
                  Anſwer. This objection hath deceived many, that they have had no right opinion and faith of the grace of God and our righteous making. Therefore will we now give no anſwer out of our ſelves, but ſet forth holy Paul, and let him anſwer, that the anſwer may be the more ſure, and the better eſteemed. Paul in the third chapter to the Galathians writeth after this manner:Galath 3▪15 
                  Deare brethren, I will ſpeake after the manner of men; When a mans Teſtament is confirmed, no man doth lightly regard or deſpiſe it, nor addeth ought thereto.
               
               
                  Now were the promiſes made unto Abraham and to his ſeed. He ſaith not, In the ſeeds, as in many, but as in one: And in thy ſeed, which is Chriſt. All theſe are Pauls words, and the meaning of them is; For as much as the Teſtaments or workes of men are of ſuch reputation in the world, that when they are made, ordained and confirmed, no man dare adde ought to them, or miniſh any thing from them, but every man muſt let them be as they are of themſelves:
                     Gods Teſtament.
                   It is much more reaſon that Gods Teſtament or bequeſt remaine ſtill, and that nothing be added to it, or taken from it. Now did God make a Teſtament or bequeſt with Abraham, and promiſed him therein, that he would give him a ſeed, in whom he and his children ſhould be ſaved. And the ſame ſalvation did he expreſly appoint in one, and not in many. Wherefore wee muſt adde nothing unto Gods bequeſt, ſeeing he hath promiſed vs ſalvation in Chriſt only, and not in many (that is to ſay, in no creature, not in our owne power and workes of the Law) neither muſt wee thinke, that

the Law was afterward added to the intent as though Chriſt were not able to ſave us, or as though we might obtaine ſalvation by our owne workes out of the Law. For thus followeth it in Paul word to word:Galath. 3.17. 
                  This Teſtament (I ſay) which afore was confirmed to Chriſtward, is not diſanulled or made of none effect by the Law (which was given beyond foure hundred yeeres thereafter.) For if the inheritance begotten by the Law, then is it not given by the promiſe. But God gave it freely unto Abraham by promiſe. Theſe are Pauls words, out of the which every man may underſtand, that to the generation of man,
                     Salvation by grace, not by deſert or workes.
                   ſalvation is given only of the grace of God through the promiſe, and through no deſerving at all: and that the law of the promiſe (that is to ſay, the bequeſt and Teſtament of God) is nothing miniſhed, but that the ſumme remaineth without blemiſh, namely, that ſalvation is given us freely.
               But here might one aske;
                     Objection.
                   Seeing that the ſalvation is clearely enough expreſſed afore the Law, and is aſcribed only unto the grace of God, why would God then adde the Law? why was he not content with the Teſtament alone?
                     Anſwer.
                   Therefore followeth it now in Paul: Why then ſerveth the Law?
                  Galath. 3.19. 
                  It was added becauſe of tranſgreſsions, till the ſeed came that was promiſed. Theſe are Pauls words, which are thus to be underſtood: The Law was not given becauſe of the promiſe, to make it of none effect, and to teach that men are ſaved by workes, and not through the grace and free liberty of God:
                     Why the Law was given.
                   but it was given becauſe of tranſgreſſion, that is to ſay, becauſe that the people of God in Aegypt had

tranſgreſſed the way and truth of their Fathers, and knew no more what was ſinne, right or unright, wherein ſtood ſalvation or damnation: for they were corrupt through the long dwelling among the Idolaters of Aegypt. Therefore did God ordaine them the Law, out of the which they might learne the will of God, what ſinne, right or unright is, and to know themſelves, to goe into themſelves, and to conſider how that the holy workes which God requireth, are not in their owne power; for the which cauſe all the world have great need of a Mediator.
                     The Law was given to further the promiſe.
                   And thus the Law was given to further the promiſe, namely, that wee through the Law might be led only unto Chriſt. For thus followeth it in Pauls words:Gal. 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 
                  And it was given of Angels by the hand of a Mediator. A Mediatour is not a Mediatour of one only: but God is one. Is the Law then againſt the promiſes of God? God forbid. Howbeit, if there had beene given a law, which could have given life, then no doubt righteouſneſſe ſhould come of the Law. But the Scripture hath ſhut up all under ſinne, that the promiſe ſhould come by the faith on Ieſus Chriſt, given unto them that beleeve. Before faith came (that is to ſay, Ieſus Chriſt in whom we beleeve) we were kept and ſhut up under the Law, unto the faith which ſhould afterward be declared. Thus was the Law our Schoole-maſter unto Chriſt, that we might be made righteous by faith, &c. By theſe words of Paul may every man underſtand now for what cauſe the Law was given, and how it is not contrary to the promiſe of the foreſaid ſeed, but rather bringeth us from our ſelves, and from all creatures, only unto Ieſus

Chriſt. The Law therefore confirmeth the firſt promiſe concerning the bleſſed ſeed, and teacheth that wee obtaine all ſalvation in him only.
                     The Law is the rule to live by.
                   Howbeit it is alſo a rule of our life, informing us what wee ought to doe, and what we ought to leave undone. Yet on our ſide is all unfruitfull, where faith is not. But where faith is, it ceaſeth not through love to worke good according to the Law: all honour and praiſe being referred unto God, to men nothing but unperfectneſſe.
               God alſo among his people wrought many things, whereby hee ſet the cauſe of Ieſus Chriſt clearely afore the eies of the people, as it is expreſſed afore by the Lambe of the Paſſeover. Likewiſe is it where as Moſes hanged up a Serpent in the wilderneſſe, that all they which were ſtung and poiſoned of ſerpents, ſhould behold the braſen ſerpent hanging, and not die, but be ſaved alive. Wheras doubtleſſe the outward beholding of the braſen ſerpent, ſaved not them that were poiſoned: but it was God, which would ſo declare, that his Sonne ſhould be hanged upon a croſſe, to the intent that every one which were poiſoned and defiled by the old ſerpent and ſinne, ſhould beleeve in the Sonne of God, and live in him. For ſo is it written, Sap.
                  Wiſdom. 16.6, 7. The braſen Serpent a figure of Chriſt.
                   16. They had a token of health according to the commandement. For who ſo converted, was not made whole by the outward thing which he ſaw, but by thee which art the reſtorer of health, and Saviour of all. And yet ſaith Chriſt more clearely, Ioh. 3.Iohn 3.14, 15. 
                  And like as Moſes ſet up the ſerpent in the wilderneſſe, even ſo muſt the Sonne of man be lift up, that whoſoever beleeveth

in him, ſhould not periſh, but have eternall life.
               
               And as touching this, the holy Apoſtle Paul bringeth in another ſentence,1 Cor. 10.1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. and ſaith: Brethren, I would not haue you ignorant of this, that our Fathers were all under the cloud, and all paſſed thorow the ſea,
                  
                     Chriſt is the rocke.
                   
                  and were all baptiſed under Moſes in the cloud and in the ſea, and did all eat one ſpirituall meat, and drinke of one ſpirituall drinke. But they dranke all of the ſpirituall rocke that followed them, which rocke was Chriſt.
               
               Beſides this, if we conſider the declaration of the lawes of the firſt Table (which teacheth how we ſhall behave our ſelves right toward God, to love, worſhip and honour him, to ſerve him and to cleave only unto him) we ſhall finde in the ſame firſt Table, the whole cauſe of Chriſt. For all that afterward was ordained and appointed concerning the Tabernacle, the Prieſthood, and the Oblations, pertaineth to the ſumme of the firſt Table, for as much as the Scripture and the mouth of God calleth it his law, precept, commandement, uſe and ſtatute, ordinance and ſervice.
               
                  
                     Queſtion.
                  And if thou aske, How can God which is a ſpirit, be ſerved with outward, viſible, and fleſhly things, as the foreſaid ceremonies of the Iewes are?
               
                  
                     Anſwer.
                  I anſwer; Such outward rites of the people of God were ſacraments and tokens of heavenly inviſible good things, and were not the heavenly riches themſelves. Wherefore they neither ſerved nor pleaſed God, that uſed and did ſuch ſervice without faith and lifting up of the minde. But they that put their truſt in God, cleaving only unto

him, and lifting up their hearts higher, and remained not in the viſible thing, thoſe pleaſed God. Whereas they had but one Altar and one place appointed where they ſhould doe ſacrifice;
                     One altar w
                           •
                        at i
                           •
                         ſignified.
                   it ſignified the croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and that he ſhould be offered up but once, (and that in one place) for the ſinne of the world. Therefore whereas the high Prieſt alſo every yeere went into the inward Tabernacle with bloud; it ſignified, that our Lord Ieſus ſhould come into this world, and ſhed his bloud once for all, to forgive and cleanſe our ſinnes, and ſo to aſcend unto heaven. Yea all oblations and all ſheddings of bloud in the ſacrifices of the old fathers, ſignified the death of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Nothing was cleanſed among them without bloud; which ſignifieth,
                     Note this well.
                   that all the purging of our uncleanneſſe is done by the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. And all the Prieſthood which was ordained for to teach, to pray, and make interceſſion, to offer and doe ſacrifice, repreſented the office of our Lord Chriſt, which came into this world, to teach us the truth and righteouſneſſe: then to offer himſelfe to the Father for our ſinnes, and after the ſacrifice done, to riſe up againe from death, to aſcend unto heaven, there to ſit at the right hand of God, and even there as a true high Biſhop to appeare alway in the preſence of God, and to pray for us. This is the ſumme of the rites and ceremonies of the old fathers, the underſtanding of the figures, and the ſpirit of the letter: whereof holy Paul hath written much in the moſt excellent epiſtle to the Hebrewes.
               
                  
                  
                     Why the ceremonies of the Law were given.
                  Out of all this is it eaſie to underſtand, how that theſe rites and ceremonies of the fathers were ſacraments, and given to the people of God. Not that they with the letter and outward viſible and corporal thing ſhould ſufficiently ſerve God which is a ſpirit, but that they ſhould lift up their mindes above the ſame to the ſpirituall things, pondering the mercy of God; out of the which hee being moved, is become gracious unto us. And when he might have damned us for our ſins and miſdeeds, he ſpared us for his Sons ſake, whom he gave unto death, and his innocent death hath he accepted for our ſinnes. Such a faithfull conſideration (which is the true beleefe) pleaſeth God, and with ſuch a faith is God ſerved, and ſuch a faith would the Lord have taught and planted in us, with the foreſaid rites and ceremonies. Therefore all they that pleaſed God among the old fathers, pleaſed him not for the letters ſake, but by reaſon of the ſpirit.
               When the ſacrifice alſo and ceremonie was executed after the ordinance of God in the congregation, the beloved friends of God had not only reſpect unto the outward thing, but much rather beheld they Chriſt with the eyes of faith, and thought thus:
                     The godly conſideration of the fathers.
                   Behold the will of God hath ordained to do ſacrifice for ſinne: now are we all ſinners and debtors unto God, in ſo much that he hath power and right over us, that like as the beaſt which is now ſlaine and offred, dieth, and hath his bloud ſhed: Even ſo might God now alſo kill us all, and condemne us for ever. Nevertheleſſe he hath taken

us to his mercy, and promiſed us a ſeed, which ſhould thus die on the Croſſe, and cleanſe us with his bloud, and with his death reſtore us unto life: which thing no doubt ſhall as ſurely come to paſſe, as this beaſt is ſlaine and offered now afore our eyes. And like as the bloud is ſprinkled over the people, for the bodily cleanſing: ſo ſhall the bloud of Chriſt be ſprinkled upon our ſoules, &c. And out of ſuch a thought and faithfull conſideration of the ſacrifices, grew repentance and ſorrow for their ſinnes, a gladneſſe, praiſe, comfort and thanks-giving unto God the mercifull Father. And to this doe ſerve certaine Pſalmes, which were made concerning the ſacrifices. To this alſo ſerve all the rebukings of the holy Prophets, and the refuſing of the oblations. For the externall pompe and ſhew of the offerings, without faith in God and the bleſſed ſeed, is nothing worth; yea it is rather abominable unto God, as thou ſeeſt in the firſt chapter of Eſay.
               
               Thou wilt aske:
                     Queſtion.
                   Might not God have taught and ſhewed his people the cauſe of Ieſus Chriſt & of true beleefe, none other way than through and with ſuch coſt, pompe and glory of ſacrifices and other gorgeouſneſſe of the Church?
               I anſwer:
                     Anſwer.
                   If the people had not fallen to more wickedneſſe in Egypt through their dwelling among the Idolaters, but had conſtantly and ſtedfaſtly remained, as did their fathers Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, then might they well have continued by the old ſhort ſimple forme, as it was among the holy fathers. But now had they ſeene in Egypt an

outward coſtly Gods ſervice, with temples, altars, ſacrifices, prieſthood, holy daies, ornaments, &c. Likewiſe the idolatry increaſed daily in all the world, ſo that now there was utterly no people, which had not their owne outward ceremonies, wherewith they ſerved God.
               To the intent then that God might retaine his people within the compaſſe of faith in one God, and in the bleſſed ſeed promiſed afore: to the intent alſo that they ſhould ſhew no outward ſervice to any other gods,
                     W
                           •
                        y G
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         among the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   or take upon them to ſerve God after the manner of the Egyptians or of other heathen, he appointed an outward Gods ſervice, and commanded to doe the ſame unto him, and elſe to none, and in the ſame pleaſed it him to ſet forth all the cauſe of the foreſaid ſeed, till he came and performed all things in deed, that they had figuratively in their ſacrifices.
               Moreover, God (according to his wiſdome) of his ſpeciall mercy and good heart that he hath unto mans generation, would with theſe outward tokens tender our weakneſſe, which of ſpirituall heavenly things hath better underſtanding, when they are ſhewed unto it by corporall viſible things. God therefore through ſuch corporall repreſentations,
                     God tendreth our weakneſſe.
                   laboured to ſhew unto that groſſe and fleſhly people, the heavenly cauſe of his Sonne. Nevertheleſſe the corporall viſible things were given for no longer, but untill the time of the fulfilling. But now that Chriſt hath appeared, and fulfilled and performed all that was written and figured of him in the Law and the Prophets, the figure

ceaſeth, and the outward ſacraments of Moſes law are of no more value to be exerciſed and uſed. Thus much be ſaid of the ceremonies.
               Whereas beſide the ceremonies,
                     Lawes iudiciall.
                   there is much written alſo in the Law concerning civill policie, ordinance, judgement, to live peaceably and well in citie and land: of buying and ſelling, of warre and peace, of inheritance and proprieties, of lawes matrimoniall, of puniſhment of the wicked, of the judgement and counſell, of lending and borrowing, &c. It is no newes at all, and ſerveth altogether for the declaration of the ſix commandements of the ſecond Table, and is comprehended in the words of Paul, Rom. 13. Love thy neighbour as thy ſelfe: And in the words of Chriſt,Rom. 13.9. Matth. 7.12. 
                  That thou wouldeſt not have done unto thee, doe not thou to another, Matth. 7. Such lawes and rules to live in peace, in a civill order and in vertue, have alſo the good holy fathers had from the beginning of the world, written in their hearts by God himſelfe. Now hath God alſo cauſed all to be comprehended in writing by Moſes, to the intent that the world might have all more clearely and perfectly, and that no man might excuſe himſelfe of ignorance.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. The originall of the holy Scripture and faith thereof.
               
                  
                     The five originall b
                           ••
                        kes of holy Scripture written by Moſes.
                  THis matter which I have hitherto treated upon, have I not fained of my ſelfe, but taken it out of the mouth and word of God. For God ſtirred up Moſes to write, and leave behinde him all the matter, for our learning and knowledge. This did now Moſes with great faithfulneſſe, and comprehended all in foure bookes. The firſt is called the booke of the creation,
                     The firſt b
                           •
                        oke of Moſes.
                   from the beginning of the world unto his time, of the creation of the world, beginning of all nations, and of the Patriarks and old righteous ſervants of God, of their faith and converſation, of the promiſes and works of God. The ſame wrote hee as hee was inſpired of the Holy Ghoſt, and as he had received of old fathers, and ſomewhat as he found in the bookes of the Aegyptians.Acts 7.22. For Moſes was excellently well learned in all wiſdome of the Aegyptians, as Steven doth witneſſe of him, Act. 7. The other three bookes wrote he of his owne time, according as he himſelfe was preſent, ſaw, and knew. And ſpecially the ſecond booke,
                     The ſecond booke of Moſes.
                   concerning the departing out of Aegypt, how the people of God were oppreſſed in Aegypt, how the Aegyptians were puniſhed, how Iſrael was delivered, received the Law, and ſet up a Tabernacle with a gorgeous ſerving of God.
                     The third booke.
                   In the third booke, which is called

                  Leviticus, are written the ſpirituall Lawes, namely ſuch as concerne the Prieſts and the Prieſthood, their office, living, knowledge, ſacrifices, ſolemne feaſt dayes, rites, ceremonies, and ſuch like.
                     The fourth booke.
                   In the fourth, which is called Numeri, hee writeth at length, how they went thorow the wilderneſſe, and came to Iordan, with a rehearſall of their order and number, of their murmuring alſo and puniſhment, and of certaine victories, with a remembrance of certaine lawes and ſtatutes. Beſide all this,
                     The fifth booke.
                   hee made yet an Enchiridion and ſumme of all the acts of his time, and of the Law of God, which is called Deuteronomium: the ſame commanded hee to bee laid in the Arke at the motion of God, and that it ſhould be read unto all the people, as it is mentioned, Deut. 31. And in theſe five bookes,
                     The originall Scripture of our faith.
                   given us of God by Moſes, is the whole ground of our holy faith. For all the Prophets afterward grounded themſelves upon the ſame, and wrote thereout, like as afterward our Lord Ieſus and the Apoſtles point unto Moſes. Neither did ever any righteous man of underſtanding, and that feared God, doubt any thing, or blaſpheme ſuch Scriptures. And from ſuch true ſervants of God, have wee hitherto received our matters in writing.
               Thus much have I ſaid concerning the Law,
                     The Law written is no new thing.
                   how it is no new thing, but even the onely will of God, but now comprehended in writing: Moreover, that all the Law pointeth unto Chriſt, and that all men of right underſtanding which lived under the Law, were Chriſtians. For manifeſt is it that Paul ſaid, Rom. 10. Chriſt is the end of the Law,
                  Rom. 10.4.
                  
                  to juſtifie everie one that beleeveth. And Galat. 3. Or ever faith (that is to ſay,Gal. 3.23. Chriſt) came, we were kept and ſhut up under the Law, unto the faith which ſhould afterward be declared. Thus was the Law our ſchoole-maſter unto Chriſt, that wee might bee made righteous by faith. All this, I ſuppoſe, will bee new and ſtrange in many hearts; nevertheleſſe, I truſt that all they which have underſtanding, doe ſee and knowledge, that this is the true, old, right, and godly Divinitie and Theologie, which aſcribeth all honour unto God the Father, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt in the Holy Ghoſt. To whom be glorie and praiſe for ever. Amen.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. All vertuous Kings, and the people of Iſrael, truſted unto Chriſt, and not to the Law.
               
                  
                     The death of Moſes.
                  AFter that the Law was given, and Gods ſervice ſet up, Moſes the ſervant of God died, being an hundred and twentie yeeres old: and at the commandement and commiſſion of God, he left Gods people to bee ruled and guided by the faithfull valiant Ioſue,
                  
                     Ioſue was a figure of Chriſt.
                   which alſo was a figure of our Lord Ieſus. For like as it was not Moſes, but Ioſue, that brought the people into the land of promiſe: Even ſo are we brought into the eternall reſt, not by the works of the Law, nor through our owne deſerving, but by grace through Ieſus Chriſt:

like as it is alſo with many words expreſſed of holy Paul, Heb. 4.3. &c. This Ioſue, no doubt, did keepe, maintaine and defend Gods faith and religion, with the ſpirit and underſtanding thereof, and taught other to keepe the ſame, like as he through Gods inſpiration received it of the fathers by Moſes. Which thing, though it bee evident in many points, yet is it manifeſt ſpecially by this, that hee would not ſuffer the children of Ruben and Gad, and the halfe Tribe of Manaſſe, to ſet up and have another altar, beſide the onely altar that the Lord had appointed them. For herein (as it is mentioned afore) was figured the vertue and perfectneſſe of the onely croſſe, death, and ſacrificing of Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore would not Ioſue that any thing ſhould be ſet cheeke-mate with the croſſe and oblation of Ieſus Chriſt, but that all honour of cleanſing and forgiveneſſe of ſinnes ſhould bee aſcribed onely unto him.
               Whereas Ioſue now, and other Iudges, Rulers, Princes and Kings of Iſrael after him, uſed ſore and great warre, ſtroke many horrible battels,
                     Ioſue fought at Gods commandement.
                   deſtroyed much land and people, and ſhed mens bloud without meaſure, he did it as a chiefe head, and as an inſtrument and veſſell of God, at the commandement of God, which would ſo puniſh the Idolatrie, the great ſinne and blaſphemie of the ungodly, which he had long ſuffered, and exhorted them to amendment, but for all his patient abiding, they would not convert: Thoſe now did hee root out through the ſword of his beloved friends: ſometime delivered he his people with the ſword of the

righteous, and ſaved them from the hand of their enemies. For becauſe of the ſinnes of his people, he gave them over ſometime into the hand of their enemies, to nurture and correct them with the rod: then fell the people of God, and fled before their enemies, and were ſubdued and oppreſt of the ungodly, till they knowledged their ſinnes, called upon God and amended, putting their truſt in God onely, through the bleſſed ſeed, worſhipping him onely, calling upon him, and honouring him according to his word, caſting away ſtrange worſhipping of God, ſervice of Idols, that ſhamefull, blaſphemous and ungodly living. Then ſent he them his helpe, and delivered them in his power, by the miniſtration of his appointed Captaines. And ſuch warring, delivering and puniſhing was no fleſhly unfaithfull worke, whom no man ought to follow, as ſome, being wrapped with the unſtedfaſt ſpirit of the Maniches and Anabaptiſts,
                     An hereſie of the Anabaptiſts. Heb. 11.32. doe meane. For Paul expreſſeth cleerely; And what ſhall I ſay of Gedeon, Barach, Sampſon, and Iephtha, David, and Samuel, and the Prophets? which through faith ſubdued Kingdomes, wrought righteouſneſſe, obtained the promiſes, ſtopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, eſcaped the edge of the ſword, of weake were made ſtrong, became valiant in battell, turned to flight the armies of the Aliants, Heb. 11. All which works the holy Apoſtle praiſeth and commendeth as excellent works of faith. Therefore are they no works of the fleſh, neither is it now contrarie to the holy faith, if Chriſtian rulers deliver their innocent people (whom God hath ſubdued

unto them) from wrongfull violence, and defend their libertie, righteouſneſſe, houſe and land, or puniſh the ſhamefull blaſphemers, Idolaters, and perſecuters of the holy faith, and not ſuffer them to have all their malicious will. Nevertheleſſe,
                     Rulers muſt puniſh.
                   this muſt be done by them, to whom God hath committed the ſword. For thus ſaith the Lord:Matth. 26.52. 
                  Who ſo taketh away the ſword, ſhall periſh through the ſword, Matth. 26. But ſpecially in the battels of Gods people and of the unfaithfull, it commeth to paſſe, and is expreſſely ſet before our eyes, that God ſaid to the ſerpent at the beginning, Gen. 3.Gen. 3.15 
                  I will put enmitie betweene thy ſeed and the womans ſeed. For the righteous are the ſeed of Chriſt, the unrighteous and unfaithfull are the ſeed of the Devill. Betweene theſe now ſee we great diſcord; but ſpecially this, that the faithfull doe alway tread the ſerpent on the head, though they themſelves alſo be bitten in the heele. For the right faithfull beleevers afore the birth of Chriſt in the time of the promiſe, had no leſſe trouble and perſecution, not onely becauſe of ſinne, but alſo for righteouſneſſe and faiths ſake, than the faithfull after Chriſts birth in the time of grace and perfectneſſe.
                     An errou
                           •
                        .
                   Therefore have they ſmall knowledge of the doings of the faithfull, which ſay, that the people of old were a victorious people, and governed corporally, but that the people after Chriſts comming are borne to ſuffer, and to no victorie or governance. Nevertheleſſe in theſe wonderfull times (in the which Gods people had no victorie, and anon were ſubdued and oppreſſed) the true faith continued upright and unblemiſhed

from Ioſue forth throughout all the Iudges, untill the time and reigne of David.
               
               
                  
                     Of King David.
                  David alſo was a man that ſuffred much through divers and long trouble, through miſerable diſtreſſe and vexation, and through ſore perſecution, without ceaſing, being proved, tried and provoked, afore he was King. Whereof the bookes of Samuel and the more part of the Pſalmes beareth record. But after that he was promoted unto the kingdom, by God (which ſaid,Acts 15.22. 
                  I have found a man after mine own heart) he advanced, ſet forth, and magnified the true faith right diligently. Here alſo to the honour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, will I ſhortly and by the way declare, what knowledge and faith this noble King and Prophet had of our Lord Ieſus. This will I doe with the declaration of the 110. Pſalme, whoſe words are theſe:Pſalm. 110.1. 
                  The Lord ſaid unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot-ſtoole. In the firſt verſe David knowledgeth the perſons in the holy Trinitie,
                     The holy Trinitie.
                   the God-head alſo and the eternall kingdome of Chriſt. Thus likewiſe did our Lord Jeſus Chriſt underſtand and alleage this verſe in the Goſpell, Matth. 22. knowledging two of the Perſons in the one only Godhead,Matth. 22.44. for he ſaith, The Lord ſaid unto my Lord. Now is it certaine and undeniable, that hee which ſpeaketh, and he to whom ought is ſpoken, are not one, but two Perſons. Yet is there but one Lord and God, and they both (the Father that ſpeaketh, and the Sonne to whom is ſpoken) are the Lord, therefore are they one, of one ſubſtance and being, the very true God. Neither is the Sonne leſſe than the

Father. There can alſo none be a father, except he have a ſonne or a childe. Now is the everlaſting Father God, therefore is the Sonne alſo everlaſting. There is alſo but one only everlaſting without beginning. Both the Father and the Sonne are eternall without beginning, therefore are they one only true God with the holy Ghoſt. Like as Iohn alſo ſaith, In the beginning, (that is to ſay, from everlaſting) was the Word, and the Word was with God,
                  Iohn 1.1. 
                  and the Word was God. And immediatly thereafter, ſaith he, that the Word is Jeſus Chriſt our Lord. For it followeth: The Word became fleſh.
                  Iohn 1.14. Therefore doth David alſo call the Son of God ſpecially his Lord, ſaying, The Lord ſaid unto my Lord.
                  Matth. 22.24. The faith of David in Chriſt.
                   And therefore calleth he Chriſt his Lord, becauſe hee confeſſeth and beleeveth, that he is his very naturall Lord and God, as Thomas alſo did knowledge:Iohn 20.20. 
                  My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20. Afterward calleth he him his Lord, becauſe that after the nature of man, he ſhould be borne out of his loynes. For thorowout all the Scripture is our Lord Ieſus called the Sonne of David: And thus doth David knowledge two natures in Chriſt, the nature of God, and the nature of man.
               That the kingdome of Chriſt ſhall laſt for ever, and that the kinde and nature of man ſhall be exalted aboue all heavens (as Paul ſaith, Hebr. 2.) David teſtifieth with theſe words: Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot-ſtoole.
                  Pſalm. 110.1. For Marke ſaith in the ſixteenth chapter:Marke 16.19. 
                  The Lord was taken up into heaven, and ſitteth at the right hand of God. Of this alſo finde we 1 Cor. 15.15. Now muſt

he needs be very God indeed, which reigneth for ever, and to whom all enemies muſt be ſubdued, yea caſt utterly unto his feet. Now followeth the ſecond verſe:Pſalm. 110.2. 
                  The Lord ſhall ſend thy mightie ſtaffe out of Sion: thou ſhalt be Lord, even in the middeſt among thine enemies. Here ſpeaketh he of the preaching of the holy Goſpell, and how the world ſhould be converted unto Chriſt, and Chriſt to reigne in the middeſt of the world. In the firſt verſe is ſpoken of the eternall kingdome, that he is very God, living and reigning for ever,
                     The ſpirituall kingdome of Chriſt.
                   not only in this time, but alſo after this time eternally. But here ſpeaketh hee ſpecially of the kingdome, whereas hee reigneth here beneath through the Goſpell. For the Staffe, the Scepter, the Rod of Chriſt is the holy Goſpell, even the power of God, which ſaveth all that beleeve, Rom. 1.16. Which maketh Chriſts enemies friends, and ſmiteth them downe that will not convert: ſo that Chriſt hath dominion and victorie even in the middeſt among his enemies. It is he, that with the ſpirit of his mouth ſlayeth the Antichriſts. This his word alſo and preachings of the Goſpell,Acts 1.8.12. came forth firſt from Sion or Hieruſalem, as Eſay,
                  Pſalm. 110.3. 
                  Micheas, and Luke doe teſtifie. Now followeth the third verſe: In the day of thy battell (or armie) ſhall thy people be well willing: the dew of thy birth is unto thee in an holy maieſtie, out of the wombe of the cleare morning. Herewith doth David deſcribe the glorious and victorious faith of the Chriſtian.
                     A battell.
                   For when the Goſpell is preached, there ariſeth a conflict betweene faith and infidelitie, betweene the ſeed of Chriſt and the Serpent, between

idolatrie and true godlineſſe. And the unbeleevers perſecute the Lord Chriſt in his members, that is to ſay, the faithfull: but they are well content utterly to give over bodie, honour and goods, their bloud and life for Gods truths ſake. For the martyrs and they in the Primitive Church, being gathered together of the Apoſtles, and after the Apoſtles time, have thus kept truth and faith toward the Lord Chriſt, and were willing to die for knowledging him. Afterward deſcribeth he alſo in the foreſaid verſe, the pure and holy conception and birth of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. And this doth he with a goodly ſimilitude, and ſaith:
                     The birth of Chriſt. Pſalm. 110.3. Thy birth ſhall be holy and very excellent, not uncleane as the birth of other men: For like as the dew out of the cleare heaven, and out of the faire morning, is borne as it were out of a mothers wombe: even ſo alſo ſhalt thou be borne holy and cleane, of an undefiled virgin. Whereof thou findeſt more inſtruction, Luk 1.31. The Lord hath ſworne, and it ſhall not repent him:
                  Pſalm. 110.4. 
                  thou-art a Prieſt for ever after the order of Melchiſedech.
                  
                     The office of Chriſt.
                   In this fourth verſe deſcribeth he the office of Ieſus Chriſt, how that he is ordained of God to be one only Prieſt for ever, which ſhould offer up himſelfe for the ſinne of the world, and alway appeare in the ſight of God the Father, and to pray for us. All this doth holy Paul declare at large to the Hebrewes in the 5.7.8·9. and 10. chapters. And ſpecially in this verſe is grounded all that is read thorowout the Scripture, of the merits of Chriſt, of the forgiving of ſinnes, of righteous making, of being Mediatour, and that he alone is the

only Salvation, Advocate, Satisfaction and Righteouſneſſe of the faithfull.Pſalm. 110.5. 
                  The Lord is at thy right hand: he in the time of his wrath ſhall wound even Kings.
                  
                     Chriſts cauſe ſhall forth.
                   This fifth verſe teacheth, how God will ever more and more ſtand on his Sonnes ſide, further his cauſe, and bring downe and deſtroy thoſe Kings, Princes, and Lords, that will not amend and beleeve in Chriſt, but will rather provoke his wrath, than deſire his grace. Which thing Herod, Nero, Domician, Maximine and Iulian have proved. Yet followeth the ſixt verſe declaring the fifth: He ſhal iudge among the Heathen, and fill all full of dead bodies,
                  Pſalm. 110.6. 
                  and ſmite the head on the wide ground. Chriſt is alſo preached unto the Heathen, and reigneth among them: but many withſtand Chriſt, and them doth he judge. And like as a King overcommeth his enemies with a battell, and covereth the whole plaine with dead bodies, viſiteth alſo and ſmiteth the head of the warre, and the head citie of the enemies:
                     Chriſt ſhall deſtroy his enemies.
                   Even ſo doth Chriſt to his enemies, and deſtroyeth their power and kingdome. All which things wee have ſeene in the old unchriſtian Empire of Rome, and in many other potentates and powers. But ſpecially he breaketh the head of the old Serpent, according to the promiſe, Gen. 3.15. And at the laſt ſhall he come to judge the quicke and dead,Pſalm. 110.7. and deſtroy his enemies for ever. Out of the brooke in the way ſhall he drinke, therefore ſhall hee alſo lift up the head. Finally and in the ſeventh verſe, he deſcribeth the paſſion of Chriſt and his glorie. In the way (ſaith he) that is, in his life while he is in this miſery, He ſhall drinke out of the brooke, that is,

he ſhall ſuffer and be overcome. For to drinke out of the cup, is as much as to ſuffer. But to drinke out of the brooke, is to be altogether full of trouble, to be vexed and tormented without victorie, and utterly to be overwhelmed with a brooke and ſtrong ſtreame of troubles. Thus was it his minde to declare the Paſſion of Chriſt. After the Paſſion, followeth the glory with the Reſurrection and Aſcenſion. Paul, Philip. 2. ſpeaketh of both, and ſaith,Philip. 2.8. 
                  Chriſt humbled himſelfe, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Croſſe. Wherefore God hath exalted him, and given him a name, which is aboue all names, &c. Thus much be ſpoken of this Pſalme, and of Davids underſtanding, which hee had of Chriſt Ieſus and of the Chriſtian faith.
               Upon this I marvell, if (after ſo evident teſtimonies) there be yet any man, which perceiveth not, that Davids faith and underſtanding of Chriſt, was even one faith and underſtanding, with the faith that we knowledge and ſay: I beleeve in one God Father almightie, &c. as it is in the twelve Articles of the Chriſtian faith. For the holy Trinitie in one God-head doth he knowledge, not only here, but alſo in the 33. Pſalme, ſaying,Pſalm. 133.6. The article of the holy Trinitie.
                   
                  Through the word of God were the heavens made, and all their power through the ſpirit of his mouth. For certaine it is, that there is but one only God, maker of heaven and of earth: but here is the Trinitie called Lord or God, Word and Spirit. Neither is there any thing in the Articles of the Beleefe concerning the God-head and Man-hood of Chriſt, of his conception, birth, paſſion, croſſe and death, of the reſurrection,

aſcenſion and judgement, but it is cleerely comprehended here in this Pſalme. The articles of the holy Church, of forgiving of ſinnes, reſurrection of the fleſh, and an everlaſting life, are contained in this Pſalme, and are treated upon yet more clearely, and with many mo words very ſubſtantially in other Pſalmes of David.
                  David was called Chriſts father. Matth. 9.27. Therefore had he our holy faith, and knowledged the ſame, was ſaved therein, and of all holy men was called the Father of Chriſt with high commendation, becauſe of the promiſe that was made unto him. Moreover, all the holy Prophets following, had reſpect unto David, as to another Moſes, and tooke many things out of his writings. For there is ſcarce any other, that ſo clearely wrote of the cauſe of Chriſt as this Prophet David, and therefore hath he honour and praiſe aboue other in Iſrael: Of whom thou readeſt alſo, Eccleſ. 47.2. Such faith and confidence in God through Ieſus Chriſt, had David out of the holy Ghoſt, and out of the doctrine of his Prophets Samuel, Nathan and Gad, and of other his Prieſts, which alſo had the ſame of God, and of the holy Fathers, ſpecially of Moſes. And no doubt, hee deſired the honour of God and of his Sonne, not to keepe it only himſelfe, but alſo much rather to require it of all his people. Wherefore no doubt he ſet up and furthered this his faith and religion among all his men of warre, kinsfolke in all his court, dominion, before the whole congregation, and all his kingdome: ſo diligently, earneſtly, and fervently, that afterward certaine hundred yeeres, they which beleeved right and lived well,

were praiſed for walking in the waies of David their Father. They alſo that did evill, & ſet not forth the true faith, of them is it written:
                     The waies of David. they walked not in the waies of David their Father. Of this haſt thou many examples in the bookes of the Kings, and in the Chronicles. Many things alſo were forgiven the Kings and all the people of Iuda, for Davids ſake, that is, for the promiſe ſake made unto David, even for Ieſus Chriſts ſake, whom Ezechiel calleth David. In the firſt booke of the Kings,1 Kings 15.3, 4, 5. King Abia. the fifteenth chapter, it is written thus: The heart of Abia was not right toward his Lord God, as was the heart of David his father. And for Davids ſake did the Lord give him a light at Hieruſalem, ſo that at Hieruſalem he ſet up his ſonne, and preſerved him. For David did that, that was right in the fight of the Lord, and all the daies of his life did not he ſhrinke from any thing that he commanded him, except in the matter of Vrias the Hethite. Thus readeſt thou alſo of Ezechias, 2 Reg. 18. Afore Ioſias was there no King,
                  2 Kings 18.5, 6. 
                  that was like him, which turned himſelfe ſo unto the Lord with all his heart, with all his ſoule, and with all his power, according to all the law of Moſes. And afterward came there none like him.
               
               But in the ſecond booke of the Chronicles,2 Chro. 34.1, 2, 3. the 34. chapter, ſtandeth the declaration of the foreſaid place after this manner: Ioſias reigned at Hieruſalem one and thirtie yeeres, and did that which pleaſed the Lord, and walked in the waies of his Father David, and declined neither to the right hand nor to the left. For in the eighth yeere of his reigne while he was yet but young (even ſixteene yeeres old) hee began to

ſeeke the God of his Father David.
               
               Thus much be ſpoken concerning this, that Iſrael and all the vertuous Kings of Iuda truſted unto Chriſt, and not to the Law of Moſes. Who ſo deſireth the number of the yeeres,1 Kings 6.1. he findeth 1 Reg. 6. even 480. yeeres, from the departing out of Aegypt untill the fourth yeere of the reigne of Salomon. And from that time untill the captivitie of Babylon, are reckoned 419. yeeres, or thereabouts. All together make 899. yeeres.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. All holy Prophets doe point unto Chriſt, and preach ſalvation only in him.
               SOmewhat yet will we now declare further, concerning the times of the Kings of Iuda and Iſrael, which in a manner were even as the times of the Iudges of Iſrael. For like as in the firſt yeeres of Ioſue, God gave great victorie and honour, and afterward reſt and peace: Even ſo were the Iſraelites very victorious and triumphant under David, and had great reſt and peace under Salomon.
                  
                     The departing of Iſrael from Iuda.
                   But like as after the death of Ioſue the honour of Iſrael decreaſed, and the departing away from God followed with one perſecution upon another (though in the meane time they had peace and deliverers, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barack, Gedeon, Iephtha, Sampſon, &c.) Even ſo did the worſhip of Iſrael decreaſe after Salomons time. For the ten

Tribes of Iſrael fell away from the houſe of David, only Iuda and Bejamin held Salomons ſonne Roboam for their King: the other made Hieroboam King. And ſo of one kingdome were made two, the kingdome of Iſrael, and the kingdome of Iuda. The kingdome of Iſrael (through the perſwaſion of Hieroboam) choſe them another manner of ſerving God. Not that they utterly denied and refuſed the God of their Fathers, but they ſerved him after a ſtrange heatheniſh manner of their owne imagining. But afterward they fell the longer the more and further into groſſe idolatrie, ſo long, till the Lord ſuffered them to be rooted out, and carried away by the King of the Aſſyrians, and ſcattered abroad among all the Heathen. The kingdome and the Kings of Iuda were ſomewhat better, howbeit they had ſome alſo which excelled the Kings of Iſrael and of the Heathen in ungodlineſſe. For they likewiſe went forth ſo long in unrighteouſneſſe, till Nabuchodonoſor the King rooted them out, and caried them away unto Babylon. But afore, we ſee that there was a wonderfull combrance in the civill policie, and in the religion. Sometime was all righteouſneſſe and true religion oppreſt, and violence and idolatrie uſed. Sometime gat righteouſneſſe up againe, and the right true faith had the victorie, all unright and idolatrie being put downe. This came to paſſe alſo in Iſrael under Helias and King Iehu.
                  
                     King Iehu. Yet was the idolatrie and wrong rather puniſhed, than any amendment following. Like as it came alſo to paſſe after the birth of Chriſt, that there were vertuous Kings and

Emperours, which (according to the prophecie of Eſay in the 49. chapter, verſe 23.) did all righteouſneſſe, ſet up the faith of Chriſt, and put downe all idolatrie. Againe, there came other, that ſet up all unrighteouſneſſe and idolatry, perſecuted the truth, and at the laſt receiued their reward convenient. So weightie a matter is it to have good or evill Rulers.
               
                  
                     God alwaies 
                           〈…〉
                         P
                           ••
                        phets
                  But in theſe wonderfull alterations, and thorowout all the time of theſe governances of both the kingdomes, God alway ſent his ſervants the holy Prophets, to rebuke wrong and idolatry, and to teach all righteouſneſſe and true ſerving of God. And firſt after the time of David and Salomon (under whom there was a great multitude of learned and holy Prophets; for David alſo and Salomon were excellently endued with the ſpirit of wiſdome and prophecie above other men) theſe were the chiefe,
                     The oldeſt Prophets.
                   moſt famous, and oldeſt Prophets, of whom the Bible maketh mention with worſhip: Semeias, which lived under Roboam King of Iuda: Ahias the Silonite under Hieroboam. Azarias the ſonne of Obed, which lived under Aſa King of Iuda, and Iehu the ſonne of Anani, whom Baaſa the King of Iſrael ſlew: Helias the great Prophet, and Micheas the ſonne of Iema, lived under Achab and Ioſaphat.
               
               Now like as in the time of David there was a great number of learned men; even ſo teſtifieth the ſecond booke of the Chronicles in the 17. chapter, that in the time of Ioſaphat there were many learned Levites and Prophets. Heliſeus was

in the time of King Iehu, and Zacharias the ſonne of Ioiada, was under Ioas, under whom alſo he was ſtoned. Nevertheleſſe we have no bookes written and ſet forth by theſe: only we have the prophecie of Abdias, which wrote his prophecie under Achab. Afterward under Vzzia, Iothan, Achas and Ezechias Kings of Iuda, lived the moſt part of them, whoſe bookes are abroad. For under theſe preached and wrote Ionas, Oſeas, Iſaias, Ioel, Nahum, Amos and Micheas. Afterward under King Manaſſes wrote Abacuck. Vnder the holy King Ioſias, wrote Sophonias, Baruch and Hieremie, in whoſe daies Iſrael had ſuch misfortune, that Hieruſalem with the Temple was deſtroyed, and the people that remained over and periſhed not, were caried away captive into Babylon. In the ſame captivitie did Ezechiel and Daniel write their prophecies. And after the captivitie when Iſrael was delivered againe, and came home to Hieruſalem, then preached and wrote Eſdras, Haggeus, Zacharias, Malachias and Nehemias. Beſide theſe Prophets no doubt there were other moe, of whom no mention is made. But theſe are the chiefe, by whom it pleaſed God to open unto us all that appertaineth to our ſalvation. And though we had alſo the writings of the other, yet ſhould we reade no other thing in them, than we finde in our owne Prophets, for as much as theſe whom we have, agree ſo together all in one.
               Now whether they be our own Prophets,
                     The Prophets preached the old faith.
                   whoſe writings we have, or the other whoſe writings we have not, yet have they all preached the ſumme of the doctrine and knowledged the faith that wee

ſpake of afore, and wrote in one ſumme, which faith Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moſes and David had: And this did they the more evidently, becauſe they applied themſelves to open the Law, and to drive away the miſunderſtanding, which was riſen up among and in the people: therefore point they every where from the letter unto the ſpirit, from the outward ſacrifice unto Chriſt Ieſus, from all idolatry unto the onely God, which ſaveth us through his mercy onely in the bleſſed ſeed, and through none of our deſervings. This did Paul ſee,Rom. 3.20, 21, 22. and therefore ſaid he, Rom. 3. Through the workes of the law ſhall no man be iuſtified in the ſight of God. For through the law commeth the knowledge of ſinne. But now is the righteouſneſſe of God declared without the law,
                  
                     The Law and the Prophets allow the righteouſneſſe of God that commeth by faith. Act. 3.24. 
                  for as much as it is allowed by the teſtimonie of the Law and the Prophets. The righteouſneſſe of God commeth by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt unto all, and upon all them that beleeve. So ſaith Peter alſo in the third of the Acts: All the Prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth (as many as have ſpoken) have told of theſe daies. And in the 10.Act. 10.2, 3. chapter: To this Ieſus Chriſt give all the Prophets witneſſe, that whoſoever beleeveth in him, ſhall through his name receive forgiveneſſe of ſinnes.
               
               Who ſo now is learned in the writings of the Prophets, knoweth well, that there is nothing read concerning the Lord in the New Teſtament, which the Prophets have not propheſied of afore. He that is then any thing inſtructed in the Prophets, hath no doubt conſidered this in the New Teſtament, that the Apoſtles prove all their doctrine of

the Lord Ieſus, out of the Law and the Prophets: yea that the Lord himſelfe confirmeth his owne doings with the Scriptures of the Prophets, and that the Euangeliſts thorowout the holy Goſpell, ſet unto the doctrine and miracles of Chriſt, theſe words: And this was done, that it might be fulfilled,
                  Matth. 21.4. 
                  which was ſpoken by the Prophets. Nevertheleſſe for their ſakes that are not yet inſtructed, I will now declare the principall articles of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, out of the holy Prophets.
               As touching the true Godhead and manhood of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
                     The godhead and manhood of Chriſt▪
                     
                   and that he ſhould be borne at Bethlehem, in the land of Iewry, of a pure virgin and maid, out of the kinred of David, the Prophets teſtifie after this manner. Eſay in the ſeventh chapter ſaith; Behold,
                  Eſay 7.14. 
                  a virgin ſhall conceive and beare a ſonne, and ſhall call his name Emanuel (that is to ſay, God with us.
                  Mich. 5.2.
                  ) Micheas ſaith in the fifth chapter: Though thou Bethlehem Ephrata art too ſmall to be reckoned among the principall cities of Iuda, yet out of thee ſhall there come one unto me, which ſhall be ruler in Iſrael, whoſe forthgoing is from everlaſting.
                  Eſay 9.
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   In the ninth chapter of Eſay it is written: Vnto us is a childe borne, and to us is given a ſonne, upon whoſe ſhoulders the kingdome ſhall lie, and he ſhall be called after his owne name; even the wonderfull counſell-giver, the mighty one of Iſrael, the eternall father, the prince of peace, his kingdome ſhall increaſe, and of his peace there ſhall be no end, and he ſhall reigne upon the ſeat of David his father. In the 23. of Hieremie it is written thus:Ierem. 23.5, 6. The righteous bloſſome.
                   
                  Behold, the time commeth (ſaith the Lord) that I will

raiſe up the righteous bloſſome of David: he ſhall be king and reigne, and proſper: iudgement and righteouſneſſe ſhall he execute upon earth. In his time ſhall Iuda be ſaved, and Iſrael ſhall dwell without feare: and this is the name wherewith he ſhall be named, even God our righteouſneſſe.
               
               Concerning the comming of Iohn the Baptiſt, which was the forerunner of our Lord Chriſt, and prepared the people for him, hath Malachy written in the third chapter after this manner:Mala. 3.1. Iohn Baptiſt.
                   
                  Behold, I will ſend my meſſenger, which ſhall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom yee long for, ſhall ſhortly come to his temple, and the meſſenger of the covenant whom yee would have. Behold, he commeth, ſaith the Lord zabaoth. And afterward: Behold, I will ſend Helias the Prophet afore the comming of the great and fearefull day of the Lord.
                  Mala. 4.5.
               
               Of Chriſts preaching, of the grace of God, of the forgiving of ſinnes, of the wonders alſo and tokens of the Lord,Eſay 61.1. The office of Chriſt.
                   ſpeaketh Eſay in the 61. chapter, after this manner: The ſpirit of the Lord God is upon me, and therefore hath the Lord anointed me, to preach the Goſpell to the meeke hearted hath he ſent me, to heale the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captive, to open the priſon to ſuch as are in bonds, to proclaime the yeere of Gods gratious will, and to bring conſolation to all them that are in heavineſſe. In the 34.Ezech. 34. Chriſt is called David. chapter of Ezechiel it is written thus: Over my ſheepe will I raiſe up one onely ſhepherd, which ſhall feed them, even David my ſervant, which ſhall feed them, and he ſhall be their ſhepherd. I the Lord alſo will be their God, and David ſhall be their Prince,

even I the Lord have ſpoken it. In the 35. chap. of Eſay it is written thus: Say unto them that are of a feeble heart: Be ſtrong and feare not, behold,
                  
                     The miracles of Chriſt.
                   
                  our God commeth to take vengeance, and to reward: God commeth himſelfe, and will deliver you. Then ſhall the eies of the blinde be opened, &c. Then ſhall the lame man leape as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumbe ſhall give praiſe.
               
               Of the kingdome of Chriſt, in the which he himſelfe alone is king, all the world being ſubject unto him, declaring his dominion and royall majeſtie, writeth Eſay thus in the ſecond chapter:Eſay 2.2. 
                  And it ſhall come to paſſe in the laſt time, that the hill of the houſe of the Lord ſhall be exalted upon the height of mountaines above all little hils, and all nations ſhall come together unto him, the people ſhall goe to him and ſay: Come, let us goe up to the mount of the Lord, even to the houſe of the God of Iacob, that he may ſhew us his way, and we will walke in his paths. For the Law ſhall come forth from Sion, and the word of God from Hieruſalem. In the 7. of Daniel it is written thus:Dan. 7.13. 
                  I ſaw a viſion in the night, and behold there came one in the clouds of heaven like the ſonne of man, which came to the old aged, and they brought him before his preſence. And he gave him power, glory,
                  
                     The kingdome of Chriſt.
                   
                  and the kingdome, and all people, nations and tongues muſt ſerve him: his power is an everlaſting power, which ſhall not be taken from him, and his kingdome ſhall not periſh. Eſay ſaith in the 62. chapter: And the heathen ſhall ſee thy righteouſneſſe, and all kings thine honour,
                  Eſa. 62.2. 
                  and he ſhall call thee by a new name (O Sion) and the mouth of God ſhall give thee the name. And thou ſhalt be a crowne of glory in the hand of the Lord, ad

a royall crowne of the kingdome in the hand of thy God. And ſoone after it followeth:Eſay 62.10. 
                  Make ready, make ready the way, gather up the ſtones out of the ſtreet, and hang out the banner unto the people: behold the Lord hath cauſed it to be proclaimed unto the end of the world. Tell the daughter Sion: behold the Saviour commeth, loe, his treaſure and his reward bringeth he with him, and his deeds goe before him. And they that are redeemed of the Lord, ſhall be called the holy people.
                  Zach 9.9. 
                  Zacharie ſaith in the ninth chapter: Reioyce O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter Hieruſalem: behold thy king commeth unto thee, even the righteous and Saviour: meeke and ſimple is he, he rideth upon an aſſe, and upon a young colt of the ſhee aſſe. He ſhall preach peace unto the heathen, his kingdome alſo ſhall reach from the one ſea to the other, and from the river unto the uttermoſt part of the earth.
               
               
                  
                     The death of Chriſt. Dan. 9.26.Of the death and paſſion of Chriſt ſpeaketh Daniel in the ninth chapter after this manner: And after two and ſixtie weekes ſhall Christ be ſlaine and put to death, and yet ſhall they have no true teſtimony, that he is guilty of death. Eſay in the 50. chapter ſaith thus:Eſay 50.5, &c. 
                  The Lord God opened mine eare, and I refuſed it not, neither went I backward: I gave my bodie to the ſmiters, and my cheeks to the nippers, and my face have I not turned from their ſhamefull intreating and ſpitting upon me. The Lord God alſo ſhall helpe me, therefore ſhall I not be confounded. And therefore have I hardned my face like a flint ſtone, and am ſure that I ſhall not be confounded.
                  Eſay 53.2, &c. In the 53. chapter there is written of Chriſt after this manner: He ſhall have neither beauty nor faireneſſe, we ſhall looke upon

him, but we ſhall have no deſire unto him. He is deſpiſed and contemned of men, a man of trouble, and one that hath had experience of infirmitie. He is ſo deſpiſed, that we ſhall hide our faces from him, and have him in no eſtimation. And yet hath he borne our unperfectneſſe, and felt our ſorrowes. We alſo thought, that he ſhould be wounded, ſmitten, and puniſhed of God. But he was wounded for our ſinnes, and ſlaine for our wickedneſſe ſake. And the puniſhment whereby we have peace, is laid upon him, and through his wounds are we made whole. All we have gone aſtray like ſheepe, every one of us hath had reſpect unto his owne way, and the Lord hath laid all our ſinnes upon him. Violence and wrong was done unto him, he hath beene evill intreated, and yet opened he not his mouth. He ſhall be lead as a beaſt to be ſlaine, and as a ſheepe dumbe before the ſhearers, ſo ſhall he not open his mouth, &c. The whole chapter deſcribeth all the cauſe of Chriſt ſo clearely, that holy Hierom ſaid not in vaine: Eſay is not only a Prophet, but alſo an Euangeliſt. Zacharie deſcribeth the Prieſthood and ſacrifice of Chriſt, and teſtifieth,
                     The ſacrifice of Chriſt.
                   that with the ſame only oblation he hath obtained grace for all ſinne; and therefore ſeven (that is to ſay, all) eyes ſhall have reſpect unto him, and ſhall ſeeke peace and reſt of their conſciences in him, and ſhall finde it. Heare now O Ioſue thou high Prieſt,
                  Zacha. 3.8. 
                  thou and thy companions, that ſit before thee, ſeeing yee are men of examples. For loe, I will bring my ſervant, even the bloſſome. For behold the ſtone which I have laid before Ioſue, will I bring, To the ſame only ſtone ſhall ſeven eyes looke. Behold, I will digge it up and diſcloſe

it, ſaith the Lord Zabaoth, and the ſinne of the earth will I take away in one day. And in that day ſhall every man call his neighbour under his vine and figge tree.
               
               
                  
                     The buriall and reſurrection of Chri
                           •
                        t. Matth. 12.40.The buriall and reſurrection of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, hath the Prophet Ionas figured very excellently. For thus ſaith our Lord Chriſt himſelfe: Like as Ionas was three daies and three nights in the whales belly, ſo ſhall the ſonne of man be three daies and three nights in the heart of the earth.
               
               
                  
                     The Aſcenſion.
                  Of the aſcenſion of Ieſus Chriſt and ſending of the Holy Ghoſt, hath Ioel alſo written in the ſecond chapter, and it is alleaged of S. Peter, Act. 2. Of the calling and gathering together the Heathen,
                     The vocation of the Heathen.
                   and of every thing pertaining to the holy Church, doth Eſay write in the 49. chapter, and ſo forth to the end of his prophecie.
               
                  1 Pet. 1.9, &c.Thus haſt thou, that the Prophets alſo in their time, did preach Ieſus Chriſt, and pointed not the people to truſt unto the works of the law and their owne deſerving, but unto Chriſt, of whom they propheſied every thing that followed after. Therefore did Peter ſpeake right, 1 Pet. 1. ſaying: Ye ſhall receive the end of your faith, even the ſalvation of your ſoules.
                  
                     The Prophets ſought ſalvation in Chriſt.
                   
                  After which ſalvation have the Prophets inquired and ſearched, which propheſied of the grace that ſhould come unto you, ſearching when or what time the ſpirit of Chriſt (which was in them) ſhould ſignifie: which ſpirit teſtified before, the paſsions that ſhould happen unto Christ, and the glory that ſhould follow after. Vnto the which Prophets it was alſo declared, that not unto themſelves only, but unto us they

ſhould miniſter the things, which are now ſhewed unto you, by them which have preached unto you the Goſpell through the Holy Ghost, that was ſent unto them from heaven, &c. In the which teſtimonie the holy Apoſtle Peter had a ſpeciall reſpect to the prophecie of Daniel; which did not only record the paſſion and glory of Chriſt, but alſo pointed to the time, in the which Chriſt ſhould come. For like as God in greateſt perils, dangers and alterations, hath alway renued and more clearely expreſſed his promiſe concerning the bleſſed ſeed: as in the time of Noe when the world was deſtroyed: in the time of Abraham, when God would prepare himſelfe a new people: in the time of Moſes, when God received his people and caried them out of Egypt, to bring them into the land of Canaan: in the time of David, when all things ſtood ſo well, and it muſt needs be avoided, leſt any man ſhould thinke David were the bleſſed ſeed: before the captivitie of Babylon alſo, and in the time of the Prophets, which (as it is ſaid afore) preached and wrote, that no man ſhould doubt in Gods promiſe, as who ſay they were given up and caſt away, though the Temple were broken, the Citie burnt, and though the people (of whom Chriſt ſhould be borne) were led into captivitie. Even ſo now alſo in the captivitie, when the faithfull might almoſt have thought, that the promiſe of God concerning the Meſſias, were cleane gone, even then did God ſhew his ſervant Daniel a more cleare viſion of Chriſt, after this manner: The people ſhall be let goe againe out of captivitie, and ſhall come home to Hieruſalem,
                  
                     A propheſie told unto Daniel. 
                  build

the Temple and Citie againe, but with a ſore time. And after that the Citie is builded, unto the time of Chriſt, ſhall be 62. weekes, that is, 483. yeeres. And even ſo was it from the third yeere of Darius Hiſtaſpes or Artaxerxes, in the which the Citie was builded, Nehemie 15. untill the 42. yeere of the Empire of Auguſtus, under whom Chriſt was borne, Luke 1. The Angell alſo gave Daniel farther information of Chriſt, how that his owne people ſhould ſlay him, and finde no fault in him, and how that the ſacrifice with the ceremonie ſhould ceaſe. And a ſtrange people (ſaith he) ſhall come from farre, and make the Temple with the Citie an horrible abomination, yea they ſhall deſtroy and breake downe all together. All which things were afterward fulfilled in the laſt weekes, that is, within 70. yeeres, or thereabout. For within 30. yeeres did the Lord grow to teach and to ſuffer. For when he was 30. yeere old, Iohn baptiſed him. Afterward within three yeeres was he put to death, and within 40. yeeres followed the deſtruction of Hieruſalem by Titus and Veſpaſian.
                  
                     The number of the yeeres.
                   All the time now and yeeres from the captivitie of Babylon to Chriſts birth are 616. yeeres. For the captivitie of Babylon endured 70. yeeres. In the firſt yeere of Cyrus were they delivered, in the ſecond yeere began they to build the Temple, and builded 46. yeeres, even untill the 6. yeere of Darius. In the 32. yeere of Darius was the Citie finiſhed, which maketh 143. yeeres: Adde now hereto the 483. yeeres out of Daniel, and thou haſt the foreſaid ſumme even 626. yeeres.
               In the ſaid yeeres had our holy faith ſore conflicts,

and the ſeed of the Serpent preſſed ſore upon the ſeed of God, as the Babylonians at Babylon,
                     Faith aſſailed and religion ſuppreſſed.
                   and the Perſians, when the people of God was come home againe. Nevertheleſſe the truth had ever the victorie, and was the more clearely teſtified by Daniel, Haggeus, Zacharie, Eſdras, Nehemias, and Malachy. Afterward were they ſpecially oppreſt by the ungodly king Antiochus in the time of the Machabees.
                  
                     Antiochus.
                   When as the times were ever the longer, the more full of perils and adverſitie, untill Aulus Gabinus, Pompeius and Craſſus, Captaines of Rome conquered the land, and the true old religion was utterly gone; in ſo much that out of the old ſerpent there aroſe in Iſrael all manner of ſects and ſymonie, whom our Lord Ieſus Chriſt with his comming in the world reſiſted, and called them the Serpents generation, as the holy Euangeliſts teſtifie. Notwithſtanding,
                     God had eve
                           •
                         ſome vertuous men.
                   in the middeſt of ſuch miſchiefes in Iſrael, there were alſo godly vertuous people, which ſought God and his anointed (though the errour was great) Among whom no doubt was ſpecially the Prieſt Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptiſt, Elizabeth his wife, and godly Simeon. When Zacharias had knowledge of the Lords comming, hee ſayd with a joyfull heart: Praiſed be the Lord God of Iſrael,
                  
                     Zacharie. Luk. 1.68. 
                  for he hath viſited and delivered his people, and ſet up the horne of ſalvation in the houſe of David his ſervant, according as he had promiſed afore by the mouth of holy Prophets, &c. For his words are read. Luc. 1. Simeon when he ſaw the child Ieſus in the Temple, and had taken him in his armes, he ſayd:
                     Simeon. Luk. 1.29. 
                  Now Lord let me dye in peace according

to thy word. For mine eyes have ſeene thy Saviour, whom thou haſt prepared before the face of all people, that he might be a light to give light unto the Heathen, and the glorie of thy people Iſrael, Luke 1. Loe, thus the hearts of all righteous in the old Teſtament from Adam unto Chriſt (even 3974 yeers) have ſtood onely upon Chriſt, in him was their comfort, upon him they truſted, it was hee whom they longed for, and in Chriſt Ieſus were they ſaved. Therefore hath our Chriſtian faith endured ſince the beginning of the world, and is, and continueth ſtill the onely true, old, undoubted and faſt grounded faith.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Of the time of the grace of Chriſt, and how that he himſelfe teſtifieth, that the ſalvation of all the world ſtandeth only in him.
               HItherto have I ſet forth the time of the promiſes, in the which God (through the promiſed ſeed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt) comforted, cleanſed, and preſerved all his ſervants and deare friends. There have wee learned and ſeene, that the Chriſtian faith, which hath endured ſince the beginning of the world, is the eldeſt, undoubted, right and true faith, which all holy Patriarks had, and in the which they ſerved God, and pleaſed him, as Adam Seth, Enoch, and Noe: Item Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob: Likewiſe the excellent and highly endued Prophet, yea the Father and

foregoer of all Prophets, even great Moſes his brother Aaron, the holy Prieſt Eleazar, and Phinees: The excellent Dukes and Iudges, Ioſue, Gedeon, and other moe: Even ſo likewiſe the Kings, David, Ezechias, Ioſaphat, and Ioſias: The dearely beloved of God, and excellent Prophets, Samuel, Helias, Iſaias, Daniel, Zacharias, and all the other. This holy faith alſo had all righteous, and ſuch as were of godly underſtanding in all the congregations of Iſrael from the beginning:
                     All Gods elect were ſaved by Chriſt.
                   In this were ſaved all they that from the beginning were preſerved and ordained to ſalvation: wherefore, whatſoever they can alleage againſt this faith (whether it be concerning holy men, old age, multitudes, learned men, generall Councels, Convocations of Parliaments, Fathers, Acts, Statutes, tokens and wonders:) it is all nothing worth, and is not to be reputed in compariſon of our holy faith, as every one that hath underſtanding may ſee in this Treatiſe before. And though my purpoſe be now finiſhed, even declared out of the Scripture, that the Chriſtian faith hath endured ſince the beginning of the world, yet will I adde a ſhort inſtruction concerning the time of grace, and performing of all promiſes, and I will declare, that God now alſo through the appearing of his Sonne, would bring into the world and ſet forth none other religion, none other faith, neither any other ſalvation, than even the ſame which was ſhewed to the old Fathers: ſaving that now all things are more evident, more clearely practiſed, accompliſhed, fulfilled and performed: for the which cauſe alſo all figures,

ſacrifices and ceremonies doe ceaſe. For in Chriſt is all perfection.
                     The old Teſtament is not to be refuſed.
                   Yet ſhall we not therefore caſt away the old Teſtament (as ſome ignorant, unlearned and fooliſh people doe) but have it in greater reputation, for as much as wee know now through Chriſt, what every thing ſignifieth, and wherefore every thing was thus and thus ordained, uſed, and ſpoken: Now ſhall every man firſt have a courage to reade the Law and the Prophets, when he ſeeth whereupon every thing goeth. And thus alſo at the beginning did the holy Apoſtles preach Chriſt unto the Iewes, out of the Law and the Prophets, as it is oftentimes mentioned in the Acts of the Apoſtles. And our Lord himſelfe, when hee went with the two Diſciples toward Emaus,Luke 24.13. and preached ſo unto them, that their hearts burnt within them, he began at Moſes, and went thorow all the Prophets, and opened unto them the old Scriptures, and ſhewed them, that ſo it behoved Chriſt to ſuffer, and to enter into his glory. This is the cauſe alſo that the Scriptures of the New Teſtament hang altogether, and referre themſelves to the Scriptures of the old Teſtament: ſo that theſe cannot be rightly underſtood without the other, no more than the gloſſe without the text. The text is the Law and the Prophets,
                     The new Teſtament declareth the old.
                   the expoſition are the Euangeliſts and the Apoſtles. Now will wee ſee what the worke of grace of the new Teſtament is.
               
                  
                     The birth of Chriſt.
                  In the two and fortieth yeere of the Empire of Auguſtus, after the beginning of the world 3974. yeeres, was Ieſus Chriſt the bleſſed and promiſed ſeed, borne of the undefiled Virgin and Maid

                  Mary, at Bethleem in the Land of Jewrie. And though he as a very man was wrapped in cloathes, and laid in the crib, yet appeareth the Angell of the Lord in great cleareneſſe unto the Shepherds, and ſaith, Feare yee not, behold,
                  Luke 2.10. 
                  I bring you tidings of great joy, which ſhall happen unto all people. For this day is borne unto you the Saviour, even Chriſt the Lord in the Citie of David.
                  
                     Tidings of Chriſts birth.
                   The firſt newes and tidings of the comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, muſt the Angell bring and give, to the intent that it might be the more accepted of all the world. All the holy men from the beginning of the world, did hitherto long ſore after the promiſed Seed. Therefore ſaith the Angell now, that he bringeth them tidings of great joy: no doubt to them that were gone, dead and paſt, to them alſo that now lived, and to them that were to come afterward. The joy is this, that Ieſus Chriſt the Saviour is borne, even the promiſed Seed, which ſhould ſave all the world from the power of the Devill, cleanſe them from ſinne, and deliver them from damnation. Therefore ſaith the Angell moreover:Luke 2.10. 
                  Which ſhall happen unto all people. For unto Abraham it was ſaid,Geneſ. 12.3. 
                  In thy ſeed ſhall all Nations of the earth be bleſſed. The ſame (ſaith the Angell) is borne in the Citie of David, even out of Davids kindred, out of the which the Prophets teſtified that he ſhould be borne; which Prophets alſo, for the ſame cauſe, called him David, and the bloſſome of David.
                  
                     The grace of God.
                   And this is now the grace of God, that whereas wee poore ſinners belonged unto death, and were in the Devils bonds, hee ſent his Sonne to looſe and

deliver us out of captivitie. This is the new Teſtament. For Hieremie alſo teſtifieth hereof, and ſaith, This is the Teſtament that I will make,
                  Ierem. 31.33. 
                  I will be their God, and they ſhall be my people, I will be mercifull to their unrighteouſneſſe and ſinnes, and will thinke upon them no more,
                  
                     Note well.
                   Hier. 31. This full and perfect forgiveneſſe is not therefore called the new Teſtament, as though there had beene no remiſſion of ſinnes among the old Fathers, but becauſe the promiſe made long before unto the Fathers, is now confirmed and renewed: and the old figures that repreſented the ſame are abrogate.
                     Chr
                           •
                        ſt the only ſalva
                           •
                        io
                           •
                         of all the w
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        d.
                   Thus the Lord Ieſus alone is ſet forth for the only ſalvation of all the world, ſo that not only we, but all they which before or after his appearance or incarnation beleeved on him, were ſaved. And at the birth of Chriſt there commeth to the foreſaid Angell, the whole heavenly hoſte, which praiſed God, and ſaid,Luke 2. 
                  Glory and praiſe be unto God in the height, and peace upon earth, to men a good will. And by this they teach us what the dutie, thankfulneſſe, and knowledge of men is or ought to be in this behalfe, that God hath done ſo great good for man: Namely, how that they ought to praiſe God,
                     The dutie of us.
                   to have a ſure truſt in him, and to be friendly and loving one to another.1 Tim. 1.5. And the fulfilling of the Law, is love from a pure heart, out of a good conſcience, and of an undiſſembled or unfained faith, 1 Tim. 1.
               In the fifteenth yeere of the Empire of Tiberius (from the beginning of the world 4004. yeeres) came the word of the Lord to Iohn,
                  Iohn Baptiſt. the ſonne of the Prieſt Zachary, in the wilderneſſe, and he went

and preached unto the people of Iſrael, amendment of life, and forgiveneſſe of ſinnes in Ieſus Chriſt: To whom he bare record, that he was the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, very God and Man, the only and ever-living Saviour, which with the ſacrifice of his own bodie, ſhould cleanſe the world from ſinne; yea hee pointed unto him with his finger, and ſaid, Behold,
                  Iohn 1.29. 
                  this is the Lambe of God, that taketh away the ſinne of the world: And ſo perfectly and wholly hangeth hee all ſalvation only on Chriſt Ieſus, that he ſaith plainly,Iohn 1.26. 
                  Out of his fulneſſe have all we received grace, &c. Ioh. 1. Item,1 Iohn 3.36. 
                  who ſo beleeveth in the Sonne of God, hath everlaſting life: who ſo beleeveth not in the Sonne, ſhall not ſee life, but the wrath of God abideth upon him.
                  Matth. 11.2. Therefore did he alſo ſend all his Diſciples from him, and commanded them to cleave unto Chriſt. He maketh no mention at all of any ceremonies, figures or oblations, as neceſſarie points to ſalvation, but preacheth Chriſt purely and clearely. This is manifeſt, Ioh. 1. and 3. Matth. 3. and Luk. 3.
               The Lord himſelfe alſo came unto Iohn,
                  Matth. 3.13. and was baptiſed▪ And when hee had received Baptiſme, the heaven opened, and the Holy Ghoſt appeared in the forme of a Dove, and there was a voice heard from heaven, ſaying,Matth. 3.17. 
                  This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am pacified: to the intent that all the world ſhould have witneſſe of Chriſt the true Saviour, not only now by the Angels, and by Iohn the holieſt man of all, but alſo from heaven, and of God himſelfe: and that we might be the bolder to commit our ſelves wholly unto him. When hee

had received the teſtimonie, he went into the wilderneſſe:
                     Note this ſimilitude.
                   And like as our diſeaſe began in Paradiſe by temptation; even ſo at the temptation in the wilderneſſe began the Lord our health: And like as the Father of us all did eat the forbidden meat;Matth. 4.1, 2. ſo did the Lord not eat the meat that hee might have eaten, but faſted fortie daies and fortie nights. Afterward came hee among the people, and began to preach ſalvation, ſaying, The time is fulfilled,
                  Matth. 4.17. 
                  and the kingdome of God is at hand; repent, and beleeve the Goſpell. Herewith hath he healed all ſores, driven out Devils, and raiſed up the dead, teſtifying ſo by his acts, that he is Lord of all things, and the true Saviour: And of them whom hee healeth, asketh he nothing: hee commandeth them not to build him a Temple, neither to give him blocke or ſtocke: hee requireth no bodily thing, but onely ſtedfaſt faith and confidence. And to them whom hee hath healed, hee ſaith, Goe thy way, and ſinne no more, take heed that a worſe thing happen not unto thee. And herewithall doth hee teach,
                     The ſubſtance of true religion.
                   in what thing the ſubſtance of true Religion lieth, even in a right true faith, and in an innocent life, that in all our converſation wee keepe our ſelves from all filthineſſe: Yea the thing that ſome man taketh for Gods ſervice, refuſeth hee, as long babling prayers, vaine-glorious faſting, and like almes giving. Hee nothing regardeth mens traditions, diverſities of ſects, long garments, outward appearance, their cleanſing, nor all their hypocriſie. He goeth into the Temple, overthroweth,

caſteth downe, powreth out every thing that is to bee ſold in the Temple: he driveth the buyers and ſellers out of the Temple with a whip. For the Temple was ordained for generall prayer, thankſgiving and preaching, and not for chopping and changing, or other ſuch like things. Theſe three points doth hee teach vs diligently to obſerve: Firſt,
                     The ſpeciall points of Chriſts doctrine.
                   that wee obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes, true righteouſneſſe, and everlaſting life, onely through him, and by his Paſſion and death, and elſe by none other meane. For hee is the onely Mediatour, Prieſt, Interceſſour, Comforter, the onely Righteouſneſſe, Satisfaction, Ranſome, Sanctifying, the onely perpetuall Sacrifice, the Suretie of grace and ſalvation. Speciall teſtimonies hereof haſt thou Iohn 3.6.14. and 16. Secondly, that wee cannot ſerve and pleaſe God with exteriour ſacrifices or any outward pompe▪ but with ſuch workes as proceed of love, and mercie. And thirdly, that all the children of God are bound to keepe themſelves from the workes of darkneſſe, and to apply them to live in righteouſneſſe, and in the light. And herein alſo is comprehended all godlineſſe, that is, all right good Chriſtian workes.
               So when hee had taught all righteouſneſſe,
                     The patient ſuffering of Chriſt.
                   and diſcloſed and overthrowen all hypocriſie in religion, he offered up himſelfe upon the croſſe for the remiſſion of all our ſinnes. For willingly and patiently put he himſelfe into the hands of his enemies and of his betrayer, ſuffered himſelfe to be taken, to be bound, to be led from one Iudge to another,

to be laughed to ſcorne, cried out upon, to be ſpitted on, and at the laſt to be adjudged unto death, to be ſcourged, and to be crowned with a crowne of thorne. Hee himſelfe bare his owne croſſe to the place of execution, where hee was crucified, and hanged up betweene two murtherers. Then lived hee in great paine from the ſixth houre untill the ninth.Iohn 29 30. Luke 13.46. At the laſt he cried; It is finiſhed, Father, into thy hands commend I my ſpirit: thus offered he himſelfe for our ſinnes, and died,
                     The fruit of Chriſts death.
                   that wee might live. But ſoone after followed the things whereby the fruit of Chriſts paſſion might bee perceived. For the vaile, which in the Temple ſeparated the holy from the moſt holy, did rent from the top to the bottome; whereby Chriſt teſtified, that now with his death, all ceremonies and figurative things were at an end, and no more of value: that the way to eternall ſalvation was opened: that all things ſignificative in the Tabernacle, in ſacrifices, rites, and obſervances, were now fulfilled and abrogate: that now the bare and onely croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, is altogether unto the faithfull: that the heele of the Virgins ſeed is well trodden upon, and his fleſh well rent and ſlaine: but that yet alſo in the meane ſeaſon he hath trodden the ſerpent upon the head. Therefore did the dead alſo ariſe, and appeared vnto certaine at Hieruſalem. For the death of Chriſt is our life. The earth quaked, the ſtones burſt aſunder. For the preaching of the death of the Sonne of God hath altered the whole world, and many hard ſtonie hearts are moved to repentance, faith and good works. But when the

ſide of the dead bodie of Chriſt was opened with the ſpeare, and the rocke (as Zacharie ſaith) was digged up, there ran out water and bloud,
                     Water and bloud.
                   declaring manifeſtly thereby, that unto us out of the death of Chriſt, followeth life and purifying. For water cleanſeth, in the bloud is the life of man. And with the bloud of Chriſt is all bloud ſtanched, and now is Chriſts bloud only available, being ſprinkled through faith in our hearts.
                     The time of Chriſts Paſſion.
                   This oblation and paſſion of Chriſt (the ranſome for the ſinne of the whole world) was done in the 18. yeere of the Empire of Tiberius, reckoning from the beginning of the world 4007. yeeres, the 25. day of March.
               So the whole bodie of Ieſus was taken downe from the croſſe, and honourably buried,
                     The buriall of Chriſt.
                   and on the third day after hee roſe up againe: ſo that his ſoule came againe to the bodie, and his verie fleſh was raiſed up from death, howbeit now no more mortall and paſſible, but glorified. For hee is the firſt in the reſurrection of the dead. For like as by one man came death, ſo by one man muſt come the reſurrect on of the dead. And like as in Adam wee all died in bodie and ſoule, ſo ſhall wee be all together reſtored againe to life in Chriſt Ieſus. This hope unto life, would the Lord print ſubſtantially in us with the reſurrection. And therefore after his reſurrection, hee continued fortie dayes with his Diſciples, that hee might well inſtruct them of his reſurrection, and that they ſhould haue no doubt therein. So when he had ſhewed and declared unto them his verie reſurrection divers wayes, and had performed al that the Father commanded him

to finiſh, hee aſcended up unto heaven with bodie and ſoule from mount Olivet in the ſight of his Diſciples, and is ſet at the right hand of God, there to remaine corporally untill the laſt day, in the which hee ſhall come againe bodily, to judge the quicke and dead: And all ſuch as have walked in faith, ſhall he take to him with bodie and ſoule into heaven, like as hee himſelfe is received into heaven: And ſhall with bodie and ſoule condemne all them, that have walked in the way of the old ſerpent, and have no
                     •
                   converted from unrighteouſneſſe to the righteouſneſſe in Chriſt. And thus ſhall ſalvation bee perfectly finiſhed, and Gods children ſhall live eternally with God, through Ieſus Chriſt. To whom be praiſe for ever. Amen.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. That alſo the elect Apoſtles preached this old faith▪ and declared that all ſalvation is onely in Chriſt.
               THus through Chriſt Ieſus is all fulfilled, that the Prophets propheſied of him before,
                     The power of Chriſt ſaveth all.
                   thus to become the ſalvation of all faithfull beleevers, even the Lambe of God, which hath beene ſacrificed ſince the beginning of the world; that is, this is he, whoſe power and deliverance hath cleanſed all them that ever put their truſt in God through the bleſſed ſeed. Herein now is the right true ſalvation, this is the ſumme of the right and perfect religion. Who ſo perverteth this,

from him ſhall God turne himſelfe: who ſo addeth ought unto this, to him ſhall God adde his wrathfull hand: who ſo taketh therefrō, his life ſhall God miniſh. But bleſſed are they, which walk in this ſimplicitie & cleanneſſe, and continue ſo unto the end; even they that heare Gods word, and doe thereafter, whoſe onely hope is Ieſus Chriſt. This only true and ever during ſalvation would hee to bee ſhewed and declared to all nations, which came to ſave all nations: but he would it ſhould be declared by the preaching of the holy Goſpell, and through the miniſtration of the holy Sacraments: And therefore by his life time hee did chuſe Apoſtles, whom he received to bee witneſſes of all his doctrine and miracles, informing them diligently, and held nothing backe from them. For hee ſaith unto them; Yee are my friends,
                  Iohn 15.14, 15. 
                  if yee doe all that I command you, I will henceforth call you no more ſervants, for a ſervant woteth not what his Lord doth.
                  
                     Chriſt held nothing back
                           •
                         from his Apoſtles.
                   
                  But I have called you my friends, for all that I have heard of my Father, have I opened unto you, Ioh. 15. But for as much as they yet lacked underſtanding, and were forgetfull, and had ever ſtrange imaginations of the kingdome of Chriſt, therefore when hee now aſcended unto heaven, hee charged them not to depart from Hieruſalem, but to wait for the Holy Ghoſt: whom he alſo gave unto them upon the fiftieth day after his reſurrection; that is, upon the tenth day after his aſcenſion, even the fifteenth day of May:
                     The Holy Ghoſt b
                           •
                        ough
                           •
                         no new doctrine.
                   by the which Holy Ghoſt they being illuminate, ſpake with all manner of languages, and were mindfull of all that the Lord had commanded

them afore. For the Holy Ghoſt did not endue them with a new doctrine, but it that the Lord had taught them out of the Law and the Prophets, the ſame did hee bring to their remembrance, and illucidate all things, and printed them more clearly in their hearts. For ſo ſaith the Lord in the Goſpell:Iohn 14.26. 
                  The Comforter, even the Holy Ghoſt, whom the Father will ſend in my name, he ſhall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, that I have ſaid unto you. Therefore ſo long as the Lord was with them, and told them all the matter of his paſſion, they were ſorrie, and could not beare away all that he ſaid unto them. But after that he was taken up from the earth into heaven, he ſent the Holy Ghoſt, even him, whom the Prophets alſo had before, and that led them into all Chriſtian veritie.
               So when they were endued with the Holy Ghoſt, they began (according to the Lords commandement) to preach in all the world the foreſaid matter of ſalvation purchaſed and obtained onely by Chriſt, and gotten by true faith. For hee had ſaid; Goe your way into all the world,
                  Marke 16.15. 
                  and preach the Goſpell unto all creatures, Whoſo beleeveth and is baptized, ſhall be ſaved, &c. And therewith comprehendeth he both the points, which the Apoſtles uſed and practiſed, even the preaching of the faith in Ieſus Chriſt, and of the miniſtration of the Sacraments. And how the Apoſtles doctrine was, it is manifeſt out of the Acts of the Apoſtles. But ſhortly and in a ſumme, they preached amendment of life, and remiſſion of ſinnes through Ieſus Chriſt: That is

to ſay, how that the whole generation of man lay in the dominion of the Devill, and in the bonds of ſinne, curſed, and damned: but God had mercie on us all, and ſent his Sonne into this world to die, and with his death to reſtore us unto life, and to waſh us with his bloud, that whoſoever beleeveth in him, ſhould not periſh, but have eternall life. All this declared they out of the Law and the Prophets, and proved, that Ieſus Chriſt whom they preached, is the bleſſed ſeed promiſed unto the fathers. Whoſo is deſirous to have a perfect example of this declaration, he findeth two Sermons of the famous Apoſtles Peter and Paul, the one in the Acts of the Apoſtles, the ſecond chapter, verſ. 14. the other in the 13. chapter, verſ. 16. There doth the holy Apoſtle open the myſterie of our holy faith, verie excellently, declaring it from the time of Abraham unto David, and from him unto Iohn the Baptiſt. Thereupon ſheweth he, how Chriſt ſuffered, died, was buried, and roſe againe from death. All this confirmeth hee with the Scriptures of the Prophets. At the laſt he concludeth the Sermon after this manner; Be it knowne unto you therefore,
                  Acts 13.38. 
                  ye men and brethren, that through Ieſus is preached unto to you forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, and that by him all they that beleeve, are juſtified from all things, from the which yee could not bee juſtified by the Law of Moſes. To this agreeth now alſo the ſermon of Peter: Yea, all the Scriptures of the Apoſtles doe finally accord to the ſame effect: Hereout alſo bring they the doctrine of repentance and amendment of life, the rebuking of ſinne, conſolations, exhortations,

and drawing to all manner of good works, that follow out of faith.
               The ſpeciall Sacraments, which the Lord did chiefly inſtitute, and command the Apoſtles to practiſe in the Church,
                     Baptiſme.
                   are holy Baptiſme and the bleſſed Supper of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Concerning the firſt,Matth. 28.18, 19. hee ſaith thus, To mee is given all power in heaven and in earth: therefore goe your way, and teach all people, and baptize them in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghoſt, and teach them to keepe all that I have commanded you. The other did hee inſtitute at the laſt Supper.
                     The Supper of the Lord. Matth. 26.26. For thus is it written in the holy Goſpell: When they were eating hee tooke bread, and when hee had given thanks, he brake it, and gave them ſaying; Take, eat, this is my bodie, which ſhall be given for you: this doe in the remembr
                        •
                     nce of mee. So tooke hee alſo the cup when 
                        •
                     hey had ſupt, and ſaid; Drinke yee all out of this, this is my bloud of the new Teſtament, which ſhall be ſhed for the remiſsion of ſinnes. With ſuch Sacraments, through outward viſible formes (for our infirmities ſake) pleaſed it the Lord to ſhew and ſet before our eyes, his heavenly and inviſible grace: not that we ſhould continue ſtill hanging in the viſible thing, but that wee ſhould lift up our mindes, and with a true beleefe to hold faſt, to print ſure in our mindes, to worſhip, and to enjoy the things that faith ſheweth us by the outward Sacraments. With theſe outward Sacraments alſo hath it pleaſed him to open, declare and ſhew unto us his grace and loving kindneſſe: Namely, how that he giveth unto us himſelfe and all his riches, cleanſeth

us, feedeth and moyſtureth our ſoules with his fleſh and bloud, that he is at one with us, and wee with him, ſo that wee uſe and practiſe the Sacraments with a true faith. For the outward enjoying of the Sacraments of it ſelfe alone, doth not reconcile us with God: but if they bee uſed with faith, then (as S. Peter ſaith, Acts 15.Acts 15.9.) through faith doth God purifie the hearts.
                     The fru
                           •
                        t of the Sacraments.
                   With the Sacraments pleaſed it him, to leave behinde him a remembrance of his gifts and benefits, to the intent that wee ſhould never forget them, but praiſe and thanke him therfore. Moreover, with viſible Sacraments was it his will to gather us together, and to marke us in his Church and people, and to put us in remembrance of our dutie, how we are one bodie together, and ought to apply our ſelves to all righteouſn
                     •
                  ſſe: All which things are found at length in the Scriptures of the Apoſtles.
               As for the Apoſtles, they miniſtred the Sacraments diligently, purely, and ſimply; and ſo (without any addition) diſtributed them unto the people of God. Touching Baptiſme, there are many examples in the Acts of the Apoſtles. The Supper of Ieſus Chriſt had the Corinthians ſomewhat altered.1 Cor. 11.17. And when Paul pointed them againe to the true ordinance and right uſe, he taketh the ſimple words and inſtitution of Ieſus Chriſt without any more addition, and layeth thoſe before them, commandeth them to follow the ſame, and holdeth him therewith well content, 1 Cor. 11. And thus did the holy▪ Apoſtles gather together all the Heathen people, through the preaching of the Goſpell,

and miniſtration of the Sacraments in the Church, whoſe head is Chriſt,Acts 15 28. The Apoſtles did not overcharge the people with Ceremonies. Acts 2.1. in whom they are builded and preſerved. Moreover, they did not load them ſore with any ceremonies. For in the Acts of the Apoſtles the ſecond chapter, where as a perfect ſhape of a right Chriſtian Congregation is deſcribed, wee have firſt the ſending of the Apoſtles, among whom Peter did firſt preach the Goſpell, that is to ſay, repentance and forgiveneſſe of ſins in Chriſt Ieſus. Then baptized hee them that were become the people of God. Afterward followeth it, that they which were become Chriſtians, continued in the doctrine of the Apoſtles, in prayer, in breaking of the bread, & in the fellowſhip: Here are the right ſubſtantial points of the Chriſtian Church ſufficiently expreſſed: the doctrine of amendment of life, and remiſſion of ſinnes, Baptiſme, the continuing and increaſing in Chriſts doctrine, prayer, the holy Supper of the Lord, and the fellowſhip, that is, love, kindneſſe, and workes of mercie.
               
                  Acts 15.20.29.Now whereas Acts 15. it is ordained that the Heathen ſhould eat no blood nor ſtrangled, it endured but for a time,
                     The Apoſtles would not offend the weake.
                   & their meaning was thereby to avoid offending of the weake. Otherwiſe have the Apoſtles everie where (eſpecially Paul) verie earneſtly exhorted men, to continue by the doctrine that was ſhewed and delivered them, and to be at a point in themſelves, to avoid ſuch learning as was new and brought up by men, becauſe they lead men farre from the truth, as we finde, Col. 2.6. Philip. 3.15. 1 Tim 4.6. and 6.2. and Tit. 1.9. And thus it is manifeſt, that the Apoſtles taught all

nations no new nor ſtrange thing, but even the ſame that they had received of the Lord.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. A concluſion, that this faith is the right true old faith, which alway ſhall ſtand ſure.
               THis holy undefiled faith which the Lord planted and ſet up in all nations by the Apoſtles, immediatly after the Apoſtles deceaſe, was ſore attempted by ſundry uncleane perſons, which brought up falſe cuſtomes and miſbeleefes, and made perillous ſects. Beſide this alſo was it ſore perſecuted with the ſword of tyrants. But in all ſuch dangers the truth overcame and had the victory. For though the citizens of the devils citie (according to the diſpoſition of their Patriarke Cain) did murder, and although falſe Prophets brought up evill counſell, yet the citie of God triumpheth, and the bloud of innocent Abel and his brethren ſpeaketh yet. But after that the perſecution was ſomewhat ceaſed, and the perſecutors ſore and horribly puniſhed for their bloudſhedding (the hereſies alſo being well brought downe by faithfull ſhepherds) in the ſame reſt alſo was our holy faith not a little hurt. For reſt put away feare, brought idle felicitie, voluptuouſneſſe, and fleſhly ſeeking of riches and dominion: and ſo through covetouſneſſe and ambition,
                     Note. The decay of Chriſts religion.
                   there was powred great poyſon into the Church, whereby

religion ſore decaied. For while the Miniſters of the word laboured more after riches, than to performe their of
                     ••
                  ce and charge, and to edifie the Church, they were pleaſed with ſuperſtitiouſneſſe in ſtead of true religion. Of this then followed it farther, that the ſingleneſſe of faith was forgotten, new lawes made, the old rites and cuſtomes either perverted, or elſe utterly overthrowne and abuſed: whereby men came farre from the doctrine and Chriſtian ceremonies, from the way of truth into errour fooliſhly, and partly into ceremonies of idolatry.
                     What inconvenience followed.
                   Hereof commeth it, that we have now the abomination of the Popes power, of Pardons, of Maſſes for the dead and quicke, of merits, power and interceſſion of Saints in heaven, of worſhipping their bones upon earth, of Idols, and vaine ornaments, pompe and pride of the Church, of hired ſinging and praying in the Temple, and of the whole ſwarme of idle religions. All which things, with other moe like fondneſſe, are nothing but new alterations, pervertings, and contrary to all old ordinances, having no ground in Gods word, and are cleane againſt God, though many hardnecked people are yet in a fury and brawle for ſuch things, and will make all the world beleeve, that this their fooliſhneſſe, alteration, and perverting of Gods ordinance, is the old faith. And yet wote they, or will not know, that their babling hath very little ground, and that they (if they conſidered the matter as it is) are very naked and miſerable.
               And though this papiſticall religion hath endured, prevailed, and triumphed now certaine hundred

yeares, yet hath God alway ſent his faithfull ſervants, and had a little holy flocke of his owne, like as afore-time in the dayes of the iudges, of the Kings of Iuda and Iſrael, and in the captivity of Babylon, though it was almoſt at the worſt afore, and at the comming of Chriſt.
                     Note.
                   Like as it is alſo with us, the nigher the ſecond comming of Chriſt, the worſe it is in the world. Nevertheleſſe (as I ſaid afore) God alway ſet forth his word, and doth yet. Contrarywiſe, the Pope with his multitude,
                     The Pope and Mahumet ſtrive againſt Chriſt.
                   and Mahumet with his (as it ſeemeth and becommeth very Antichriſts) have hitherto undertaken to ſuppreſſe the old religion, and to ſet up his owne ordinance (unknowne to our fathers of old time) to bring it into poſſeſſion, and under the name of God and his holy Church, to ſpread it upon all Chriſtendome. For out of the acts and ſtatutes of the Pope and his wanton ſpiritualty, and out of the lawes of Mahumet, it is manifeſt what the one hath taken in hand and done now more than 600. yeeres, and the other upon a 900. yeeres. It is evident yet alſo even now, whereto his generall councels and parlamenrs doe extend. But not regarding how he threatneth and faceth, and how he garniſheth his new and wanton religions with falſe (but diſſembling) titles, boaſting of many hundred yeeres, many generall Councels, Fathers, holy men, Doctors, Vniverſities, Cloiſters, ſinging, praying, faſting, almes-giving, diſplying, and telleth ſuch like: All his bragging ſet aſide,
                     Let us doe as our o
                           •
                        deſt fathers have done long b
                           •
                        fore us.
                   let us caſt his religion from us, and take upon us unfainedly the true old religion, which hath endured ſince the beginning

of the world, by the which all holy men have ever loved, worſhipped and ſerved God, and knew nothing utterly of the Popes religion. And if we muſt for this cauſe be hated and perſecuted of the world, well, it hapned even ſo unto all holy Prophets before us likewiſe, and ſpecially unto Ieſus Chriſt our Lord: which ſhall come ſhortly to judgement, and utterly deſtroy the kingdome of Antichriſt, whom he now killeth with the ſpirit of his mouth. Our poſſeſſion is not here upon earth, the kingdome of heaven is our native country: From thence looke we for the Saviour Ieſus Chriſt our Lord,Philip. 3.20, 21. which ſhall raiſe up our mortall and miſerable body, that he may make it like his excellent and glorified body, according to the power, whereby he may ſubdue all things unto himſelfe. To him be honour and praiſe for ever and ever. AMEN.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   