
      
         
            
            
            A
Compariſon betweene
the auncient fayth of the Romans,
and the new Romiſh Religion.
            Set foorth by Frauncis Bunny, ſometime fellowe
of Magdalen College in Oxforde.
            
               MATTHEW. 15. 13.
Euerie plant which my heauenly Father hath not planted,
ſhalbe rooted vp.
            
            Printed by Robert Robinſon for Raph Jackeſon.
1595.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable
my verie good Ladie
Katheren Countiſe of Huntingdon,
Frauncis Bunny wiſheth increaſe
of honour here, and euerlaſting
life elſewhere.
*⁎*
            
            
               IF trueth ſhame not
more of anie thing,Contra valentinianos.
then when ſhe is hid,
as Tertullian truely
writeth: then it behooueth
her friends
to do her that fauor,
that by all meanes
poſſible they will earneſtly indeuor to bring
her to light, that ſhee may be ſeene of them
that ſeeke her, and knowen of them that
loue her. And although this may perchance
ſeeme a hard attempt in theſe our dayes,
wherein falſehoode maketh ſo fayre a ſhew,

and hath ſo great appearaunce of that it is
not, and euery man claimeth to the trueth,
be their doctrines neuer ſo diuers, yet ſince
God hath giuen vs meanes to driue awaye
thoſe thicke cloudes of errour and ignoraunce,
that the ſunne of trueth may ſhine
vnto the worlde, I haue indeuoured in this
ſhort treatiſe, to take away that colourable
ſhewe of trueth from the Church of Rome,
that the vndoubted trueth of the Church of
Chriſt may the better appeare. For we haue
a touchſtone, the word of God that cannot
lye, a rule that cannot deceaue, by which
whatſoeuer we trie and examine, it wil ſoone
bee ſeene whether it bee true or falſe. Truth
alſo is a thing that is auncient, and hath bin
alwayes,De virginibus velandis. ſayth Tertullian, and like the good
corne that was firſt ſowen: but errour is that
bad ſeed which was caſt after into that field
by the enuious man.Tertul. de preſcriptionibus aduerſus Haereticos. Seeing therefore that
is true that was firſt, and what ſo euer commeth
after is falſe: howe eaſie a matter is it
for ſuch as ſearch, to ſee the light, and for
them that inquire after her, to finde the
trueth? For if it bee true that the Scriptures

teach, & that onely, then al that is not agreable
to that truth, muſt needs bee falſe. And if
that onely be nowe true, which in the Apoſtles
times was true: no number of dayes
or yeares ſhall prooue that not to bee falſe
nowe, which then was not true. Therefore
for the benefite of all ſuch as loue the truth,
I haue in this treatiſe ſet downe, the doctrine
which was firſt taught and preached at Rome
in the Apoſtles dayes, whereof no man
doubteth, but that it muſt bee the infallible
worde of God, and Chriſtian religion. Then
alſo I haue added thereunto that which is
nowe holden for the Romiſhe religion and
Catholicke fayth there. And becauſe theſe
two doe verie much differ, as hee that readeth
will ſoone ſee (for indeede they are nothing
like:) and wee are aſſured that that
which Gods worde deliuereth, and was firſt,
muſt needes bee currant, that which hath
no warrant in the worde, and commeth after,
muſt needes be counterfeite. I haue endeuoured
to bee ſhort, becauſe I hoped it
woulde be the more willingly read, and the
better remembred. And for that cauſe I

haue not aunſwered the argumentes, which
the Romiſh Catholickes vſe for defence of
their opinions, and the rather becauſe it is
performed in an other treatiſe. But I truſt
in this it will appeare, that hee that will imbrace
the Catholicke Fayth that was then,
when the faith of the Romans was commended,
whereof the Papiſtes make greate
bragges, muſt needes deteſt that Romiſh
fayth that is now, and accompt it moſt blaſphemous.
This little worke I haue beene
bold to dedicate vnto your good Ladiſhip,
not onely as a diſcharge of my duetie of
thankefulneſſe toward your Honour, to
whome you bounde mee long ſince by manie
vndeſerued courteſies: but alſo becauſe
that then I knewe your great zeale, and feruent
deſire and loue to the trueth, and your
Chriſtian care to augment your knowledge
of the will of GOD: Whereof I nothing
doubt, but the Lorde hath giuen vnto you
great and happie increaſe. To whoſe abundant
mercies in Chriſt I commit your good
Ladiſhippe, alwayes praying that hee will
here confirme you in his trueth, and continue

all his good graces tovvardes you, vntill
hee ſhall take you out of this vale of
miſerie, to raigne vvith him in endleſſe
glorie, Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Compariſon betweene the auncient faith
of the Romans, and the new Romiſh Religion,
ſet forth by Frauncis Bunny, ſometime fellow
of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  IT is a daungerous ſtombling
blocke, which the
Church of Rome hath caſt
in the waies of the ignorant,
whereby they are
made to fall into the déepe
dungeon of Popiſh hereſies
and ſuperſtitions, when
they beare the worlde in
hand, as much as they can,
that the Apoſtle in commending
the faith of the Romans that then was, or rather
in teſtifying that it was publiſhed through the
world,Rom. 1. 
                        •
                     . doth approue the faith alſo that now is there
taught. True it is that onely they that are ſtarke blind,
would ſtumble at that ſtone: for hée that is but halfe
ſighted, may plainely ſée that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh but
of the faith of the Romans that then was, and doth not
promiſe or prophecy, that it ſhould be ſo alwaies. In the
beginning God planted true Religion & the feare of him,
in the hearts of men and women: but in continuance of
time, that plant of the Lords own plaining, was ſo ouergrowen
with the wéeds of wickednes of life, and ſuperſtitions
ſeruing of God, that it was hardly to be ſéene emongſt

men. In ſo much as of the times of Enos it is
written, (as if the world had for a long time forgotten
that there is any God) that then he began to call vpon
the name of the Lord.
                  Gen. 4. 26. Yea that which was at the firſt deliuered
from God as a perfect rule of life, and written in
the heart of man: Yet was by the corruption of man ſo
blotted out, and by the darknes of our minds ſo defaced,
that God was forced as it were to write it a new (that it
might the better be remembred) in the tables of ſtone.
Yea and ſuch is the force of our naturall and hereditary
infection, that we cannot long kéep the truth ſincerly deliuered
vnto vs, without mingling, or mangling of the
ſame.De praeſcrip. aduerſ. haereticos. And therfore Tertulian teacheth vs truly, that the
trueth muſt be before hereſy, euen as the body is before
the ſhadow:Math. 13. 24. And he proueth it by that parable of our Sauiour
Chriſt, wherin the good ſéed is ſaid firſt to be ſowen
& after the 
                     •
                  ares. And ſo concludeth that that doctrine is
from the Lord, & true, that is firſt, & that which commeth
after,Contra epiſtolam Stephani. is falſe and ſtrange. And Ciprian alſo confirmeth the
ſame, when for reformation of any error, he teacheth vs
to haue recourſe to the fountain. Which rule of Ciprian
S. Auguſtin alſo commendeth vnto vs,De baptiſmo contra Donatiſt. li. 5. ca. 26. Vincient. Cō
                     mon. as a very good rule
and worthy to be followed. And Vincentius Lirinenſis in
his Commonitory, doth not more earneſtly indeuor any
thing then that without any addition, we kéepe ſincerely
that which is deliuered: yea it is his onely intent & purpoſe,
his whole drift & deſire, to teach vs to loue that firſt
was taught, and to eſchew al new additions. Therefore
howſoeuer religion at the firſt, was either at Rome or
elſe where truly eſtabliſhed, yet that is no good argument
to proue, that it ſhould ſo continue alwaies. Whereof if
we would make any doubt, let vs looke backe vnto the
Church amongſt the Iews, where God eſtabliſhed among
them for his ſeruice and worſhip, euery ceremony, ſo that
in euery thing they had plaine direction by Gods lawe,
how to behaue themſelues: yet notwithſtanding their
owne inuentions which they added therto were ſo many,

that Chriſt when he came complained:Math. 15. 6. 
                  That by their traditions,
they made Gods cōmandement of no authority. And
if this befell vnto the people of the Iewes, of whom God
made eſpeciall choice, and tooke them to be his peculier
people: why may it not befall vnto the Church of Rome
that is but one of the places among others, which God
had choſen to ſet his name in?Rom. 15. 
                        ••
                     . And if the goodnes which
the Apoſtle commendeth in them, was not in them ſuch
a continual or eternal inheritance, but that they haue
long ſince loſt the ſame, as themſelues cannot deny: how
wil they be able to proue, that they muſt haue ſincerity
of faith for an euerlaſting ſucceſſion? I wil not here ſtand
to examine what the Apoſtle meaneth by this word faith
in this place, although that perchance might ſerue to lay
their brags. For amongſt many ſignifications of this
word faith, there are two that may eſpecially ſerue for the
vnderſtanding of that place. Sometime faith ſignifieth
religion it ſelfe, or the rule of faith, as it is taken in this
queſtion, what faith or religion do you profeſſe or are you
of? And in this ſence it muſt be taken in this place to
pleaſure the papiſts. And in another ſence faith may here
ſignify their forwardnes, confidence & conſtancy in this
their religion: and ſo it ſemeth that the Apoſtle here doth
vnderſtand it▪ And then this is the ſence of theſe words:
It is ſpoken of in al the world, how readely you receiued,
& conſtantly continued in the faith. And thus doth Chriſoſtom
ſéeme to expound this place,Ad Romanos Serm. 2. when he ſaith that the
Apoſtle giueth thanks for their faith & confidence, as if he
would by the latter expounde the former, by confidence
teach what he meaneth by faith.Tho. Aquin. in Rom. lect. 5. And euen Tho. of Aquin
doth ſo take it: The Romans (ſaith he) are commended for
their faith, becauſe they yeelded to it ſo willingly, and
ſtood in it ſo ſtifly. And this place thus expounded, doth
not proue their faith to be Catholicke: for many are
conſtant that oppugne the Catholicke faith. Neither yet
will I oppoſe vnto this ſome other places, where the
Apoſtle may ſéeme perchaunce to giue as great, if not

greater commendation vnto other Churches; and yet
were not they therby aduanced to be the onely patterns
that all other ſhould follow, as they would haue this of
Rome to bée.1. Theſſ. 1. 7. 8. For the Apoſtle writing to the Theſſalonians,
teſtifieth of them, that they were an example or patern
not only to them of Macedonia & Achaia, but that their
faith was ſpred abroad in all the world. Is therfore the
faith of the Theſſaloniās at this day the true faith becauſe
it was ſo ſomtime? If you ſay it is not, what is ſaid here
more for the Church of Rome, then was ſaid for that of
Theſſalonica? Although therfore to their immortal praiſe,
this iuſt & due commendation belonged vnto them who
followed that ſincere faith and holy profeſſion, which at
that time was taught at Rome:
                  Devnit. eccle yet hée cannot as much
as ſéeme to be a Chriſtian (as Ciprian ſaith) who continueth
not in the trueth of that goſpell and faith▪ Whereby
it is euident, that vnleſſe the Church of Rome can ſhew,
that they hold that ſame faith now, that their predeceſſors
did whom S. Paul commended, this praiſe of thoſe
faithful Romans, belongeth no more vnto them, then this
promiſe that God made to Abraham,
                  Gen. 17. 7. That God would be
his God, and of his ſéed, pertaineth to Iſmael and Eſau who
although they came of Abraham as touching the fleſh, yet
were they and their poſterity a godleſſe and a graceleſſe
people. But that it may appere as cléere as the Sunne at
noone day, that vnder an honeſt cloke of ancient religion,
they ſéeke to couer their new found ſuperſtitions (and
whatſoeuer man hath deuiſed is but new) and vnder the
name of holy faith, they commend vnto vs, their groſſe Idolatries,
and moſt profaned blaſphemies: My purpoſe
is, (if God with his good grace ſhall aſſiſt me therein in
this ſhort treatiſe, briefly to ſet downe, both the ancient
religion of the Romans, which at that time was taught
and receiued in Rome, when this their faith was publiſhed
in the whole world: and alſo the faith or religion

that is now, ſo violently defended of the Church of Rome
and is (although vniuſtly) called, the Catholick Romiſh
religion: that we comparing the one of them with the
other, may ſée how vnlike they are, and that they cannot
flow both from one fountaine, or both of them be taught
of one ſpirit. And if we will know the auncient religion
of the Romans, and the faith wherevnto the Apoſtle giueth
ſo good a witneſſe, wee can haue no way more certaine,
then to trie what was taught in the Church of
Rome then. For that onely can be called that Roman
faith, that was then taught in that Church, and beleeued
of the faithfull there. All which with reuerence we
receiue, and moſt faithfully beléeue. But the additions
of later times, and that which ſince they haue foyſted
in vnder the name of that auncient Roman faith, wee
iuſtly reiect, as water mingled with the pure wine,
whereby the wine is corrupted, or as myre or filth that
hath ſullied the fined gold, whereby the excellencie of
the gold is blemiſhed, or as tares and wéeds ſowen in
the field where firſt good corne was ſowen, whereby the
growing of the good corne is hindered. But what ſo euer
the Apoſtle Saint Paule writing to the Romans, doth
teach them to beleeue, whatſoeuer faith he would haue
them to holde, that we acknowledge to bee in déede the
true Roman faith, in the which he is deſirous to confirme
and ſtrengthen them by ſome ſpeciall gift,Rom. 1. 11. 12. and to
haue mutuall conference with them, no doubt to incourage
them to continue conſtantly therein. Yea what ſoeuer
he teacheth in that Epiſtle, whether it bee to eſtabliſh
them in that they had learned, or to inſtruct them
more perfectly in any poynte whereof they were yet
ignorant, I ſay all that wee imbrace as the auncient
faith of the Romans. Moreouer whatſoeuer Saint Peter
who they ſay was Biſhop of Rome, and that hee
wrote his firſt Epiſtle from Rome (for rather then

Saint Peter ſhould not be proued to be at Rome, they are
content to cal Rome Babylon) whatſoeuer I ſay he wrot
in that Epiſtle, which they ſay that he wrote from Rome
we alſo moſt readily receiue as that old and authenticks
Roman religion, whereof we will make no doubt at all.
And further, whatſoeuer doctrine can be proued out of
Saint Markes Goſpell,De Rom. pont li. 2. cap. 2. which Maiſter Bellarmine goeth
about by teſtimony of ſundry auncient writers to ſhew,
that it was written at Rome, as he heard Saint Peter
preach the ſame, that alſo we will acknowledge to bee
the Roman faith, which is ſtill to be followed. So that
whatſoeuer eyther Saint Paule wrote to the Romans, or
Saint Peter being (ſay the papiſts) among the Romans,
wrote vnto the diſperſed Iewes, or Saint Marke at Rome
haue taught, and what ſoeuer is conſonant and conſenting
therewith, that is vndoubtedly receaued of
vs. But that which cannot be found agréeable to any of
theſe writings I truſt any indifferent reader wil think,
that we may iuſtly ſuſpect, as neither taught by thoſe
godly teachers, neither yet beléeued of thoſe famous
and faithful ſchollers, and therefore of none acknowledged
at that time for the faith of the Romans. And if then
it were not the faith of the Romans: what néed either the
Rhemiſtes in their edition of the teſtament,In Rom. 1. 8. or all the
reſt of them, ſo confidently to bragge, that the faith
of the Romans was ſo commended of the Apoſtle?
Muſt it needes follow that the Romiſh faith that now
is, is true, becauſe that was good and godly? Suſpend
thy iudgement (good Chriſtian Reader) and come not
with a preiudicate opinion. Trie and then truſt, proue
and examine whether we or the Romiſh Church, come
néerer to the auncient Roman faith, and bee bolde to
heare and followe them, that beleeue as thoſe firſt beleeuing
Romans were taught and veleeued. And who
ſo euer they bee that diſſente from that faith, or

ſwarue any thing from that religion, or ad any thing to
that doctrine, ſay not to ſuch, ſo much as God ſpéed▪ For
they are in déed heretiks and enemies to Gods truth,
they are the corrupters of his moſt ſacred word, they are
the verie botches and blanes of all Chriſtian Religion.
And that thou maiſt (good Chriſtian reader) more readily
ſée, and more eaſily iudge, both of that old Roman
faith, and this new Romiſh Religion, my meaning is ſo
to compare the one of them with the other, that at one
view, thou maiſt ſée them both. Wherein I dare promiſe
nothing, but ſincere dealing, both in ſetting down,
whatſoeuer Saint Paule, Saint Peter, or Saint Mark
haue taught vs, concerning ſuch points as are in queſtion:
and alſo in poynting vnto the doctrine of our aduerſaries,
I will not charge them with any thing vntruly,
I will not falſifie any of their writings, that the truth
may appeare, and God may haue the glorie. Let vs therfore
ſee firſt what was then, and what is now taught
there of the word of God.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  SAint Paule in that Epiſtle that he writeth
to the Romans teacheth,Gods word powerfull and neceſſarie for all. that The Goſpell
is the power of God vnto ſaluation, to euery
one that beleeueth.
                  Rom. 1. 16. By the Goſpell, he
meaneth that part of Gods word,Goſpell. that
preacheth vnto vs that ioyfull newes of
our attonement made with God, which elſwhere he calleth
the word of Reconciliation.
                  2. Cor. 5. 19. This word he ſaith is
The power of God:
                  The power of God. 
                  For the weapons of our warfare are
not carnall, but mighty through God, to caſt down holds,
caſting down the imaginations,
                  2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. 
                  and euery high thing that
is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt. Of

this powerfull word,Iere. 23. 29. GOD ſpake long before Saint
Paules time by his Prophet Ieremie. Is not my word
euen like a fire ſaith the Lord, and as a hammer that breaketh
the ſtone?
                  Hebr. 4. 12. Of the power of this word thapoſtle writeth,
that It is liuely, and mighty in operation, and ſharper
then any two edged ſword, and entreth through, euen
to the deuiding aſunder of the ſoule and the ſpirite, and of
the ioints, & the marrow, and is a diſcerner of the thoughts,
and intents of the heart.
                  Eſay 49. 2. Yea, Chriſt himſelf in the Prophet
Eſay is brought in confeſſing, that the Lord Hath
made his mouth like a ſharpe ſword. So that this word is
neither ſo blunt or dull, or ſo vnable to make the man
of GOD perfect to euery good work, as the aduerſaries
of the Goſpell would haue vs to imagine it to be. So
that in this place Saint Paul doth giue teſtimony,Iam. 1. 22. that
the word of God is as Saint Iames ſaith, able to ſaue
our ſoules:2. Timot. 3. 16. And profitable to teach, to reproue, to correct,
and to inſtruct in righteouſnes.
                  1. Pet. 1. 23. Saint Peter therfore doth
liken the word to a ſéed, and that to ſuch a ſéed, as doth
(if the fault be not in vs) ſpring and grow vnto eternall
life. For as the good ſéed, if it be caſt in a good ground,
and moiſtned in due ſeaſon with the dew of heauen, can
not but be fruitfull when the time ſhall ſerue: euen ſo
Gods word, if it ſound To him that is poore, and of a contrite
ſpirit,
                  Eſay 66. 2. 
                  and trembleth at his words, and be watered
by the graces of Gods holy ſpirit, it cannot, it will not
be vnfruitfull. Saint Mark alſo in that parable of the
ſeed that falleth vpon the good ground,Mark. 4. 8. 
                  and brought forth
fruit, ſome thirtie, ſome ſixtie, ſome a hundred fold: doth
ſufficiently teſtifie vnto vs of the efficacie of the word,
if by reaſon of the infirmitie of our fleſh, and corruption
of our ſinful nature, the edge therof be not rebated,
and the force hindered. Not becauſe I aſcribe ſuch force
either vnto the ſound, that we may heare, or the letters,
that we may read, but vnto the ſence and ſubſtance of

the word; vnto the leſſon that may be gathered out of the
ſame. Whereunto we ſée Saint Paule writing to the Romans,
and Saint Peter being at Rome (as our aduerſaries
affirme) and S. Marke alſo there according to the doctrine
of S. Peter as they tell vs, penning his goſpell, do giue this
effect that it is of power to ſaue, and the very ſéede of eternall
life. They find not therein any ſuch hardnes, as ſhould
driue men and women from the reading therof. They find
no ſuch dangers, they ſpy no ſuch perils. But on the contrary
it was holden for good doctrine at Rome,
                  1. Pet. 3. 15. when Saint
Peter did write (if from thence he wrote) Alwaies to be ready
with all meeknes and reuerence, to anſwere to euery body,
that ſhall aske a reaſon of that hope which is in you. And that
this is required of euery man & woman, that ſhould ſanctifie
the Lord God in their hearts, euen of ſeruants, and
not of maiſters onely, of wiues▪ and not of huſbands onely:
it is more plaine, then that it can be probably denied. Now
to yéeld a reaſon of thy faith, requireth much greter knowledge,
then to make confeſſion of thy faith. So that héere
the Apoſtle ſéemeth to require that of them, that S. Paule
doth aſſure himſelfe that he ſhal find in them, namely that
they are ſo filled with all knowledge,Rom. 15. 14. 
                  that they can admoniſh
one an other.
                  Philip. 1. 9. 10 Yea this knowledg is ſo neceſſary for all
Chriſtians that Saint Paule alwaies wiſheth it to be in
ſuch as he writeth vnto,Coloſſ. 1. 9. 10. and prayeth that they may haue
it. But ſéeing this hope that is in vs, is grounded vpon the
word (for otherwiſe it is but a foolſh fancy, and no ſound
hope) the knowledge whereby wee muſt be made able
to aunſwer of the ſame, muſt be the knowledge of Gods
worde. Yea whatſoeuer beſides that we doe know it may
perchaunce ſome way ſatiſfie our humour, and ſerue for
ſome turnes, but this one knowledge, is that onelie
that is neceſſary and without which we cannot but erre,
as Saint Marke himſelfe reporteth vnto vs that Chriſt
told the Iewes:
                  Marke. 12. 24. 
                  Doe you not erre, becauſe you know not
the Scriptures? So that we ſée, that the auncient doctrine

of the Church of Rome was this: That to knowe Gods
word is the meanes or power whereby God ſaueth vs,
and the ſéede of euerlaſting life. And therfore as the knowledge
thereof is comfortable and profitable, ſo to be ignorant
thereof, is very dangerous for any Chriſtian man
or woman.
               But the now Romiſh Church,Gods word reproched. doth not onely ſuffer without
any publike ſhewing of their miſlike, the ſacred Scriptures,
and Gods written worde, to be moſt reprochfully diſgraced,
and blaſphemouſly ſcorned at, by comparing it to a leaden
rule, a noſe of wax, Inkye diuinitie, and with ſuch like prophane
and godleſſe ſcornes: but alſo they teach, that that
word of trueth wherewith (Saint Iames ſaith) God hath begotten
vs,Iac. 1. 18. is doubtfull and may be wreſted any way: it is not
ſufficient to teach vs all trueth,Doubtful and not ſufficient. without the helpe of traditions:Ignoraunce mother of deuotion.
it is harde to be vnderſtoode, and therefore the people
muſt not reade it. And that it is beſt for the people to be ignorant
ſtill: for ignorance is the mother of deuotion. So
that we ſee the auncient Church of Rome commended vnto
vs Gods word as moſt neceſſary for Chriſtians: the now
Church of Rome condemneth the ſame, not as needleſſe onely,Dangerous.
but euen as hurtfull and dangerous. They hated ignorance
as a ſworne enemy to Chriſtianitie: theſe reuerence her, as
a fruitfull and the onely mother of popery. Therefore the
olde faith of the Romans, and the newe Romiſh religion are
in this nothing like.Gods word muſt haue power from man. And yet there is not any greater diſgrace,
that they can lay vpon this powerfull worde, then that which
blaſphemouſly they affirme, and prophanely maintaine,
that eùen this power of GOD, and immortall ſeede, hath
no power at all or authoritie,Eckius in enc
                        •
                     i. de auto Eccle. vnleſſe the Church authorize
the ſame. As though this power of God, that it may be
powerfull,Marke. 4▪ 3. muſt receiue power from man: and this ſeede,
that GOD that ſower went forth to ſowe, cannot growe,
vnleſſe man giue it increaſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  THere is alſo in theſe daies great queſtion what is
Gods word, that is to ſay, what that word is, that
ſhould be the rule of religion and conuerſation.What is Gods word.
For the which the old religion of Rome was this: That
in any wiſe they ſhould take héede of ſuch as make diuiſion,
and giue occaſion of euill contrarye to that doctrine
which they had learned.
                  Rome. 16. 17. And S. Paule prayeth that
they may be Confirmed according to his goſpel, and preaching
of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  25. As for other worde then that hee did
teach, or other goſpell then that he did preach, as he héere
teacheth the Romans,
                  Gal. 1. 
                        •
                     . that they ought not to beléeue, ſo he
flatly writeth to the Galathians, that If he or an Angell
from heauen, preach any other goſpell, they ſhoulde be ſo
farre from receiuing it, that they ſhoulde hold him accurſed
that bringeth it. And S. Peter commending the worde
whereby men (by their ſinfull nature mortall) are made
immortall, poynting vnto that word ſheweth what it is,
And this is (ſaith he) the word, which by the goſpell is preached
vnto you.
                  1. Pet. 1. 25. And in the end of this his firſt epiſtle he proteſteth.
This is the true grace of God wherein ye ſtand. That
is to ſay,1. Pet. 5. 12. this faith or religion that you haue béene taught,
this doctrine of the goſpell which you haue learned, is the
true faith, the true religion, a true doctrine. For ſo do Claudius
Guilliandus and Iac. Faber no enemies to popery expound
it. Then by the old faith of Rome we ſée, that that
which they then preached, and that which was agréeably to
that rule, is the truth: euen that which was then Depoſitum
committed or taught, not any thing that ſhould be afterward
committed to them or taught. And this is in trueth
that old worde of God, which was then acknowledged
for Gods word, and had not any beginning from later
times, this is in déed an auncient religion, Which was promiſed
before by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures.
                  Rom. 1. 2. But the
now Romiſh faith cannot abide this doctrine. And therfore
our new M. of Rome haue decreed, that al the books of the old

and new teſtament (as wel the Apocrypha as Canonical) and
alſo the traditions themſelues concerning faith or maners,
                  Apocrypha & traditions added to Gods word. 
                  ſhal
with like affection bee beleeued, and with like reuerence
receiued. Yea & they are not aſhamed to teach that theſe their
traditions are more neceſſary and profitable then Gods word.
We ſee then that the old religion of Rome, taught both by
Peter and Paule, is to reſt in that worde that then was taught
without adding thereto. The Romiſh religion that now is, doth
arrogate vnto themſelues alwaies to adde as they ſee cauſe,
which their additions are nothing elſe but an augmenting of
the heapes of their ſuperſtitions: whereas Auguſt. Hierom. &
others, appoint the liſtes and limites of Gods word, to be the
Law, the Prophets, the Euangeliſtes, and Apoſtles.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  THen let vs come to the queſtion of iuſtification,
which is ye very ſumme of true Chriſtian
diuinity. And it is the intent and purpoſe of
the Apoſtle in the Epiſtle to the Romans, moſt
exactly to teach the ſame. For when the good
ſéed of our frée iuſtification in and for Chriſt was ſowen in
the ground of their harts: then came the enuious man and
ſought to ſowe ſundry ſorts of bad wéeds there alſo. For
ſome there were that were altogether enemies to the goſpell
of Chriſt as were the obſtinate Iewes, who could not
abide to heare of this ſaluation by Chriſt. Others beléeued
in part the goſpell, but thought yet that the ceremonies
which God commanded (not knowing that they were appointed
but vntill the time of reformation ſhould come)
ſhould not be abrogated, and therefore would mingle the
Law with the goſpell. Who alſo looked to be iuſtified by the
Law and the works therof,Rom 10. 5. becauſe it was promiſed: Hee
that doth theſe things ſhall liue thereby. There were alſo a
third ſort perchance, namely ſuch as were conuerted from
Gentiliſme that being proud of that grace that was broght
vnto them, were not onely more ſecure of their own eſtate,

then was for their ſafety, but alſo deſpiſed the Iewes as a
people ſo reiected, as if God vnmindfull of his promiſe,
would neuer be reconciled to them again. Againſt al which
the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle teacheth,Iuſtification by faith without the works of the Law. that al people that beleeue,
of whatſoeuer cuntry or nation, are freely iuſtified by
faith in Chriſt. And firſt he proueth that neither Iew nor
gentile (vnder which two al are comprehended) can be iuſtifyed
by doing the works of the Law, becauſe none can
fulfil the Law, neither the gentiles by that light of nature,
the Law written in their heart, neither the Iewes by that
knowledge of the Law that they ſo much bragged of. And
this the Apoſtle performeth (as the diligent Reader may
obſerue) from the xvii.Rom. 3. 20. verſe of the firſt Chapter, vnto the
xxi. of the third chapter. So that he flatly concludeth. Therfore
by the works of the Law, ſhal no fleſh be iuſtified. Now
this place being ſo plaine as it is, againſt iuſtification by
works, the doctrine of merits is quite ouerthrown, if ſome
color be not deuiſed to auoid the force of this teſtimony.
The Romiſh Catholiks therfore indeuor as much as they
can to make vs beléeue that thoſe wordes muſt haue another
ſence and vnderſtanding, then we take them to haue:
but what ſence that is they are not yet reſolued.Bellarmin. de iuſtif. li. 1. c. 19. For
ſome ſay that the Apoſtle by the workes of the Law meaneth
the works of the Ceremonial Law, and in déed many
of the Papiſts do ſo expound it. But Maſter Bellarmine liketh
not of that anſwer, & confeſſeth in plain termes that
not onely the obſeruation of the Law of ceremonies, but
alſo the kéeping of the moral Law is excluded from iuſtification:
but yet he would haue vs to imagine, that onely
ſuch workes as are done before we beléeue,Concil. Trident. are denied to
iuſtifie vs.Seſſ. 6. As for the workes that we doe after, they doe
iuſtifie and merit as they teach vs.Againſt merit, And this their abſurd
opinion, procéedeth of their ignorance of the intent and
meaning of the Apoſtle in the Epiſtle to the Romans.
For Maſter Bellarmine in the place before alledged, doth
affirme, that the Apoſtle there, as alſo in his Epiſtle to the

                  Galathians, goeth about to proue that none can be ſaued
without faith, or without Gods mercy: which is in déed
the trueth, but it is not the whole trueth. For he is alſo
as carefull to take away the confidence that any had
or might haue in their owne workes. And becauſe he
writeth to them who had faith already (for, Their faith
was publiſhed throughout the worlde:)Rom. 1. 8. and teacheth vs
that all our reioycing,Rom. 3. 27. by this iuſtification by faith in
Chriſt is taken away (but where is merit, there is reioycing
in our ſelues) therfore it is plaine that the Apoſtle
excludeth here from iuſtifying al works. This alſo appeareth
by the ſetting down the true cauſe of iuſtification (By
faith) and remouing the wrong cauſe in ſo general termes:28.
(Without the works of the Law) & that alſo the Apoſtle doth
after in the example of Abraham. All which may teach vs,
that S. Paule héere indeuoreth, to take from all workes,
when ſoeuer we doe them, all hope of being ſaued thereby,
to the end that our pryde in our owne workes being
abated, and our boaſting taken away, He that reioyceth
may reioyce in the Lord. For this cauſe alſo the Apoſtle doth
afterwards ſo ſet workes and merit againſt grace, as if the
one of them doth quite ouerthrow the other:1. Cor. 1. 31. 
                  If by grace,
not now by workes, for then grace is no more grace: but if
it be of workes,
                  Rom. 11. 6. 
                  then is it now no grace, for then worke is no
worke. We ſée then, that S. Paule teaching that we cannot
be iuſtified by workes, to the end that our Ieſus may
be indeed a true, onely, and perfect Sauiour, and fully ſaue
vs from al our ſins, taketh away from all our doings the
hope of meriting and deſeruing the ſame. And to this end
the Apoſtle S. Peter alſo,1. Pet. 1. 3. in the beginning of his firſt Epiſtle
doth make mention of Gods aboundant mercy wherby
we are not onely begotten to a liuely hope, but alſo
Kept by the power of GOD through faith vnto ſaluation.
Therefore I ſay hee teacheth vs,5. that we obtaine this by
Gods greate goodneſſe, becauſe hee woulde not haue
vs any thing to truſt in our merites, but in that, God of all

grace, who will make vs perfect, (for our workes cannot
do that) that we may aſcribe,1. Pet. 5. 10. 
                  To him glory and dominion
for euer,
                  Obiect. (and not to our ſelues, or our goodnes.) But if
any man replie that this doctrine ſéemeth contrarie to
that which Saint Paule writeth to the Romans,
                  Rom. 3. 6. 
                  That God
will reward euery man according to his deedes: Or to that
Saint Mark reporteth that our Sauiour Chriſt promiſed,Mark. 9. 41.
                  That he, who in his name, gaue a cup of cold water to drink
to his ſeruants,
                  Solution. 
                  ſhould not leeſe his reward, thus I aunſwere:
God in mercie promiſeth reward to ſuch as do his
will, and in mercie he likewiſe performeth the ſame, not
waighing the work, but remembring his mercie. So
that herein wee may rather commend Gods faithfulneſſe,
in kéeping his promiſe alwaies: then eſtéeme of our
works. For who will think that a cup of cold water gyuing,
may be worthy of eternall life? And the words of
Saint Paule are plaine enough, if we wreſt them not out
of their naturall ſence. For we denie not that GOD rewardeth
men According to their workes. And the place
proueth not that GOD rewardeth them For their works,
and that ſence onely can eſtabliſh their doctrine of merites:
but thapoſtle ſaith there onely thus much, that
good workes ſhall haue a good reward of eternall lyfe,
glorie, honor, and peace: Euill workes their due reward
of wrath, indignation, tribulation, and anguiſh. So
that according to the qualitie of their workes, (the qualitie
I ſay, and not the merite) GOD in mercie, according
to his promiſe, ſhall giue honour and immortalitie
to them that ſéeke to ſerue him. This therefore ſtandeth
ſtill, the vndoubted old faith of the Romans, That
by the workes of the Law,
                  Rom. 3. 20. 
                  there ſhall no fleſh bee iuſtified
in Gods ſight.
                  Iames 2. 21. For howſoeuer Abraham was iuſtified
by workes (before men) as others alſo are Iuſtified,
that is declared and accompted before men iuſt,) by
workes, and not by Faith onely.
                  14. (For euen Saint Bede expoundeth
that place of Saint Iames, for the approuing of

                  Abrahams faith or making it to appeare) yet I ſay, Before
God, workes cannot iuſtifie. And this is the auncient
Roman faith, receiued alſo and taught of the auncient Fathers,In Rom. Ser. 7.
both writing of this Epiſtle to the Romns, and elſe
where. Chriſoſtome ſaith, that this righteouſnes is called
Gods righteouſnes, becauſe man cannot work it but
God only. And after, That the Sonne hath perfected it
wholie with his bloud.In Rom. Ser. 2. And in another place verie notablie:
For thou ſhalt not obtaine (this righteouſnes) by thy
trauels and labours, but thou muſt freely receiue that which
is from aboue of Gods free gift: bringing with thee of thine,
only this one thing, namely that thou beleeue. Then which
words, what can more plainly impugne the doctrine of our
aduerſaries, or ſhew what was the iudgement of this
auncient father concerning this point? But that conſent
and conſenancy which we find in many of the Fathers,Faith only. as
in Origen, Hierom, Ambroſe, Iſichius, Baſil, Athanaſius, Primaſius,
Hillary, Theodoret, Bernard, giuing that work to
Faith only, to ſaue or iuſtifie, may ſufficiently perſwade vs
how faſt they held this old Religion, or Romiſh faith, that
a man is iuſtified by faith without the works of the Law.
I may therfore I truſt with Cyprian conclude,Rom. 3. 28. that If Abraham
beleeued God, and it was accompted to him for righteouſnes:
                  Lib. Epist. 2.
                  Euery one alſo that beleeueth God,
                  Epist. 2. 
                  and liueth by
Faith, is found iuſt, and is declared to be alreadie made happy
and righteous in faithfull Abraham.
               
               
                  But the new Romiſh Religion is this,Works iuſtifie. That good works
do merite iuſtification and eternall life,Concil. Trid. ſeſs. 6. can. 26. 32. So that by their good
works they ſay they can ſatisfie for their ſinnes. And for this
cauſe when at ſhrift they haue confeſſed their faults, their
ghoſtly father (for ſo they terme him) will inioine ſome penance
vnto them, wherby they tell them that they may ſatiſfie
for their ſinnes, and make recompence to God for them.
For almes and faſting (ſaith one) doth eaſily carie men into
heauen.Ioh. Bethel. in rationa. diuin. cap. 65. And thus in this their new Religion they do not only
expreſly ſet themſelues againſt that old Roman faith, wherin

we are taught that good workes cannot iuſtifie before God, but
alſo blaſphemouſly they rob Chriſt of his office,Iohn. 1. 20. who is in truth
onely that Lambe of GOD that taketh away the ſinne of the
world:1. Iohn. 2. 2. and is the propitiation for the ſame.Heb. 10. 14. Who with one offering
(by offering himſelfe a Sacrifice for our ſins) hath made
perfect for euer them that are ſanctified.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  ANd as this ancient faith which was then ye faith
of the Romans when their faith was commended,The maner of iuſtifying by faith.
doth put vs paſt hope of béeing ſaued by
our workes:Rom. 3. 24. 25. ſait doth teach vs that this ſaluation
is without our merit fréely beſtowed vpon
vs that beléeue. Wee are (ſaith S. Paule) iuſtified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſus.
Whome GOD hath ſet forth to be a propitiation by faith in
his bloud, in declaring his righteouſneſſe, by the forgiuing of
ſinnes that are paſt, &c.
                   In which wordes wee ſee againe
that our iuſtification is free, therefore not for our workes,
but by grace. Wée ſée the meanes of this our ſaluation, euen
the redenption that is in Chriſt Ieſus. We are alſo taught
the meanes how it is applied to vs by faith: And that not
ſimply by faith, as if it were frée for vs to repoſe this our
faith and confidence, according to our owne fancy, vpon any
helpes that we can deuiſe, but by faith in his bloude. Then
alſo we learne héere what is this iuſtification, the forgiuenes
of ſinnes. But is Chriſt onely profitable to them that were
in his time, and to vs that haue béene or are ſince? Yes verily
He declareth his righteouſnes in forgiuing the ſins that are paſt,
ſuch as his choſen ſeruantes haue committed ſince the world
began, for ſo both S. Ambroſe, and their owne friend Tho. of
Aquin ſéeme to vnderſtand the ſins that are paſt. Which former
ſins or ſins that are paſt ſeing it is receiued by ſo generall
a conſent of the olde tranſlation,The Rhemiſts take from the word. and the interpreters, I
maruell that the Rhemiſts do leaue it out. If we had ſo done
we ſhould haue beene cryed out vpon, for falſifyers of the
worde of God, and deprauers of the ſame. I woulde alſo

aſke why in tranſlating into Engliſh, they would rather retaine
the Latin worde Gratis, then ſet downe the Engliſh
word Freely. What was the Engliſh ſo plain, that you could
not deuiſe any colour, that might ſeeme plauſible to your
fauorits, for the maintenance of your new hereſie? If you
thought ſo, why giue you not glory vnto God, confeſſing your
errour, that others might learne by you, not to be deceiued
any longer. If you ſaw not your miſliking why when you
ſhould tranſlate and make the worde plaine, doe you ſo hide
this light, vnder the cloſe buſhell of your wordes, vnknowen
to them that ſhoulde read your booke? For thus our newe
Maſters of Rheimes do tranſlate Iuſtified gratis by grace &

caet.
                  
                  Rom. 3. 24. what theſe mean by tranſlating thus let the world iudge.
But the ſumme of the auncient doctrine is this, that we are
iuſtified fréely without deſeruing euen by the forgiuenes of
our ſinnes through faith in Chriſt his bloud, which is gathered
not onely out of the words of S. Paule by me alledged, but
alſo through out all his Epiſtles. Which teſtimonyes I omit
becauſe that which is already ſaid is ſo plaine, and my eſpeciall
purpoſe is to ſhew what hath béene the auncient faith
of the Romans. As therefore we ſee what S. Paule taught
them, ſo let vs ſee if S. Peter in that his Epiſtle, which they
ſay he wrote from Rome, haue ſaid any thing for that point.
Hée ſaith That we are kept by faith vnto ſaluation. And that
The reward or end of our faith,
                  1. Pet. 1. 5. 
                  is the ſaluation of our ſoules.
And againe that Chriſt was ſhewed in theſe laſt times for your
ſakes (ſaith he) which by his meanes doe beleeue in God.
                  9. 20. 21. And
whoſoeuer ſhall mark, how the Apoſtle S. Peter in that firſt
Chapter, of his firſt Epiſtle, doth ſet forth the excellency of
our hope, and the redemption that we haue in Chriſt, which
is the end or reward (not of our workes) but of our faith, yea
how that Chriſt is ſhewed for vs that beléeue, and that the
Apoſtle in ſpeaking of our ſaluation doth not make our
workes any cauſe thereof, but on the contrary aſcribeth it
wholly to Gods mercy, euen to his abundant mercy apprehended
by faith: he muſt needs confeſſe that S. Peter hauing
ſo good occaſion to haue ſpoken of iuſtification by works & yet
not hauing once mentioned the ſame, had not any purpoſe

to deliuer that doctrine, that our own works may iuſtify vs.
               But our new Romiſh Rabbies that haue nothing to vant themſelues
of,Iuſtification taught by Chriſt and his Apoſtles hereſie. but the rotten ruines of auncient Rome, can abide
no doctrine worſe then this that wee are iuſtified by faith in
Chriſt his bloud. It is hereſie with them to ſay, that wee obtayne
forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes by faith in Chriſt. But to attribute
that which onely Chriſtes merites by his death and bloudſhedding,
and faith apprehendeth, to holy bread, holy water,
pardons,Popiſh iuſtifications. 
                  Agnus deis, bleſſed graynes, pilgrimages, monkes,
bookes and cowles, candels, croſſings, and ſuch like trifling
traſh is good deuotion, and ſound religion. That which they call
hereſie, we teach word for word, out of the auncient doctrine
of the Romans. But that which they would haue the people beleeue,
concerning theſe toyes, S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. Marke
his ſcholler, would haue been aſhamed to haue taugh it, to any
Chriſtians.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  SAint Paul hauing planted and proued this doctrine
of iuſtification by faith in Chriſt,This doctrine of iuſtification by faith in doctrine of liberty. as he
doth in the fourth chapter of this Epiſtle to the
Romans, and elſe where in many places: hee
then teacheth that in reſpect of this grace, we
ſhould be ſo far from being imboldened to ſin,
that on the contrary we are the more bound therby to holines
of life.Rom. 6. 2. 3. & caet. For whoſoeuer is dead to ſin, muſt not liue to ſin. But
we if we be not baptiſed into Chriſt, are dead to ſin: Therfore
ſuch as are baptiſed into Chriſt, may not liue to ſin or in ſin.
Yea it is good reaſon that the ſeruant obey his Maſter, but we
are Gods ſeruants by promiſe in baptiſme, therefore him we
muſt obey: then we cannot obey him, which God hateth, forbiddeth,
and puniſheth, but we muſt ſerue God our Maſter in
holines and righteouſnes. And whereas no man euer more
plainely taught, our frée iuſtification in Chriſt, without our
workes or merites, or any inherent righteouſneſſe, euen by
the forgiuenes of our ſinnes, then the Apoſtle S. Paul, both
in this epiſtle and elſe where: yet no man more earneſtly and

effectually then he, exhorteth to holines of life, good workes,
and all Chriſtian duties: ſinne and ſecurity haue not a ſharper
enemie then he is.1. Pet. 2. 24. S. Peter alſo teacheth vs that Chriſt
his Owne ſelfe, bare our ſinnes, in his body, vpon the tree.
Whereby he ſheweth the ſatiſfaction that he hath made, to
be the attonement betwéene God and vs: and that without
vs he hath done it, himſelfe I ſay in his owne body hath paid
that price, and taken away the condemnation due to the
ſinne that we haue committed. Hee hath done it vpon the
trée by his death and paſſion, purchaſing thereby eternall
redemption. What can the Apoſtle ſay more plainely, to
teach vs that the ſatiſfaction for al our ſinnes is alreadie perfected
ſo in and by Chriſt, that our owne workes can be nothing
auayleable to ſatiſfie for them, or that there is not
to that vſe any neede of them? What then? Séeing he beareth
our ſinnes ſhall we lay loade vpon him, and by our
ſinne and vngodly life, doe what wee can to make his
burthen heauier? No no, he hath done all this that wee
who (by this benefite of Chriſt) are dead to ſinne, ſhould
liue to righteouſneſſe. For if GOD bee our God, wee
muſt be his people: If hee bee our louing Father, hee looketh
that wee ſhoulde be his obedient children, If he bee
our gratious Lorde and Maſter, we muſt not be vngracious
but duetifull ſeruantes. For as God doth couenant
with vs to bee our God, ſo do we alſo by vowe and promiſe,
binde our ſelues vnto him to bée his ſeruantes. And this alſo
doth the Apoſtle Saint Peter teache vs, who in the firſt
Chapter hath plentifully ſet forth Gods greate merrie towardes
vs, euen in this queſtion of our free iuſtification,
as alſo in this place he hath done, and yet wil not in any wiſe
that any Chriſtian duties ſhould of vs be vnperformed, but
exhorteth vs to bee occupied in them as we may ſee. Chap.
4. 1. 2. 3. 4. and to accompt them as a debt that we owe vnto
God,Ephe. 2. 10. and muſt pay him. For we are Gods workmanſhip
created in Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes, which God hath before
ordained that we ſhould walke in them. Saint Marke reporteth
vnto vs that our Sauiour Chriſt preachd often
forgiuenes of ſinnes, as in his third, and fourth Chapters it

may appeare, which forgiuenes of ſin, doth quite ouerthrow
that inherent righteouſnes, and iuſtification by worke that
the papiſtes ſtriue to eſtabliſh. And yet the ſame S. Marke
doth regiſter and record, among many other godly exhortations,
that our Sauiour Chriſt made to his diſciples this neceſſary
caueat. Take heed watch and pray, for you know not
when the time is:
                  Marke. 13. 33. By all which this doth appeare, that ſanctification
and holines, muſt followe iuſtification and forgiuenes
of ſinne (for we are waſhed that we ſhould not againe
defile our ſelues with the filth of ſin) and that Gods
loue, doth more effectually tie vs to obey him, and to indeuour
our ſelues to doe his will. And looke howe much the
more we are inſtructed, and aſſuredly perſwaded of the free
loue of God, ſo much the more, will our inner man be inflamed
with loue to him againe. I ſay euen with ſuch loue,
as will thruſt vs forwardes to walke in good workes. And
this is notably proued by our Sauiour Chriſt who gathereth
that the ſinfull woman in S. Luke felt,Luc. 7. 47. 
                  That many ſinnes
were forgiuen her becauſe ſhe loued ſo much. And thus we ſée
that the auncient Roman faith was this, that ſuch as haue
receiued and felt Gods free grace in forgiuing their iniquities,
as in trueth they are,Detemp. ſer. 237. ſo in duety they muſt be alwaies
ready to ſerue him. So that I may boldly ſay with S. Auguſt.
It can hardly bée that he that beléeueth well ſhould liue euil.
               But our popiſh ſpiders out of this ſweete flower doe gather
their poyſon.Romiſh reproches againſt this true doctrine. They burthē this doctrine, which in expreſſe words
is taught by S. Paul, and the effects of it by S. Peter alſo (that
we are iuſtified by faith without the workes of the Law) with
this ſlaunder, that it is a doctrine of liberty, and occaſion of licentious
life, a hinderance to good workes. And thus this doctrine,
which they cannot confute with reaſon, they couer with
ſhame and reproches. And that which they cannot with all
their learning proue falſe:
                  Dialog. cum Tripho. by this ſhameles ſhift they ſeeke
to make odious. Far otherwiſe did the ancient fathers both ſpeak
& write.Act. 15. 9. li. 2. 
                  Iuſtinus Martyr lerned of the Apoſtle S. Peter to ſay that
faith profi
                     •
                  eth our hearts.Epiſt. 2. 
                  Ciprian ſaith to ceaſe from ſin,Aduerſ. Marce. onem. li. 4. that beginneth
of faith. Tertulian affirmeth that faith ſheweth vs the
way (whither?In pſal. 115. to licentious life? No, but) by which we muſt

come to God. Baſil aſcribeth vnto it, great force to allure, draw
and perſwade the mind,Constit. Mon
                        •
                     ſt. cap. 16. becauſe as in another place he telleth
vs, it ſtrengheneth the powers of the ſame, it obtayneth & getteth
indeuour in vs, and Gods helpe, which both are neceſſary
in al our works.Hereſi. 76. 
                  Epiphanius writeth that it preſerueth euery faithful
man,In Ioh. 6. he meaneth from euil no doubt. And Theophilact telleth
vs, that faith in Chriſt is truely a holy and perfect worke, and
doth ſanctifie or make holy him that hath it:In Ioh. 3. And on the other
ſide,Ti
                        •
                     . 1. 16. that ſuch as lead an vncleane life, are not truely faithfull,
who profeſſe that they know God, but in workes they deny him.
By all which it is plaine to ſee,Eph. 6. 16. that theſe holy fathers did thinke
that faith doth both quench all the firie dartes of the wicked,
and nouriſh or maintaine within vs, the good motions of the
ſpirit, and ſo is as it were the fountaine from whence doth ſpring
whatſoeuer good work we can performe. But the papiſtes would
beare the worde in hande, that the more wee teach them to
beleeue, the wider we open them a doore to ſinne. But woulde
you in deede finde out that doctrine, that doth let looſe the
raynes of lycentious life? and giueth liberty to doe what you
will? Looke then to our newe Romiſh religion that ſelleth ſinnes
for money, and pardons for faultes both paſt and to come alſo.
Faith (whereby wee apprehend this free iuſtification) is Gods
gift, and therefore not eaſie for vs to get, ſeeing wee cannot
haue it at all, vnleſſe hee will giue it, increaſe whereof the Apoſtles
themſelues craued of God, becauſe of themſelues they
coulde not get it. But as much mony as will buy a pardon is
not harde to come by. Eſpecially rich men might by their doctrine,
be bolde to ſinne, becauſe money woulde buy pardons
enowe. Nowe whether the auncient faith of the Romans,
or this new Romiſh religion, giue greater liberty to licentious
life, let the indifferent Reader iudge.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  BVT this our doctrine of iuſtification by faith in
our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, without the workes
of the Lawe, that it may both the better be vnderſtoode,
and more throughly be deliuered from

the vniuſt reproches of ſuch ſlaunderous ſpirits: It ſhall
not I ſuppoſe be amiſſe,What iuſtifying faith is. but verie neceſſary to declare, what
maner of perſuaſion this Faith is, by the doctrine of the
Apoſtles, if any thing may out of theſe their writinges,
which doe any way concerne the Romans) be brought to
teach vs the ſame. Firſt therefore this Faith is not only a
generall perſuaſion of Gods power, mercie, and ſuch other
things,A particular confidence. but euen a particular confidence and truſt, wherby
we do not onely giue our aſſent or conſent that GOD is
mighty and mercifull, but alſo we do with comfort applie
particularly vnto our ſelues, whatſoeuer greatnes and goodnes,
in generall perſuaſion we yéeld to be in God. And this
is plainly proued by thapoſtle vnto the Romans, ſetting forth
the faith of Abraham before our eyes, as a perfect patterne
of true faith, in that he beléeued not onely in generally, that
God could or would do ſuch a thing,Rom. 4. 18. 19. 20. but euen particularly,
that he would and could performe his promiſe that he made
vnto him concerning Iſaac, So ſhall thy ſeed be. And ſo it came
to paſſe, that neither he conſidered his owne bodie now dead,
when he was almoſt a hundred yeares old, neither yet the deadnes
of Saraes womb. But contrary to hope, beleeued in hope, that
he ſhould be the father of many nations. Now this conſtancie
of Faith cannot poſſibly be in any man or woman, vnleſſe
they haue (beſides a generall perſuaſion, and hiſtoricall aſſent
to this that they heare, that God is good) a particular application,
and an inward féeling, whereby they may ſay as
their old tranſlation bringeth in Iob,
                  Iob. 19. 7. ſaying: This hope is laid
vp within my breſt. Faith alſo muſt be, if it be true and ſuch
as is required, a conſtant confidence without doubting. Not
becauſe that we can héer attaine to that perfection, that our
faith ſhould haue no infirmitie, but that all weakneſſe in
faith, doth argue great want in the ſame. Such was that
Faith, that héer the Apoſtle commendeth vnto vs, in the
example of Araham.
                  Rom. 4. 21. For Abraham was Fully perſuaded, aſſured
or certified, that what GOD had promiſed, he was
able to performe. Now fully to be perſuaded of a thing,
and to doubt of it are contrarie. And Saint Peter willeth
vs, To truſt perfectly, in that grace that is brought vnto vs.
                  
wherby he doubtleſſe meaneth nothing els, then thapoſtle
S. Iames,
                  Iames 1. 6. when he oppoſeth Doubting or wauering, againſt
true faith: Let him aske in faith nothing doubting. But that
faith muſt haue theſe properties, that is, that it muſt be a
confidence and truſt, wherby aſſuredly and particularly, we
applie vnto our ſelues the comfort of Gods promiſes, or of
the examples of his mercie. Thapoſtle in this Chapter doth
farther teach vs,Rom. 4. 11. I meane Saint Paule, in the fourth to the
Romans,
                  A Seale. teaching circumciſion to be, A ſeale of the righteouſnes
of Faith. A ſeale is ſet to the writing, to take away all
occaſion of doubting from the ſame. So are the Sacraments
added to Gods promiſes (if it were poſſible) to make vs
without all wauering in Faith. And the writings whervnto
ſeales are affixed, contain for the moſt part, particular
benefits beſtowed vpon them, to whom they are made and
ſealed: Euen ſo the Sacraments, are to the godly aſſurances,
not onely that God loueth mankind, or Chriſt is a Sauiour,
that taketh away ſinnes, and maketh attonement
with God for them, but alſo that God loueth vs, and Chriſt
ſaueth vs: I ſay euery particular man and woman, if they
be faithfull, haue within them this faith. Which application
of this benefit of Chriſt to themſelues, and to their conſciences,
is beléeuing. And they that can attaine to this, haue
attained to Faith, and this their particular faith is ſealed vp
to them in the Sacraments. But an aſſent to the hiſtorie
hereof we may yéeld, without comfort or conſolation. For ſo
do the Diuels beléeue and tremble. Yea let vs ſée, what an
example of Faith,Iames 2. 19. thapoſtle in the viii. of this Epiſtle ſetteth
forth himſelf to haue, I warrant you we ſhall find it neither
mingled with doubtfulneſſe, nor reſting onely vpon Gods
generall promiſes: But in wonderfull aſſurance, he findeth
and confeſſeth in himſelfe, to his vnſpeakable comfort, Gods
great mercy in iuſtifying and ſauing him. For he is not only
aſſured,Rom. 8. 33. that none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods
choſen, becauſe God iuſtifieth, and none can condemne, becauſe
Chriſt died and roſe againe,34. and at Gods right hand
maketh interceſſion for vs,35. but alſo that nothing can ſeparate
vs from that loue wherwith God loueth. And this he

ſaith he is ſure of.38. This then is the auncient faith of the Romans,
                  Rom. 14. 5.
                  That euery one ſhould be fully perſwaded in their owne
mind, (for if in meates this perſwaſion muſt be, then much
more in the cauſe of our iuſtification) and Truſt perfectly
(without doubting) on Gods grace.
                  1. Pet. 1. 13.
               
               Yea the auncient Fathers, do not know any other faith for
a true faith, but onely this aſſurance and particular perſuaſion
of the heart.De Mortal. Ser. 
                  Ciprian calleth it A confidence of good things
to come,Baſil. de vera fide. Tom. 2. fol. 12. and proueth that it muſt ſo be. S. Baſil ſaith it is
An approbation of that which is ſaid, with aſſent, and without
wauering, with full aſſurance that it is true. Which confident
perſuaſion, is manifeſtly againſt popiſh doubting neyther
can it be without particular application of the promiſes to
our ſelues, which in their groſſe diuinitie they finde to
bee néedeleſſe.Jn Mat. Can. 5. 
                  Hilary will haue no doubt at all in our faith.
Neyther can a generall faith, without applying particularly
to vs Gods promiſes, make vs abſtaine from euill and
doe that is good,Ope. Imper. Ho. 39. which Chryſoſtome ſaith is the worke of
faith. And this doth S. Ambroſe plainely teach by the ſimilitude
of a phiſition who although bee promiſe to heale all,In cap. 2. 1. Tim
yet they that will haue helpe, muſt ſeeke to the phiſition. And
why? Is it not euery one that ſtandeth in neede may haue
the medicine applyed? yes verily. For it will not otherwiſe
doe them any good. Now ſaith he, faith giueth vs this (ſpirituall)
health, which vnleſſe the minde receiue withall the
heart, it doth no good but rather hurt. As therefore it doth
no good to a diſeaſed body to know that he may haue helpe,
vnleſſe the phyſicke be miniſtred to him: euen ſo in theſe
ſickneſſes of our ſoule, the aſſaultes of ſinne, without this
particular applicution there can be no helpe. Let therefore
Maſter Bellarmine tel vs if he will,Bellarm. de Iuſtif. li. 1. cap. 4. that his fellow Catholickes
of the Romiſh ſtamp, do hold it rather a preſumption
then faith, To be aſſured of the promiſe of ſpeciall grace or
mercy: yet will we rather holde faſt that auncient faith
of Rome, approued alſo by ſundry fathers, then wander
with them, in their wauering opinion, and deſperate
doctrine.
               But our new Romiſh teachers can abide nothing leſſe then that

we ſhould teach men to aſſure themſelues by faith of their ſaluation.Bellar. de iuſtif. li. 1. ca. 6. 7.
And therefore they teach this faith to be but an aſſent,Aſſent or generall knowledge.
not a confidence, and that it may be a generall knowledge not
a particular and vndoubted perſuaſion, or truſt, that we are
iuſtifyed by Chriſt. They take for a patterne of their faith,
that faith that the diuels haue,Iac. 2. 15. as before out of Saint Iames I
taught that they beleeue, yea feare and tremble. And while
they make faith to be but a bare aſſent, they thinke it an eaſy
matter to beleeue (for in deed the moſt wicked may haue ſuch
a fayth:)What faith we ſay iuſtifieth. by this meanes it commeth to paſſe, that they ſpeake
euill of our doctrine which they knowe not. For wee doe not
teach that popiſh faith doth iuſtify, which is but an hiſtoricall
aſſent, to thoſe thinges that are ſpoken of GOD: but we ſay
that that aſſured perſuaſion which Sainte Paul commendeth
in Abraham,
                  Rom. 4. and whereof himſelfe reioyceth:Rom. 8. And whereby
we are kept by the power of GOD vnto ſaluation:1. Pet. 1. 5. wee
teach that that doth not onely iuſtifie vs before God, becauſe it
apprehendeth and taketh holde of him, by and in whom onely,
wee are accompted righteouſſe in Gods ſight: but God by
it doth alſo purifie our heartes. Becauſe it cannot be but that
wee will haue a delight in Gods commaundementes, if once
this aſſured and vndoubted perſuaſion of Gods eternall goodneſſe
towardes vs, be planted in our heartes. Although therefore
we ſtill teach conſtantlie with our Sauiour Chriſt, & his
Apoſtles, that fayth without workes doth iuſtifie, ſpeaking of
a true fayth, and an aſſured confidence, which was the olde
Roman fayth: yet we wil alſo ſay with the new Romaniſtes, that
the fayth of the nowe Church of Rome, or that fayth which
the diuels may haue cannot iuſtifye.Romiſh ſaith iuſtifieth not. But this doth nothing hinder
our cauſe, for wee accompt not that baſtard Roman faith,
worthy the name of faith. So that in this latter aſſertion wee
yeelde to them. And in the former, wherein we affirme that
faith, as it is an aſſured confidence, taking holde of Gods mercy
in Chriſt doth iuſtifie, I would they alſo woulde yeelde vnto
the trueth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  WEe haue ſéene then the moſt auncient doctrine
of iuſtification by faith (grounded vpon the
firſt promiſe of the womans ſeede, that ſhoulde
breake the head of the ſerpent) taught by the
Apoſtles:Gen. 3. 15. who yet ment not thereby, to open a
gap to licentious life, becauſe they ſpeak not there of a deueliſh
faith, a popiſh faith, a dead faith, that may be fruitleſſe,
but of ſuch a perſuaſion, and ſo aſſured a confidence, ſetled in
the heart of the faithfull, as will not ſuffer them to be idle,
or vnoccupied in godly workes as occaſion ſhall bee offered.
And if wee looke further into the doctrine taught by the
Apoſtles, we ſhall alſo learne out of it, not onely that it
is neceſſary to doe good works, but alſo howe, and to what
ende wee ſhoulde doe them.How and why good workes muſt be done. For if our affection in doing
them be not ſincere, if our direction and rule be not Gods holy
word, if our intention and ende be not Gods glory, and
the performance of our dutifull obedience, vnto our Lord
and Lawgiuer: whatſoeuer our worke be called in name,
or ſeeme in ſhew, it is not in deede a good worke. Firſt
therefore for our affection, not onely our Sauiour Chriſt
who is a heauenly and true teacher of all trueth,Math. 7. 17. telleth vs,
that the trée of our heart cannot bring forth good fruite,Luke. 6. 43. 44. vnleſſe
it (I meane the tree) be good it ſelfe: but alſo S. Paul teacheth
vs that the fleſh, that is that part of man that is not
regenerate, ſtriueth againſt the ſpirit, whereby he is
brought to that, that, Hee doth not the good thing which hee
woulde,
                  Rom. 7. 19. 23. 
                  but the euill which he would not. And that through
The rebelling Lawe in his members, rebelling (I ſay) againſt
the lawe of his mind, and leading him captiue vnto the Lawe
of ſinne, which is in his members. Nowe if we marke
why the Apoſtle maketh this complaint, and addeth that grieuous
and pitifull exclamation O wretched man that I am
we muſt confeſſe, that he was forced thereto, becauſe that Although
he woulde doe good,
                  24. 21. 22. 
                  and had delight in the Lawe of
God concerning the inner man: yet his rebellious fleſhe did
                  
trouble and moleſt him ſo,28. that he could not ſo freely, ſo holily
and ſincerely,Rom. 6. ſerue God as he ſhoulde haue done. And
that is it that in the ſixt chapter he perſwadeth vs, that we
ought not to ſinne, becauſe we are dead to ſinne, ſo that we
ſhould not any more haue to doe therewith, but ſhould haue
our affections freed from the ſame,Rom. 12. 1. and wholly bent to ſerue
God in holines. And for this cauſe afterwardes, when he beginneth
to come to exhortations, he layeth this as the ground
and foundation of al, That we muſt offer vp our ſelues euen
our owne bodies a ſacrifice to God. For if we beginne not
with our ſelues, euen with our owne affections, to haue
them ſanctified, whatſoeuer we doe cannot bee holy. And
therefore S. Peter alſo who plentifully exhorteth to the performance
of Chriſtian dueties, yet telleth vs before, that
we are elect vnto Sanctification.
                  1. Pet. 1. 2. For heereby our affections
are reformed, that in doing of al our works, we may do them
with a good heart. And afterward (he ſaith) Seeing your hearts
are purified in obeying the trueth through the ſpirite, to loue
brotherly without fayning,
                  22. 
                  loue one another with a pure heart
feruently. In which wordes we cannot but ſee, how ſincere
an effection the Apoſtle requireth, in performance of this dutie
of loue, which muſt alſo bee a patterne for vs to doe all
good workes by,Auguſt. in pſal. 77. enarrat. for thy heart not béeing ſincere, thy workes
are not pure, though they ſeeme good. As for the ſecond point.
which is, that our workes, if we will that God ſhoulde accompt
them good, ſhould be commaunded in Gods word, and
agréeable to his will: it may appeare to be the auncient faith
of the faithfull Romans, becauſe S. Paul teaching them to
doe good workes, ſeemeth to require nothing of them but loue,
which he ſaith is the fulfilling of the Law: ſo that he would
haue vs occupied in performing of loue to God,Rom. 13. 8. and loue to
man, which God in the ten commandements requireth of vs,
and then we ſhall not faile but doe good works. But this yet
he teacheth more plainely,Rom. 14. 23. in the ſhutting vp of that notable
diſcourſe,Degrat & libero Arbit. li. 5. ca. 10. in the fourtéenth Chapter. Whatſoeuer is not of
faith is ſinne. In which place Maſter Bellarmine wil haue vs
by faith to vnderſtand knowledge, as alſo the Rhemiſtes teach
vs, or perſuaſion of conſcience, that the thing which we

doe is good and lawfull. But whatſoeuer we doe, for the
which we finde not our direction in Gods word, what perſuaſion
can we finde for the ſame in our conſcience, that God
ſhall recken it among good workes? Or rather why ſhoulde
we not alwaies feare, leaſt God for ſuch workes of ours
ſhould ſay, Who hath required theſe thinges of your handes?
in which reſpect al the fathers in our good workes require faith.
                  Eſa. 1. 12.
And is not I pray you our good worke a flower of ſweete
ſauour, and a fruite of pleaſant taſte vnto the Lorde?
All men wil confeſſe it is ſo.1. Pet. 1. 23. From what roote then muſt it
come?1. Pet. 2. 2. doubtleſſe from no other, but from that immortall
ſeede that Saint Peter ſpeaketh of, The worde of God,
Whereby hee woulde alſo haue vs to growe.
                  Regulae breu. interrogat. 119 And if S. Baſil
(concerning the precepts of their monkiſh life) doth think
they muſt not be left vndone to take other workes in hand,
and that ſpecially becauſe that euery one knoweth not
what is conuenient for them to doe, but may as well
chooſe that may be to his hurt and hinderance, as to his helpe
and furtherance: then how much more ſhould Gods lawes be
in ſuch accompt among vs (who are by our profeſſion regular,
hauing an expreſſe commaundement to doe that onely
which God commaundeth) that we would not for any thing
adde vnto the ſame our owne inuentions, or mingle with
the ſame our owne traditions? And if we ſuppoſe that one
man may better ſee how to ſet downe rules of life then another:
how is it that we are ſo be ſotted, that wee giue not
that glory to God, that he knoweth better (I ſay not then
any, but) then all men, what workes they are that pleaſe
him beſt? Or if we confeſſe him to haue that wiſedom, why
doe we not follow then this his direction, why do we not ſtudie
to keepe his commaundementes? why doe wee weary
our ſelues in our owne waies, and waſt our time in doing
our owne workes? Thirdly in euery good worke, God alſo
conſidereth to what ende it was done. And principally
we muſt reſpect Gods glorie. Whether ye eate or drinke,
or whatſoeuer ye doe,
                  1. Cor. 10. 3
                        •
                     . 
                  doe all to the glorie of GOD. And
therefore Saint Paule findeth greate fault with the Romans,
or rather writing to the Romans that neyther the

Gentiles when they knewe God;Rom. 1. 21. did glorifie him as God,
and the Iewes by their ſinnes diſhonored the name of God.Rom. 2. 23.
And for that cauſe giuing to the Romans a caueat,Rom. 16. 17. 18. he willeth
them to take heede of ſuch as made deuiſion. And
why? For they ſerue not the Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, but their
owne bellies. They ſeeke not to glorifie the Lorde,
but to pamper themſelues.Rom. 16. 17. Yea both Saint Paul and S.
Peter alſo,1. Pet. 5. 11. teach vs this leſſon by their owne example, giuing
to him prayſe, glory and dominion. And this glorifying
of GOD is eſpecially performed, by conſecrating
vnto him, the good grape of our holy obedience: Euen by
letting our light ſo ſhine before men,
                  Math. 5. 16. 
                  that they may ſee our good
workes, and glorifie our Father which is in heauen. Thus
then we ſee that the auncient religion teacheth vs, that no
good worke can procéede from vs, vnleſſe the ſpring of our
heart firſt be purged from the filth of ſinne, leaſt our affections
by that corruption, ſhoulde be mingled (like muddie
water) with ſinfull cogitations, and withdrawen from
ſinceritie in our action. Then alſo that ſuch onely are in
déede good workes,In Pſal. 118. Concione. 12. for doing whereof we haue warrant in
Gods worde. Laſtly that in the ſaid worke, eſpecially we
muſt ſeeke Gods glory, by ſeruing him in duetifull obedience,
for that the worke muſt be conſidered according to the ende
whereunto it is directed, and which we reſpected in doing
the worke Auguſtine teacheth. And if any of theſe be wanting,
either a ſincere heart, which cannot be without faith, a direction
out of the word, or a godly ende, the worke is not
good whoſoeuer worketh it, or whatſoeuer ſhew of goodnes
it ſeemeth to haue in the eies of men. As on the contrary,
that which we doe according to Gods worde, with a ſincere
heart deſiring to walk on forward in all holy obedience, that
is in déede a good worke.
               But it is almoſt a common receiued opinion of our new Romiſh
Catholicks,Popiſh good workes. that the good intent maketh a good work: Inſomuch
as many think it muſt needs be a good worke, that a man or woman
doth with a good purpoſe. Neither yet do they meaſure
this their intent or purpoſe, with the true line of Gods worde,
but with the falſe meaſure of their owne imaginations. And

heereby it commeth to paſſe, that the outward appearance of a
good worke, is taken of many to be an action acceptable to
God, although it be not either directed to the right end, or
commaunded in Gods word, or done by him that hath the ſpirit
of regeneration. And this maketh them ſo groſly to teach concerning
good workes, becauſe they would for the better credit
of their workes, commend the actions, not only of the wicked,
but of the Infidels alſo, that neuer knew God, as if they might
be perfect and void of ſinne. which is a thing as abſurde, to him
that by the light of Gods ſpirit, doth walk in the pathes of Gods
word, as if they would affirme, that a wild vyne whileſt it remayneth
wild, might bring forth a kindly grape, a crab tree a
good apple,Workes not commaunded of God. or from a foule and corrupt puddle, might ſpring
ſweet and wholſome waters. As for Gods Law, becauſe the
waies therof are not roomy enough, for ſuch reelers and rouers
to run in, who according to their owne fooliſh phanſies, are alwaies
hatching ſome new deuotions, as not only the infinite
ſwarues of their Religious orders (as they falſly call thoſe irreligious
companies) but alſo their innumerable toyes and ſuperſtitions,
whereby they would beare the world in hand, that they
pleaſe GOD, and deſerue his fauour doe plainley prooue:
they therefore now in the new Romiſh Religion commaund
vnto vs many things, whereof in the Scripture they can find
no one commaundment, no one example. They quite forget
the ſtraight charge that GOD layeth vpon his people,Deut. 12. 8. when
he telleth them, that They muſt not doe vvhat ſeemeth good in
their owne eyes,
                  32. 
                  and concerning Gods Law: That they muſt ad
nothing therto, nor take any thing therfrom. But that they may
ſeem to be full fraught with good workes, they eſteeme euerie
thing wherein they tye themſelues to any ſtrait rule, (although
with neglect manie times of ſundrie Chriſtians dueties)
or beſtow their goodes (for the moſt part verie ſuperſtitiouſly)
or make any ſhewe of Religion, glorious in the
eyes of the world, this I ſay and ſuch like deuiſes they accompt
for good workes. And what ſhould I ſpeake of the
end where vnto they haue eſpeciall regard in doing of theſe
good workes?The end of Popiſh works. Let the practiſe of the Church of Rome at this
daie, whereſoeuer her deceites are not yet knowen, or her

blaſphemies abhorred, let their owne conſciences I ſay teſtifie
heerein, what they think, what their Prieſts do teach them. Do
they not inioine them penance to ſatisfie for their ſinnes? do
they not teach therby to merite eternall life? Yea, what do the
moſt deuout of them, all their life long, but toyle themſelues,
to kindle to themſelues a fire,Eſay 50. 11. in the ſparkes whereof they alſo
walk for a time, who yet ſhall in the end lie downe in ſorrow.
That is, they ſeek by their owne workes, to make for themſelues
peace with God, and procure an attonement with him. But
when God ſhall ryſe vp, and lay open to their owne conſciences
their fooliſh waies that they haue found out, then ſhall their
owne wickednes correct them,Ier. 2. 19. and their turnings back reproue
them: Yea their plague ſhall be, the fruit of their owne imaginations,Ier. 6. 19.
becauſe they haue not taken heed (ſaith the Lord) vnto
my words, nor to my Law, but caſt it off. And becauſe they are
not perſuaded that euer they can be ſo ſure of heauen (now
when they are once brought to think that by worke, they muſt
get it) they buy Maſſes and trentals,Buying of helps for ſin. both quick and dead, they
build places wherein they may alvaies be prayed for (that by
that work they may be holpen to Heauen.) They hire Priſtes
and Friers to ſing and ſay for them. They ſpare no coſt, they refuſe
no trauell. They impoueriſh themſelues and their poſteritie,
to purchaſe (if by any meanes they may) pardon for their offences:
according to that good Fryer-like and Catholike verſe.
               
                  Veſtris noſtra damus, pro noſtris veſtra roga
                        •
                     us.
               
               
                  Part of our prayers your friends ſhall haue,
                  Your goods for recompence we craue.
               
               But in the mean time, while Chriſtians are ſo buſied (as themſelues
imagine) to ſaue their ſoules by workes, where is there
any time or ſpace to think of Gods glorie,The true end of good works not regarded. or of our owne dutie
and performing of our humble obedience? We ſee then how
the Romiſh Catholikes doe all that they doe, not in reſpect of
dutie, but for reward: not for loue, but for payment. And therfore
with them no wages, no work, no pennie, no pater noſter.
Whereas on the contrarie, we are ſo far from denying that it is
neceſſarie for Chriſtians to do good workes, that we rather
affirme that they are not a good tree, that in due ſeaſon will not
bring forth good workes. But theſe our workes muſt be directed

to Gods glory, and muſt proceede from an earneſt loue that
we haue to be occupied in doing of his will and keeping of his
commaundementes: In ſo much as though there were no promiſe
of reward, no hope of recompence, yet becauſe God hath
ſhewed his mercy,Luk. 1. 74. 75. That we being deliuered out of the handes
of our enemies, might ſerue him without feare, in holines and
righteouſnes all the daies of our life, and hath commaunded
vs to doe good workes, wee will therefore earneſtly indeuour
to doe them.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  NOw ſéeing our works muſt be ſuch as I haue
in the former Chapter declared, that firſt it
ſelfe muſt be commaunded of God, then it
muſt ſpring from a fountaine by faith ſantefied,
that it may be done ſincerely, Laſtly it
muſt be done to ſuch end onely as ſhall tend to
Gods glory, and the diſcharge eyther of our generall duetie
of Chriſtianity, or the performing of our particular callings▪
ſeing I ſay that if in any of all theſe thinges there be imperfection
the worke cannot be called good: it is very neceſſary
to examine, whether ſuch workes as we doe, may
haue in them any ſuch perfection,Whether our works can be perfect. that they may in déede bee
perfectly good, and in all thinges agréeable to the rule before
ſet downe. For if it be not perfect it cannot merit. And if
it might be that we could doe ſome perfect workes, yet conſidering
the multitude of our ſinnes, we were worſe then mad
if we would imagine, that a few good workes could make
ſatiſfaction vnto God, for our infinite tranſgreſſions. But
to put this matter out of doubte it is moſt certaine that
there cannot be perfection in any thing that wee can doe,
ſo long as we haue this ſinnefull bodie. For although
we may attaine to the firſt of theſe three poyntes, and
may indeuour and earneſtly labour, to walke in thoſe
good workes,Epheſ. 2. 10. 
                  Which GOD hath ordayned before that we
ſhoulde walke in them: Yet in the other two properties
of a good woorks if wee bee not partiall in our owne

iudgement, and blinde in our owne wayes, we muſt confeſſe
our ſelues to be far ſhort of that which God requireth of
vs. And therfore S. Paule deſcribeth the true happineſſe
of a Chriſtian, to conſiſt (not in the perfection of our owne
workes or that nowe being ſtirred vppe and holpen by
Gods grace, wee are able to fulfill the Lawe, or doe
ſuch thinges, as ſhall be founde righteous and perfect in
Gods ſight) but in the forgiueneſſe of our iniquities,Rom. 4. 7. 8.
the couering of our ſinnes, the not imputing vnto vs our
tranſgreſſions. For out of the Prophet Dauid hee telleth vs
that ſuch are bleſſed men. Yea our Sauiour Chriſt him
ſelfe when hee will haue vs to looke vnto our true happineſſe,
if wee will beleeue him that was (ſay they) S.
Peters ſcholler ſpeaketh of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes.Mar. 2. 5. 3. 18. And on
the other ſide when he will threaten wrath,Mar. 3. 29. hee ſaith ſins
ſhall not be forgiuen. But perchaunce they will tell vs that
in our firſt iuſtification, we muſt haue this forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes, but afterwardes once being freed by grace,
we can our ſelues auoyde the deceites of ſinne, and doe ſuch
thinges as God muſt accompt meritorious, and therefore
perfect. But Saint Paule a man no doubt regenerate and
as perfect a man (I ſuppoſe all will confeſſe) as euer was
ſince, did finde and feele that there was a Lawe in his
members, rebelling againſt the Lawe of his minde, and
leading him captiue to the Lawe of ſinne,
                  Rom. 7. 23. 
                  that was in his
members, yea and that he felt this, not onely when hee
was careleſſe of his ſaluation, or neglected his wayes,
but euen when hee indeuoured to ſerue GOD, and
woulde faine haue done good,22. 
                  Euen when hee had delight
in the Lawe of GOD, concerning the inwarde man.
Which doth ſufficientlie proue vnto vs, that the fountaine
of our hearte, is ſo troubled with theſe fowle affections,
that it is impoſſible, that any cleare
                     •
                   water ſhould
come from thence. And for proofe héereof, let vs looke vpon
ſome good worke, and with indifferent iudgement
let vs trie,Our prayers not perfect. whether as it commeth from vs, it can be perfect
or not. And what better worke can we finde then
prayer, which is that ſweet ſacrifice of perfume that God

delighteth in? If any man will ſay that he can offer vp vnto
GOD his ſacrifice, without any wante or imperfection,
he proclaimeth thereby vnto the worlde, that hee
knoweth not what it is to pray, or hath no feeling of his
owne weakenes. I ſpeake not heere of popiſh prayers,
which are full of horrible blaſphemies,Popiſh praiers both in reſpect of
him to whome they pray, and of the mediatours by whome
they ſeeke to obtaine, and of the merite, which they looke
for, becauſe they haue numbred vp a certaine number of
prayers. Let the Church of Rome affoorde vs but one
man, that iuſtly and truely can ſay, that he can at any
time, with ſincere heart, and vnpolluted lippes, ſo earneſtly
and confidently as God requireth, being lifted vp
from earth and earthly cogitations, talke with God and
ſue vnto him for neceſſarie graces, onely or eſpecially reſpecting
Gods glorie, without wauering in fayth, or
wandering in affections, or forgetting that hee is talking
with GOD: and then we will yeelde that our works
there may be perfection: But if in ſo holy a worke, wherunto
our owne wantes may ſtirre vp vs to be the more
ſincere, yet wee ſhall alwaies finde imperfection, how
then can our other workes be voyde of ſinne? But if any
man in his exceſſe of folly, and depth of ignoraunce, eyther
of that he can doe, or of that he ſhoulde doe, woulde
make the worlde beleeue, that he is able to offer vnto
GOD the ſacrifice of prayer, without faulte or blemiſh;
his owne thoughtes will teſtifie againſt him, his
knowledge will accuſe him, and his conſcience will condemne
him, that hee deceaueth himſelfe, and that there
is no trueth in him. For this is the perfection which we
can looke for, and which Saint Paule deſireth to bring the
Romans vnto, not that they ſhoulde haue no ſinne, for that
he knewe was impoſſible,Rom. 6. 12. but that they ſhould not let ſinne
raigne in this their mortall body, that they ſhoulde thereunto
obey by the luſtes of it. And that our prayer cannot
be altogether voyde of wantes,Rom. 8. 26. what can be more playne
to proue, then that which S. Paule himſelfe teacheth the
Romans, that Wee knowe not what to deſire as we ought.
                  
For how can wee performe that perfectly, which thing we
knowe not howe to doe as we ought? The ſpirit (of GOD)
ſendeth vp (I confeſſe in deed) requeſts for vs (that is maketh vs
to requeſt) with groninges vnſpeakable. But what is that
to vs,Bad tooles. and to our nature, to the perfection of our worke.
We are like bad tooles in a good hand (I ſpeake of the regenerate.)
The toole being ſharpened by the workeman hath
an edge, and can cut. So we when God hath reformed our
will by the ſpirit of regeneration, haue a readines or deſire
to doe good. But this edge if it méete with any thing that
is harde as iron or ſtone, is broken and made blunt or
dull. So is this our willingneſſe or readineſſe taken away
when our carnall affections and deſires, doe oppoſe
themſelues. So that although Gods ſpirite, that worketh
in vs and by vs is holye, yet becauſe it worketh by
ſuch euill inſtrumentes as we are, looke howe much wee
want of the perfection of our regeneration (which heere
cannot be perfected, for whileſt heere we liue we are but
children) and are not come to our perfect groweth, ſo much
muſt needes our worke want, of the cleare light of the
minde to direct it, or of the ſincere obedience of the heart
to performe. And becauſe the Apoſtle 
                     •
                  newe thus much,
therefore that wee ſhoulde not be altogether diſcouraged,
in reſpect of the imperfection of our actions, or the corruption
of our nature,Rom. 8. 2. he telleth vs that The lawe of the ſpirit of
life in Chriſt Ieſus, (marke that this Law of the ſpirit of life is
in Chriſt, not inherent in vs) hath freed vs from the Lawe
of ſinne and death. So that we haue no other remedie for
our wantes and imperfections, then that that holines which
is in Chriſt,Imputation of Chriſts holyneſſe. ſhoulde by imputation become ours. By the
which in the ende, that ſanctification which by the ſpirit is
heere begotten in vs, ſhall be alſo fulfilled in vs, as is promiſed
afterwards.Rom. 8. 4. For that righteouſnes of the Law that
there is ſpoken of, that it is not, or cannot be fulfilled of vs
ſo long as we cary about vs this body ſubiect to ſinne and
correuption, experience teacheth, and I thinke the papiſts
themſelues that haue any ſhame will not deny. For
ſo long as we haue any luſt or concupiſcence, which ſo long

as we liue we ſhall haue; Admit that luſt were not ſinne, as
the patrons of luſt the papiſtes woulde haue vs to beléeue,
and falſly teach, yet whileſt that remaineth, no body
can ſay that the very righteouſnes of the Law or whatſoeuer
the Lawe required is fulfilled of vs. For euen themſelues
confeſſe that luſt is aſwaruing from the Lawe, and is not
according to the direction thereof. Whereby it appeareth
that theſe wordes of righteouſnes of the Lawe that muſt
be fulfilled in vs are to be vnderſtoode of that that ſhall be
performed in vs héereafter, and not of that righteouſneſſe
that we can now attaine vnto. I cannot therefore but maruell
at our Rhemiſtes, that by theſe wordes woulde prooue,
that we may fulfill the Law. For beſides that which I haue
ſaid that it muſt be vnderſtood of the perfection which we
ſhall haue: the wordes themſelues alſo teach vs, that this is
done not by vs (for we cannot attaine to that holines) but in
vs: now if Chriſt in vs fulfill the Lawe, it is not thereby proued
that our ſelues fulfill the Law, or that it is poſſible that
we ſhould attaine to the perfect obedience therof. I truſt
that it appeareth, that the ancient faith of the Romans which
was commended by S. Paul doth ſo proclaime our vnworthineſſe,
and debaſe our owne workes, (if we will conſider
them how God in his iuſtice may iudge of them) that we may
iuſtly confeſſe with the people of God,Eſa. 64. 6. 
                  Wee haue all beene as
an vncleane thing, and all our righteouſnes as filthy cloutes, we
all doe fade as the leafe, and our iniquities as the winde haue
taken vs away. So that we alwaies haue good cauſe to pray,
that God (whatſoeuer thing we take in hande) ſhould Forgiue
vs our treſpaſſes.
                  Ser. in Rogationibus. For as ſaith Saith Bernard, we want
trueth, charitie and courage. (Yea and the more we looke
into, and the better we knowe our ſelues, the more plainely
ſhal we ſee that theſe will alwaies be heere vnperfect) Reaſon
(ſaith hee) fayleth through ignoraunce of the trueth,
will is weake, becauſe affection fainteth, the fleſh is
vnable, through ſcante of courage. In ſo much as reaſon
doth not well vnderſtande what it ſhoulde doe, and the
will hath no greate liking of that which it knoweth, the
coruptible bodie alſo is a burthen to the ſoule,Wiſd. 9. 15. ſo that we

cannot doe what we woulde. Which true teſtimonie of S.
Bernard, doth ſufficiently proue, that in our works there cannot
be perfection.Retract. li. 1. cap. 19. And S. Auguſtine as elſe where, ſo in his
booke intituled De perfectione iuſtitiae doth plainely proue that
no man heere can be perfect.Enar. in pſ. 38. So that we muſt be glad that
the Lorde when he vieweth our workes accompteth that
as done, which if it be not done, he pardoneth as S. Auguſtine
writeth elſe where. Who alſo teacheth vs that our perfection
conſiſteth in knowing that héere we cannot be perfect:
why ſhould we then dreame of that to be héere in vs,
which we cannot poſſibly attaine vnto? or what meane we
to ſay that is ſtraight, that agréeth not with the rule? or that
is perfect that néedeth mending?
               But the new relligion of the Romiſh Church is,Perfection in works. that the works
of the regenerate may be ſo perfect and holy as that they
may be voyd of ſinne, and nothing in them to be reproued. Yea
and not that onely, but alſo that by them they may iuſtify themſelues,
& merit or deſerue eternal life, becauſe they can perfectly
keepe the Law.Andrad. Orthod. Explic. li. 5 This is the doctrine which with common conſent
they teach. And yet thēſelues confeſſe that the loue of God,
cannot be perfect in vs, neither ſo great as it ought to be. But
howe that agreeth with that which they alſo affirme, that any
man (I ſuppoſe they vnderſtand it but of the regenerate) may
fully and perfectly keepe the Lawe, let the reader iudge. To
ſalue this ſore, Andradius Payuas taketh great paines in the place
before alledged. But I cannot but maruell, that the ſtrength of
the trueth, did not inforce him to giue glory vnto God, and to be
aſhamed of that ſilly ſhift, which he and before him the Ieſuites
of Colen are forced to vſe in their cenſure.Deut. 6. 5. For when they ſee
that God requireth that we ſhould loue the Lord our God with
all our heart, with all our ſoule, with all our might: and they
confeſſe that to this loue of God, or the keeping of this commaundement
we cannot attaine, they tell vs that God neuer
would deale ſo hardly with vs, as to require that of vs that we
cannot doe, and therefore that this commaundement doth but
ſhew what we ought to wiſh & ſtriue for, but that God meaneth
not to tie vs to obey it in this life, as for the fulfilling of it, it
ſhall bee after this life. Woulde a man thinke that theſe men

who brag ſo much of the fulfilling of the Law, would now in
good earneſt confeſſe,This commandement is generall to all men heer. that God would haue them keep no more
of the Law then they can? God in like manner deliuered both
the Tables of the commaundements, with as great charge to
keep the firſt, as the ſecond. And in the firſt, is all that comprehended,
euen that earneſt loue, that in theſe words is commaunded.
Therfore if we be tyed vnto the performance of loue towards
men, how can we be free to leaue, or to doe our dutie
toward God?Deut. 6. 1. Yea Moſes telleth the Iſraelites a litle before, as
it were by way of preface, That theſe are the commaundements,
ordinances, and Lawes, which the Lord God commaunded him to
teach them, that they might doe them in the land, whither they go
to poſſeſſe it.
                  Math. 22. 39. Among which this is one, and the greateſt, as Chriſt
himſelfe witneſſeth. And ſhall we then truſt them, that tell vs
that God gaue vs not that commaundement, to require of vs the
keeping of the ſame? No, rather let vs beleeue as the truth is,
that God who gaue vs this commaundement, ſhall alſo, and
iuſtly may, without note of crueltie, require at our hands, the performance
of the ſame. But when we ſee that it paſſeth our power
to keepe it (as our aduerſaries truely confeſſe) then muſt we
learne to ſeek for our perfect obedience, to him onely, that
did and could onely performe the whole Law. And that is the
leſſon that Saint Paul teacheth vs,Gala. 5. 24. when he ſaith, The Law is a
ſchoolmaſter vnto Chriſt, that we may be iuſtified by faith. Agreeable
vnto that alſo that the ſame Apoſtle taught the Romans,
                  Rom. 10.
                  That Chriſt is the end of the Law to righteouſneſſe to all that beleeue.
Now how litle this baſtard brood that now is reſembleth
thoſe auncient commended Romans, let the Reader iudge.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  NOw as concerning the powers of our nature,
we humbly acknowledge, that by our hereditarie
corruption they are ſo ſtayned and polluted,
that nothing but ſinne, nothing but euill
can come from vs, or be in vs, vntill God by his
ſpirit of regeneration hath made vs new men:De tempore ſer. 48. for we cannot
raiſe our ſelues from the death of ſinne, as Saint Auſten teacheth.

And being regenerate, yet there are in vs two men:
The new man weak and féeble,The newman. better (in truth) in hart and
courage, then in hand or power: called a new man when it is
compared with the old man. But when Gods ſpirit will in
déed ſet forth, how litle our ſtrength is to ſtand againſt our
ſpirituall enemies, in this our ſpirituall battell, then we are
called children in reſpect of our weaknes. Then alſo there is
in vs the old man,The old man. luſty and ſtrong, come to his full groweth.
Betwéene theſe two, in the godly there is a continual ſtrife.
As for the vngodly they are altogether old, there is in them
nothing new, no new hart or affections, no new mind or vnderſtanding,
no good deſires, no godly motions. Now this old
man although in the regenerat he be but faint harted: yet hath
he ſo many helpes, and ſo many oportunities and occaſions
to do euill, and to annoy the new man that he is ouer doing,
neuer quiet, alwaies ſtriuing againſt the ſpirit: Inſomuch,
as he neuer ſéeth the new man, the ſpirituall man, the man
that yeldeth it ſelfe to the ſpirit of God to be led therby, indeuouring
or attempting any good thing, but ſtraight way this
old man oppoſeth himſelfe with might and main, ſo that he
will neuer ſuffer the new man quietly or fréely to do any
good. But be the ſpirit neuer ſo willing, yet will the fleſh alwaies
be found not only weak, but alſo rebellious. By this
meanes it commeth to paſſe, that although God of his great
mercie, by his good ſpirit, haue wrought in his new borne
babes, a will readie to ſerue him, and a deſire or readynes to
obey him: yet is not this will of ours, at any time frée or at
libertie to performe the ſame, either as we ſhould, or as we
would. For as Gods children are by the godly motions of the
ſpirit ſtirred vp to do his will, euen then preſently doe the
luſt
                     •
                  
                  1. Pet. 2. 11. of the fleſh, which fight againſt the ſoule, make a mutinie
or commotion, prouoking the members thereof, to
wreſtle and ſtriue againſt ſuch holie cogitations. So that it
commeth many times to paſſe,Gen. 38. 29. as it was in the birth of Tamars
children: For Zarah being firſt néere the birth, yet Phares
his brother came forth before him. So theſe godly motions
béeing firſt thought vpon, yet euen in Gods good and
obedient children, ſuch corrupt and vngodly affections will

firſt ſhew themſelues. Of which dangerous battell, commeth
this troubleſome effect, troubleſome (I ſay) to Gods
children, that their loue eyther of God or man, is not without
want, their faith, not without feare, their obedience, not
without blemiſh, their ſeruice, not without negligence, to
be ſhorte in any good thing that we will attempt, we ſhall
not be without euil to hinder the ſame. Which thinges being
well conſidered of, I truſt it wil eaſely appeare that our will
though it be good in the regenerate, yet is not at any time
altogether free to doe as it would, in reſpect of theſe corrupt
luſts of the fleſh. And that this is the auncient faith of the
Romans, that was in S. Paules time, it is more plaine
then that with any good ſhew of reaſon it may be denied. For
the Apoſtle teacheth the Romans thus much euen by his own
example. Who féeling within himſelfe, this ſpirituall battel
betwéene the ſpirit and the fleſh, (which onely Gods children
do féele) & ſo by experience being taught, that when he had
done what he could, he was notable to doe that which willingly
he would haue done,Rom. 7. 19. he plainely confeſſeth, The good
that I would, do I not, but the euill which I would not, that do I.
Now I truſt no man will anſwere that he ſpeaketh not of
that he could doe, but of that he did: I truſt no body wil imagine
but that the Apoſtle did what he could to doe good, and
not to doe euill, and yet when he had ſtriuen therein to the
vttermoſt, his regenerate and godly will, was not of power
to performe his godly deſires. But if any man would iudge
ſo groſly of S. Paule, as that he might haue done more then
he did to ſtand againſt ſinne, yet would they be ſufficiently
confuted by that which the ſame apoſtle addeth almoſt immediately,
whereby he ſheweth by what meanes it came to
paſſe, that he was ſo driuen and drawen to doe againſt his
will.Rom. 7. 22. 23. Euen becauſe There was a Lawe in his members rebelling
againſt the Lawe of his minde, and leading him captiue
to the Lawe of ſinne, although concerning the inward
man, he had delight in the Lawe of God. Now if S. Paule
had not free will as no doubt in theſe wordes he plainely
teacheth the Romans, that hee had not to doe good,
ſhall we imagine that we, who are much leſſe fréed from

corruption of ſinne then he was, haue any ſuch fréedome
or power in vs? Shall we that are in compariſon, drye
ſtumpes, and fruitleſſe plantes, deceiue our ſelues in this
vaine conceit, that we are better able to bring forth the fruit
of good works then he was? God forbid. No I am verily perſwaded,
that whoſoeuer doth but conſider what a good work
is, according to that I haue before ſaid, eſpecially in the viii.
Chapter: and on the other ſide how weake wee are of
our ſelues, becauſe our regeneration is not heere perfected,
and how ſtirring and ſtriuing our luſtes are whereby we
are hindred in our good indeuours: he wil vtterly deteſt that
deceitfull doctrine of mans free will to doe good, and abhorre
it as a proud preſumption. And hee will not onely
with Saint Paule humbly confeſſe his owne weakenes,
but with S. Peter alſo heartely giue thankes vnto our gratious
God who hath Kept vs by his power,
                  1. Pet. 1. 5. (not by the power
or free wil that we haue) vnto ſaluation.
                  Cap. 20. Aura. Concil. So that we ſee we
to acknowledge this weaknes in our ſelues (yea although
we be regenerate) to doe good, and the power whereby we
are preſerued to ſaluation, that we ſhould not quite fall from
it, to be from God, and in him, is the Catholicke doctrine, that
then when theſe Apoſtles taught, was receiued at Rome?
According to the which alſo the fathers in the Aura
                     •
                  ican counſell
did affirme, That many good thinges are wrought in man
which man worketh not: But man doth no good at all, but that
God giueth (power) that he may worke it. And Theophilact
moſt plainely, ſpeaking of the workes that we doe after baptiſme,In Galata
                        •
                      cap. 2.
wherein the papiſtes eſpecially brag of their fréewill,
Our will (ſaith he) is dead, but his (that is Chriſtes) liueth,
and doth gouerne this our life. If then our life be gouerned by
Chriſtes will, where is the power of our owne will, which
our aduerſaries ſo much extol?Ad probam de Virginitate. I ſaid (ſaith Fulgētius) that thou
waſt preuented, not onely with that loue wherewith GOD
loued thee, but with that alſo which hee freely powred into
thee, that he might be loued of thee. Therefore all euen whatſoeuer
holy loue thou haſt towardes thy husband, thou haſt it
in deede in thee, but not of thy ſelfe. Much might be alledged
out of the fathers to this ende, whereby it might appeare

how they did follow this ancient faith of the Church of Rome
but I will take my leaue with Arnobius his wordes. You
(ſaith he) repoſe in your ſelues the ſaluation of your ſoules,
                  Arnob. aduerſus Gentes. li. 2. 
                  and
hope to be made Gods by your owne inward indeuour. But we
promiſe not to our ſelues any ſuch thing of our infirmitie ſeeing
our nature to be of no ſtrength, and that it is ouercome by the
affections thereof whenſoeuer it ſtriueth.
               
               But now would they teach vs to ſpeake with new tongues, not
the wonderfull workes of God, but the ſtraunge ſtrength that is
in vs to ſerue God: ſtraunge (I ſay) becauſe we haue neither
ſeene it in the godly, nor heard it in the pure and auncient Roman
Church, nor can finde or feele it in our ſelues, vnleſſe it be,
when wee are paſt feeling,Trident. Concil. Seſſ. 6. cap. 6. that wée feele not our ſelues. But
thus they teach vs that being once ſtirred vp and holpen (for
theſe are their owne termes) by grace, man hath afterwardes
ſuch power,Ibi. cap 4. Cenſ. Colonient. pag. 33. dial. 2. that hee is freely moued to God, to diſpoſe and
prepare himſelfe, to obtaine the grace of iuſtification. Yea that
our luſtes or deſire of ſinne, are ſubiected to reaſon and free
will, with ſuch ſubiection, as ſcarſely there can be any greater.
And thus whereas God becauſe the olde heart of man is
naught, and hath nothing in it that will further, nay that will
not hinder vs,Iere. 32. 39. to walke vprightly in the wayes of godlineſſe,
promiſeth to giue vs another heart,Ezech. 36. 26. A newe heart (ſaith God)
will I giue you, and a newe ſpirite will I put within you: they
woulde make vs beleeue, that this olde hearte of ours will
ſerue with a little chaunge. And yet that wee may know, that
to ſtirre vp and to helpe our olde heart, will not ſerue the turne,
God by Ezechiel in the place alledged ſaith, I will take away
the ſtony heart out of your body, and I will giue you a heart of
fleſh. By which wordes of giuing a newe hearte, taking away
that we haue of ſtone, giuing vs one of fleſhe, God woulde
haue vs to learne, that we muſt not onely be ſtirred vp and
holpen as they ſay, but euen made newe before wee can doe
that which pleaſeth God. And as for thoſe that are ſo caryed
away, with the plauſible and pleaſaunt ſounde of free
will, I woulde requeſt euen for Chriſt his ſake, that they
woulde take a viewe of their owne waies, and enter into
their owne ſecrete thoughtes, wordes, and deedes, and if at

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
home they finde all well, if they can as they wiſh and woulde
(if they be not ſenceleſſe and ſecure in ſinne) keepe Gods commandements,
then let them ſtil beleeue that doctrine, and followe
ſuch blinde guides. But if they finde, that the greateſt
ſhew of godlineſſe that they can make, can be but the performance
of ſome externall worke, whether it be in prayer or
prayſing of God, or doing of any duety towardes our neighbours
(wherein euen the moſt wicked will perchaunce ſometime
ſhewe themſelues more deuout then they) let them not
then be deceiued by any of theſe ſeducing wordes: Cannot I abſtaine
from euill? cannot I doe that which is good? cannot I be
occupied in good workes? For although thou canſt doe that
worke, which may in another be a good worke, yet becauſe
the worke is not good, that is, not commaunded by God, done
by a godly man, and directed to Gods glory, and the doing of
our own duety, that worke I ſay which may in an other be praiſe
worthy, in thee may be ſinne. Thus therefore I ſay that it is
no more in thy power to worke a good worke, then, to make
new thy owne heart, but both muſt be of God of whome we
haue all our ſufficiencie.2. Cor. 3. 5.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  BVt now concerning the Sacramentes, there
is not much as I can gather eyther in that
Epiſtle written by S. Paule to the Romans, excepting
that onely that is in the fourth Chapter
that Abraham receiued the ſigne of circumciſion,Rom. 4. 11.
the ſeale of righteouſnes of faith:
eyther in S. Peter his firſt Epiſtle but that in the third chapter,1. Pet. 3. 21.
when he ſaith, Whereto the baptiſme that now is anſwering
that figure (not the putting away the filth of the fleſh, but
the confident demaunding which a good conſcience maketh
to GOD,) ſaueth vs alſo by the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt.
In the former of which two places,The vſe of the Sacramēts the Apoſtle doth plainely
teſtify that Abraham being iuſtified before by faith, did
afterwardes receiue the ſigne of circumciſion, to ſeale vp
in and vnto him, this righteouſnes by faith. Which ſaith

becauſe it hath reſpect vnto the promiſes, we ſee therefore
that this was the vſe and office of circumciſion vnto Abraham,
to confirme vnto him the promiſes of God. And that
other place out of S. Peter, doth partly confirme vnto vs
the ſelfeſame vſe of baptiſme. For when Noah and his company
ſawe that the ſame water that drowned others, and
ſwallowed them vp into the depth, did ſaue them, in carying
the Arke wherein they were aboue the waters, this muſt
néeds aſſure them, not onely of Gods power, but of his goodnes
alſo and readines to performe his promiſe, in ſauing
them from periſhing by water. And in like ſorte, the water in
baptiſme, aſſureth that little flocke, that is truely belonging
to Chriſt his holy catholicke Church figured by the Arke; of
the forgiuenes of their ſins. And, as not the water that caried
the Arke, was the efficient cauſe of their ſauing which Maſter
Belarmine abſurdly imagineth (for the water was as apt
to haue drowned them as the other) no neyther yet the Arke
it ſelfe,Li. 1. de effect. although it might more properly be ſo eſtéemed (becauſe
in it they were caried aboue the water but God ſaued
them by the Arke vpon the water:Sacr. cap. 17. & li. 2. cap. 3. So is it in baptiſme, as S.
Peter teacheth vs in that he ſaith that it ſaueth by the reſurrection
of Ieſus Chriſt, I ſay not by it ſelfe, but by the reſurrection
of Ieſus Chriſt. From whom onely it hath the vertue
and efficacy, by whome onely it turneth to our good. And as
al periſhed in the ſame water, which by carying vp the Arke
ſaued them that were therein, all I ſay that by faith beléeuing
the promiſes were got into the Arke: euen ſo the
water in baptiſme though it outwardly put away, from
all that are waſhed therein, the filth of the fleſh: yet is it not
in deed profitable to any, but to ſuch as haue that righteouſnes
and holines of Chriſt Ieſus, ſealed vp thereby vnto their
owne conſciences. Whereby it appeareth moſt plainly, that
the ſacraments doe not giue grace, or worke righteouſnes in
vs,Rom. 2. 25. or of themſelues, becauſe they are receiued of vs, do make
vs holy. But as the Apoſtle S. Paul ſaith of circumciſion, Circumciſion
verily profiteth nothing, except you keepe the Law;
ſo may we truely ſay of our Sacramentes, that not the
receiuing of our Sacramentes, but the holy obedience

ſpringing from our faith, that is ſealed vp vnto the godly in
the Sacramentes is the thing that is acceptable to God, commended
before men, and comfortable to our owne conſciences.
For as in that place alledged, hee reckoneth them onely
truely circumciſed, that keepe and fulfill the Lawe, and
haue that true circumciſion of the heart, and that the godleſſe,
howe ſo euer they haue receiued in their fleſhe the
outwarde marke or ſigne, yet are in deed vncircumciſed: euen
ſo howe ſolemnly ſo euer the faithleſſe and fruiteleſſe
flocke, haue receiued the Sacramentes of our ſanctification
and redemption which is in Chriſt, yet if they bring
not forth ſuch fruites of the ſpirite, as doe teſtifie and ſhew
that inwarde waſhing away of the filth of ſinne, they
haue Baptiſmum fluminis the waſhing of the water, non flaminis,
not of the holy Ghoſt: they haue the ſigne of Gods grace,
but not the ſubſtance thereof, the viſible token, but not the inuiſible
grace. But the Sacramentes are vnto ſuch as ſeales
ſet to a blanke, wherein becauſe dothing is contayned,
therefore by theſe ſeales, there is nothing aſſured. Nowe out
of this which hitherto I haue ſaide, we ſee that the Sacramentes
haue theſe two vſes, to aſſure vs of the performance
of the promiſe of grace, and to preach to vs repentaunce for
our ſinnes paſt, and holines in the reſt of our life that is
to come.
               But our now Romiſh Catholickes, who are neuer content, that
eyther themſelues or other ſhould eate within the teacher of the
word of God, doe wander farre out of theſe liſtes: teaching that
our Sacramentes haue in them that grace which they ſignifie,Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 7. can. 6. 7. 8
and doe giue the ſame grace, to all men, at all times if men be
not a let vnto themſelues, euen Ex opere operate, that is in reſpect
of the worke it ſelfe, becauſe the Sacraments are receiued of
them. Wherby they doe ſuch iniurie vnto Chriſt, as we that profeſſe
the name of chriſtian men and women, ſhould be aſhamed
of.Math. 1. 21. For that ſauing from ſinne,Iohn. 1. 16. which God by the miniſtery of the
Angel proclaimed ſhould be by his ſonne, whom for that cauſe
he called Ieſus our Sauiour, becauſe he ſhoulde ſaue his people
from their ſins, they aſcribe vnto the Sacraments. And that grace
which we can finde onely in Chriſt, of whoſe fulnes we haue all

receiued grace for grace,Cyprian de baptiſ. Christi. they would haue vs to ſeek for in ſuch
viſible things, as are in truth but pledges of the ſame. Whether
(ſaith Cyprian) it be Iudas or Paule that baptiſeth, it is Chriſt
that waſheth,In 2. Cor. 3. pardoneth, and putteth away ſinne. And S. Ambroſe
making a difference between the watering that is by baptiſme,
and the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, ſaith, that to forgiue ſinnes
(in baptiſme) and to giue the holy Ghoſt, it belongeth to God
only: for the ſpirit hath bin giuen without laying on of hands,
and the remiſſion of faults without baptiſme, if we will credit
that learned Father.Contra Creſcon. grammat. li. 2. cap. 21. Both the good and the bad (ſaith S. Auguſtine)
can dip in the water, but none but he that is alwayes good
can waſh the conſcience. Thus do theſe agree with the old Romiſh
Faith, teaching the outward ſigne, not to giue but to aſſure
vs of the inuiſible grace. And yet they are not aſhamed, ſtill to
brag that the faith of the Romans was commended by thapoſtle:
Although themſelues that boaſt ſo much thereof, as it is eaſie to
ſee, if we compare this auncient Faith, with their new deuiſes, do
ſet themſelues as ſworne enemies to the ſame, to fight againſt
that faith. And this I ſuppoſe is the effect of that which can be gathered
out of theſe firſt eight Chapters of this Epiſtle to the Romans,
of ſuch things as are in controuerſy between vs and the Papiſts.
Wherin if they teach, that which theſe Apoſtles and faithful
ſeruants of God did teach, let their doctrine be beleeued. But if
they haue chaunged that auncient Religion, ſwarued from that
old Faith, corrupted that worſhip of God, and mingled that pure
wine, either with the water of their own inuentions, or the dregs
of Iewiſh and Heathniſh ſuperſtitions, why do we not deteſt
theſe deceiuing Doctors, as enemies to all truth, and hinderers of
our eternall ſaluation?
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  OF the thrée Chapters following, I would haue
ſpoken nothing, I mean the ix. x. and the xi. of
the Epiſtle to the Romans, but that I think it
neceſſarie out of one principall point of doctrine
that is in them handled,Predeſtination free without reſpect of our works. to note how contrarie,
to it ſelfe the doctrine is, that the Church of Rome teacheth.
For out of them it is moſt plainly and inuincibly gathered,

that GOD hath predeſtinate & choſen vnto eternal life ſuch
as it pleaſeth him to take, fréely euen in reſpect of his owne
purpoſe and counſell, without any reſpect vnto good works.
Which becauſe it is ſo manifeſt, that themſelues are aſhamed
to denie it, I briefly paſſe ouer, without any long confirmation
out of the reaſons héerin alledged for proofe of the
doctrine.Rom. 9. 11. 12. For Maſter Bellarmine out of theſe words. When as
yet they were not borne, or had done any good or euill, that the
purpoſe of God might ſtand, not by workes, but by the caller,
it was ſaid to her, The elder ſhall ſerue the yonger. And alſo out
of thoſe,Rom. 11. 5. 6. 
                  The remnant is ſaued according to the election of
grace, If of grace, not now of workes, for then grace were no
grace. Out of theſe words I ſay he concludeth verie plainly
and truely,De Gra. & lib. arbit. li. 2. ca. 10 not onely that election or predeſtination is frée,
but alſo without any forſéeing of the workes that men ſhould
do after, as his words are. And much more pithyly alſo is
this confirmed by the latter end of the laſt ſentence, which is
with full content left out by the old Tranſlation, the Rheimiſts,
and the reſt of them. For although all the Gréek copies
but one, and the Syrian Tranſlation haue theſe words, But
if it be of works, then is it now no grace, for then work is no
more work. Yet do they willingly follow the want in the old
Tranſlation, becauſe the ſetting of grace againſt works, in
ſuch ſort as wée ſée they are oppoſed, maketh wonderfull
ſtrongly, againſt the Popiſh doctrine of merites. But what
ſhould I ſpeak of Maſter Bellarmine,
                  D. Whitaker contra Duraeū lib. 6. pag. 762. Iohn Durey the Scot
telleth vs, that it is famouſly holden in all the Vniuerſities
of the Catholicks, That the foreknowledge of merits, is not the
cauſe of predeſtination. Although he cannot deny but Pighius
was of a contrarie mind. And Maſter Bellarmine indeuoureth
in this point to ſhew his ſkill, to ſatiſfie ſome that think it
cannot be, that predeſtination ſhould be frée, if all men haue
ſufficient help giuen wherby they may be ſaued. And becauſe
vpon this ſufficient help they eſtabliſh their merite,Sufficient help. this is
therfore alſo the ſumme of that he teacheth, that Merites and
Predeſtination may both of them be taught. But how he is
héerin deceiued, his owne words will beſt declare. But in
the mean time, this is that which Saint Paule did teach, and

they ſay that yet they 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that God fréely not hauing regarde
to the workes which 
                     •
                  e ſaw they ſhould doe, did chuſe
a number, vpon whom he beſtoweth eternall life. Which
doctrine as it was daungerouſly impuyned in thoſe dayes of
S. Auguſtine, ſo was it learnedly defended by him in ſundry
treatiſes. In which it may appeare, that the Pelagions then
did vſe the ſelfeſame obiections againſt this comfortable doctrine,
that the papiſtes now make againſt the teaching of
our free election,Auguſt. de predeſt. & gra. cap. 6. as that God may ſame to deale vniuſtly in
that he puniſheth the wicked whom he calleth not from their
wickedneſſe. Againe that therby all indeuour to liue in Gods
feare is taken away, vertue is hindred, fatall neceſſity eſtabliſhed,
the doctrine is perilous,Proſper. Epiſt. ad Aug. de reliquijs pelag. and ſuch like obiections are
reckoned vp of Proſper, as alſo of Hilary who in like manner
writing to S. Auguſtine rehearſeth thoſe cauils of the pelagions
againſt this trueth,Hilar. Epiſtela ad August. crauing S. Auguſtine his helpe
therein, becauſe many as vs ſaith did much depend vpon the
authoritie of men, and as Proſper in his Epiſtle faith, they
defend their obſtinacy by antiquitie, alledging that neuer
any expounded thoſe places to the Romans after that ſorte.
Which obiections becauſe it is too long to confute in this place,
I ſend the reader who is deſirous to be further inſtructed, vnto
S. Auguſtine his bookes, of the predeſtination of the Saints
which is an aunſwere to the two Epiſtles of Proſper and Hilarie,
and that other of the vertue of perſeuerance, and that
of predeſtination and grace which before I ſpake of. Which
thing I may I truſt be the bolder to doe, becauſe theſe are the
ſlaunders which the pelagians th
                     •
                  ſe knowen and condemned
heretickes burthened this doctrine withall; and therefore
our aduerſaries ſhould be aſhamed to vſe them. Now if
you long alſo to know what theſe heretickes did teach, this it
is.Proſperi. Epiſt. apud Auguſt. De praedeſtinat. Sanct. cap. 18. That God foreſéeing who ſhould beléeue, and continue in
that faith, did predeſtinate ſuch to his kingdom. Or as S. Auguſtine
ſaith they taught that God did chooſe ſuch as he ſawe
ſhoulde be holy by the choice of their frée will, on the contrary
he ſhewed the election to bée frée, without any regard to
workes eyther before or after, and that which the Pelagians
did then and the papiſtes now doe teach he calleth a new preſumption.
               
                  
But becauſe they like worſe then to be thoughte
new (although in all thinges they are new fangled) let vs
ſee what it is that they would haue vs beléeue.
               No doubt the Church of Rome doth as much as they can indeuour
to obſcure and darken this doctrine, that the glory of merits
may ſhine the brighter. And therefore euen Maſter Bellarmine
who in as plaine wordes as he can deuiſe, hath before
taught that this election is free without any reſpect to workes;
yet after (as he now repented him of that he had ſaid) writeth
That by predeſtination the elect get no right or clayme to bleſſednes,Degra. & lib. Ar. li. 2. cap. 15.
neyther is it due to them, but after that by well deſeruing,
they haue gotten the ſame. Can white and blacke be more
contrarie, then theſe two ſayings are one of them to the other?
So that whilſt he ſeeketh to eſtabliſh the opinion of merites, he
doth not onely gainfay the trueth, but euen himſelfe alſo. Let
vs marke the ſimilitude whereby he will illuſtrate his meaning.
A king (ſaith he) promiſeth a price to the beſt runner,Ibid. cap. 17. to
whome God reuealeth that if they runne vpon horſes, ſuch a
one ſhall winne, in wagons ſuch a one, on foote ſuch a one, by
ſhip ſuch a one. Then he appoynteth them to runne with
wagons, which he alſo cauſeth to be prepared for them. Althogh
Maſter Bellarmine may ſeeme to be runne farre from the trueth,
when by ſuch fond fictions, he would make falſhoode carie a
ſhew of ſound doctrine: yet we may ſee his meaning is that as,
the kinge propoſeth the price to the beſt runner, and then
appoynteth ſuch a kinde of running, as he knoweth he ſhall excell
in, whom he would haue to winne: ſo God electeth vnto
happines, ſuch as he would, becauſe he knew before that they
ſhould merit the ſame. Is this free election? Is there in this no
regard to workes?Pſal. 115. 8. I ſuppoſe it is in our Romiſh Maſter verified,
that is ſpoken of the Idol makers, That they who make the Idols
are like vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   them. Of Idolaters they are become Idols them
ſelues, that haue eyes and ſee not, eares and heare not, yea wit
and vnderſtand not, but ſay and vnſay, almoſt with one breath.
But when they haue done what they can, that auncient fayth
ſhall be founde not onely true, but alſo directly againſt their
doctrine, If election bee by grace, then not of workes, if
by workes then not by grace. And becauſe it ſeemeth they

are not yet reſolued, whether they ſhoulde mayntaine the
auncient fayth of Rome, which ſometime they commende,
or this newe opinion, which they had rather follow, it were
beſt they woulde ſettle them ſelues to ſtande to the one or the
other, for they cannot make both agree together. Neyther
are they content vpon this olde garment to ſet a newe patch:Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 6. cap. 12.
but alſo as much as they dare, they diſgrace this auncient fayth
and olde religion, when they call it a vaine preſumption and
raſh to aſſure our ſelues of our election.Rom. 11. 29. But firſt that our election
is certaine I hope they dare not deny, becauſe the free
giftes and calling of God are without repentance. The queſtion
then is whether wee can be aſſured that we are choſen:
woulde he that taught vs to call him father, haue vs to doubt
whether we be his children? Or if the ſpirite it ſelfe beare witneſſe
to our ſpirite,Rom. 8. 15. 16. that we are the ſonnes of GOD, ſhall
theſe newe vpſtart Catholickes tell vs, that ſo to doe is
raſh preſumption? And why is it called the ſpirite of Adoption▪
                  15.
but becauſe it teacheth vs, nay it aſſureth vs our election.
Or howe can wee attayne to that reioycing in tribulation,
which Saint Paule and Saint Peter alſo commend in the godly,Rom. 5. 3. 4. 5.
but becauſe we are ſure that howſoeuer God ſeemeth to
handle vs,1. Pet. 1. 6. yet he ſtill loueth vs, and therfore his chaſticements
are not bitter to vs, becauſe the loue of God is ſpred abroade
in our heartes. Let therefore theſe deſperate doctours dececiue
ſuch as are deuoted to them, let vs reioyce in this aſſurance
of faith, that our names are written in the booke of
life.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  THe Apoſtle hauing hitherto continued in doctrine,
eſpecially in teaching vs, that we are freely
iuſtifyed in Chriſt by fayth without works,
and that this iuſtification is common both to
Iewes and Gentiles▪ He commeth to exhortations▪
                  Rom. 12. 2.
mouing vs to offer vp our ſelues vnto God in ſacrifice
Giue vp your bodies, a quicke ſacrafice, holy and acceptable
to God. And that we may be the better inſtructed, in offering

our ſelues aright or as we ought to doe the telleth vs firſt
that we muſt not Be faſhioned like vnto this worlde to follow
the corruptions thereof.2. Secondly we muſt be Renued in the
ſpirit of our minde, that hauing our vnderſtanding lightened
we may proue what is that will of God, good, acceptable and
perfect: not following too earneſtly our owne affections,
but ſubmitting our ſelues and our willes, to Gods good
will. And thus muſt we ſacrifice vp our ſelues to God. Much
like is that,1. Pet. 2. 5. that S. Peter alſo writeth of Our ſpirituall ſacrifices
acceptable to God through Ieſus Chriſt. Nowe none can
offer a ſacrifice, but ſuch as are prieſtes, but all men muſt
offer theſe ſacrifices: (for the Apoſtles both of them write,
not onely to ſuch as were in the miniſterie among them, but
euen to the lay people, mouing then to offer theſe offerings)
therefore all men are prieſtes. Yea S. Peter in playne words
affirmeth that we are A royall prieſthoode,
                  9. or as it is in
Exodus from whence he borroweth thoſe wordes A kingdom
of prieſtes.
                  Exod. 16. 6. For there al muſt be kings, and al muſt be priſtes.
Neither can we reade that there is inſtituted in the newe
teſtament any other kinde of Sacrifiſing prieſtes then
theſe. And wee muſt alſo marke what our ſacrifice is that
is heere mentioned: The ſacrifice (not of Chriſtes bodie)
but of our owne bodies, the ſacrifiſing and ſanctifing of our
ſelues. Now if the Apoſtles had knowen of any ſacricire of
the Maſſe,The Sacrifice of the Maſſe. was there not now good occaſion to haue mentioned
it? Yea if it had béene in ſo greate accompt as the papiſtes
hold it to be, how coulde theſe two Apoſtles, without
great impietie haue buried in ſilence, or paſſed ouer without
mentioning, ſo neceſſarie a ſeruice of God? But then
there was no ſuch thing, and therefore it is not ſpoken of
by them, who can beſt tell vs what the olde Roman ſaith
was. It hath beene long after that time raked out of the
verie channell and ſinke of ſuperſtitions, and is ſo contrarie
to that they taught, that if this ſacrifice of the Maſſe
had beene but once mentioned in their time, they would
in expreſſe wordes, haue made the verie name of it odious,
among Gods people. Well of this exhortation we learne,
becauſe we are both the ſacrifice, and ſacrificer, the offering

and the prieſt, that we muſt in al thinges apply our
ſelues in holines to ſerue God. For that which is offered
to GOD muſt haue no blemiſh: and the prieſtes were
conſecrated to Gods ſeruice: euen ſo muſt we ſtriue to be
faultleſſe, and alwaies indeuour to be occupied in good
workes, and in ſo doing we ſhall in deede as holy prieſtes,
offer vnto God moſt acceptable ſacrifices. As concerning
ſacrifices for ſinne we knowe none but Chriſt, we ſeeke none
but him, becauſe wee neede none beſide him. If God haue
(ſaith Chriſoſtome) by one ſacrifice taken away ſinne,In Epiſt. ad Heb. ca. 10. Ho. 18. wée
neede not another. And againe, there is no other ſacrifice, one
hath cleanſed vs, after which followeth fyre and hell. And
Theophilact writeth that the ſacrifice of Chriſtes body once
offered,
                  In Epiſt. ad Heb. ca. 7. Ho. 13 Theophil. in Ep. ad Heb. cap. 10. 
                  ſhall alwaies be auailable for our ſaluation, ſo that we
ſhall not ſtand in neede of a ſecond. With this one therefore
wee may well content our ſelues and comfort our conſciences
with the ſufficiencie thereof, ſaying with ſweete S.
Bernard,
                  In Cantica▪ ſerm. 22. 
                  Thy paſſion (O Lord) is the laſt refuge, the onely remedy.
When wiſedome fayleth, when my righteouſnes cannot
helpe, and the merits of holines cannot ſerue the turne, then doth
it ſtand me in ſteed.
               
               But in the Church of Rome which now is, there is no mention
of prieſts, but onely of thoſe ſhorne and ſmeered ſacrifice
                     ••
                  
And if you deſire to knowe,Prieſtes. howe and when their prieſthoode
was inſtituted, they wil tell you Chriſt did inſtitute their order,
when hee ſaide at his laſt ſupper doe ye this. For that which
Chriſt referreth to the whol action of his laſt ſupper,Luc. 22. 19. which then
he inſtituted, they wil haue it meant of his ſacrifice, as if hee
had ſaide ſacrifice as I doe. And as they haue in trueth no colour
of trueth, to wring out of thoſe wordes, their ſacrifyſing prieſthood,
ſo in ſuch ſort to wreſt theſe wordes could not make for
them. For if they ſay doe this, that is, ſacrifice as I doe, they
are farre from ſacrifyſing as Chriſt did. For hee did, ſacrifice
him ſelfe in his death vpon the tree. But our Romiſh prieſts,
will rather leaue their prieſthoode, then offer ſuch ſacrifices.
Well it doth not appeare in the writinges of theſe two
Apoſtles, that euer they dreamed of ſuch a prieſthood but onely
of that whereof by Chriſt we are all partakers, euen all that

offer vp theſe ſpirituall ſacrifices, men, women, children, of all ages,
ſortes, and ſexes. So that theſe ſacrificers are a new order,
whether they be regular or irregular,Sacrifices. it maketh no great matter.
For they were not ſo much as thought vpon, in the Apoſtles
times. And for the ſacrifices whereunto S. Paule moueth vs,
they tell vs much of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, an Idoll of their
own making, ſet vp to deface and diſgrace the vertue and efficacie
of Chriſt his death and paſſion. For when blaſphemouſly
they terme it,Rom. 3. 24. 35. a ſacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead,
is not that directly contrary to that free iuſtification by grace,Heb. 9. 12.
by the redemption which is in Chriſt Ieſus which is eternally obtayned
by his owne ſacrifice of himſelfe once offered,Heb. 10. 10. 14. euen to
that propitiation which God hath ſet forth to vs in his bloude?
Which doctrine the Apoſtles teach vs euery where, and namelie
S. Paule, moſt plentifully before hath inſtructed the Romans
therein. Other offerings alſo they put vs in minde of, namely to
offer to ſtockes and ſtones, which they call ſaintes, fat offerings,
with full hands, that the greater ſhare may come to the prieſtes.
Yea they will alſo make men beleeue, that it is no meane ſacrifice
to God, if you be good and bountifull to them, but that it
ſmelleth full ſweetely, and is highly accepted of him. And thus
whereas S. Paule teacheth vs to ſacrifice our ſelues to God, they
tell vs that eyther we muſt ſacrifice our landes, goods, and poſſeſſions
to them or their benefite, or elſe they muſt ſacrifice for
vs in the Maſſe, and not we for our ſelues. And theſe are the ſacrifices
and offerings that they ſpeake of: how neere of kinne to
thoſe that the Apoſtles ſpeake of let the reader iudge.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  NOw the Apoſtle S. Paule, although he ſpeaketh
not of a peculiar kind of prieſtes, ye doth
he not omit the eccleſiaſticall function or miniſtery
in the Church. For hauing exhorted vs by
mortifying of our affections, to conſecrate our
ſelues vnto God, that we the more throughly may ſubmit our
wil
                     •
                   to Gods wil, he perſwadeth vs not to buſy our ſelues about
that which belongeth to another mans duety, but that

euery one of vs ſhould haue a great regard to doe our owne.
And then beginning with eccleſiaſtical offices he ſaith,Rom. 12. 6. 7. 
                  Whether
(we haue) propheſie (let vs propheſie) according to the
meaſure of faith: Or an office, (let vs wait) on the office: Or he
that teacheth,
                  8. 
                  in teaching: Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation,
or he that diſtributeth, (let him do it) with ſimplicitie: He that
ruleth, with diligence, he that ſheweth mercie, with cheerfulneſſe.
I mean not héer to make my ſelfe a partie in that bitter
contention, which miſerably hath afflicted this Church of
England, which I would to God, either it neuer had bin begun,
or had bin followed, with more moderation. I purpoſe
not curiouſly to examine what is ment by theſe particular
words of propheſying, office, teaching, exhorting, diſtributing,
ruling, ſhewing mercie. In which many beſtow too
much labour, more then in the defence of the truth, againſt
the ſworne enemyes to our profeſſion. We haue the Papiſts
our profeſſed aduerſaries, who think their quietnes,
conſiſteth in our variance, and wiſh our falling out, as did
the Cananits the falling out of Abraham and Lot. Let vs
therefore yet at the length follow Abrahams godly aduiſe.Gen. 13. 7. 8.
                  Let there be no ſtrife betweene thee and mee, nor betweene
thy heardmen and mine: for we are brethren. But to come to
that which eſpecially I note in theſe words, we ſée that if all
theſe duties before mencioned,Offices in the Church of Rome. did belong to the Eccleſiaſticall
function, yet can we not find out the offices that the
Church of Rome that now is, will haue to bee in their
Church. We find there prophets or teachers, likewiſe ſuch
as exhort. Admit alſo that we find the Deacons there to
diſtribute. By rulers ſome vnderſtand not onely Eccleſiaſticall
Rulers, but other Magiſtrates alſo. As that lykewiſe
of ſhewing mercie, may well ſignifie any that by
office in the common wealth, or Church, or béeing moued
by their owne priuate affection do ſhew mercy: It is
not vnlikely, but that if there had bin at that time any
other offices in the Church, the Apoſtle would haue ſpoken
of them. And to be ſhort, the offices that the Apoſtle
mentioneth, either belong to the miniſterie of the word,
as prophecying, teaching, exhorting: Or to the care of the

poore, as Deacons that diſtribute, and they that ſhew mercy,
or to gouernment and bearing rule (if in that thapoſtle ſpeaketh
of Church offices.) A ſecond thing that muſt héere be
conſidered of, and that which is in déed the principall intent
and meaning of the Apoſtle, is the ſinceritie & that euery one
in theſe duties muſt performe. For he would haue vs faithful
in the office that is committed vnto vs, whatſoeuer it be, and
that according to the meaſure of Faith, & the grace that is gyuen
to vs, we occupy well our talent vntill our Lord & maſter
come.1. Pet. 4. 11. Saint Peter is alſo of that mind, If any man ſpeak, let
him ſpeak as the words of God. By theſe things it may appear,
to what end the offices were appointed in the ancient. Roman
Church, & what was required at the hand of each Officer.
               But afterwards as ſuperſtition began to grow, ſo theſe functions
heer ſpoken of by thapoſtle began to be leſſe regarded, and
other were had in a greater accompt. For theſe are the orders in
the Romiſh Church.Diſt. 21. cap. Cleros. Prieſts, Deacons, Subdeacons, Candle ſnuffers,
or Candle-cariers, Exorciſts or Coniurers, Readers, Porters.
Some alſo reckon the Singers amongſt their orders. And although
euen the meaneſt of theſe might performe ſome neceſſarie
ſeruice in the Church, yet by what reaſon can they imagine
that their Candle-cariers, or Porters, are neerer to the Prieſts office,
then other that haue no ſuch office in the Church? As for
their Prieſts, who are to ſupply the place of Prophets, teachers,
and exhorters, they haue in a maner altered that function, and giuen
them another work to doe. For when they take orders, the
Biſhop giuing them in their hand the Chalice with wine,Durand. Ration. diuin. li. 3. and the
couer of the chalice with one of their cakes vpon it, ſaith to them,
Receiue power to offer a ſacrifice to God, and to ſay Maſſe, both for
them that liue, and for the dead, in the name of the Lord. So preaching
is no part of their dutie, but only to ſacrifice and ſay Maſſe.
And if any man will obiect, that we our ſelues haue alſo want of
ſuch learned Miniſters, as are able truely and ſoundly to teach,
and rightly to deuide the word of life: I muſt needs confeſſe
that we are neither as we ſhould, neither as we would be for that
point, but wiſh and pray daily, that the Lord would increaſe
mightily, the number or paynfull and faithfull labourers in his
vineyard. But yet we are not either ſo ſenceleſſe or ſhameleſſe,

that we dare alter Chriſtes ordinance. We are not ſo ſawcy, that
when he biddeth his ſeruants doe one thing, we will commaund
them to doe another.Math. 28. 19. If he ſay go teach all nations, baptiſing
them in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy
Ghoſt: We dare not ſay goe offer Sacrifice and ſay Maſſe for
the quicke and the dead. For that is quite to alter Gods ordinance,
to make them paſtours that (I ſay not) cannot, but muſt
not feede, and teachers that neede not teach. It is a ſcorne (ſaith
one Gilbert as Durand citeth him) A watchman to be blinde,Rationat. diuin. li. 1. a
forerunner to be lame, a prelate to be negligent, a teacher to
be vnſauery or ignorant, and a cryer to be dumb. No man therfore
can deny, but that there is in the Church of Rome, a great
degenerating and ſwaruing from the auncient offices which S.
Paule ſpeaketh of, ſo that as in their doctrines they wholy diſſent,
from that pure antiquitie, ſo in their doings they diſagree from
their perfect patterne. How vnlike in affection are theſe men to
the godly fathers who commended in times paſt the faith of
Rome?
                  Epiſt. li. 1. 
                  Ciprian is much 
                     •
                  greeued that he could not come to the
people (of Aſſuris as I take it) that he might vſe his miniſtery
among them to the comforting of euery particular man.Epiſt: 8. God
forbid (ſaith Gregory Nazianzen) that I ſhoulde play the
euill ſheephearde,Greg. Nazian. Orat. 4. which deuoureth the milke, clotheth himſelfe
with the wool, and doth ſell and kill the fat of the flocke,
leauing the reſt among the wild beaſtes and rockes. God forbid
that I ſhoulde feede my ſelfe and not my flocke. If I exhorte
not you (ſaith S. Auguſtine) to agree with your aduerſary,De temp. ſer. 9. I ſhall
continue in ſrife with him. He that biddeth you doe, commandeth
vs to ſpeake, If you become his aduerſaries, becauſe you
doe not that he willeth, we alſo ſhall be his foes, in not ſaying
that he chargeth vs. Yea Gregorie himſelfe a Biſhop of Rome,
howſoeuer it is now enough for a prieſt to ſay Maſſe and lift faire
(for that is a fine qualitie and much commended) doth flatlie
pronounce that a prieſt going in and out muſt die for it, if hee
make not his voyce to be heard, and that he prouoketh againſt
him the wrath of the iudge whom now we ſee not,De cura paſtorali. part. 2. c. 4. if the voyce
of his preaching ſound not, ſo that in his time as in the daies of S.
Paule, priſtes muſt be preachers, which now is not very neceſſarie
or requiſite with them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  AS for obedience to princes, without ſinne it cannot
be denyed vnto them,Obedience to magiſtrates. becauſe Chriſt commaundeth
to Giue to Caeſar that which is Caeſars.
So that it is a debt that we owe vnto them,Math. 22: 21.
and is due to be paid,Marke. 12. 17. a duety that they may
claime of vs, yea that God inioyneth vs to doe, and therefore
it muſt be performed.Rom. 13. 1. For this cauſe the Apoſtle S. Paul commandeth
euery ſoule to be ſubiect to the higher powers. Noting
thereby not onely the outward ſhew of ſubiection, which
many times may be, where is a trayterous heart: but euen
that hartie & true ſubmittnig of our ſelues with duetiful affection,What ſubiection is required.
which he calleth the ſubiection of the ſoule. The ſame
leſſon S. Peter did teach, who they ſay was Biſhop of Rome,
and wrote this Epiſtle at Rome, Submit your ſelues to al maner
of ordinance of man for the Lordes ſake. And againe, Honor
the king. And this ſubiection as not onely lay men are bound
to performe, but euen prieſtes and monkes, yea Apoſtles,
Euangeliſts,1. Pet. 2. 13. Prophets, if we 
                     〈◊〉
                   beléeue Chriſoſtome vpon
this place:17. ſo the biſhops of Rome for ſome hundreds of yers,
dutifully obſerued the ſame,Chriſoſt. ſer. 23. reuerencing as their Lords the
mighty potentates, as by ſome of their owne writings, and
in the hiſtories it may appeare, and alſo patiently ſuffering
vnder them reproches and death.
               But the Church of Rome that now is, doth many waies ſeeke to
raſe out this Law, and to diſanull this commandement. Firſt in
that the Biſhops of Rome haue ſo exalted themſelues aboue the
Emperours who are the greateſt Monarches,Popes aboue Emperours. that they haue
made them to cary their meate to them, to giue them water to
waſh, and bowe and kneele to them, to leade their horſe, cary
their canapy, hold their ſtirrop, waite at their gates barefooted
and bare legged, to lie proſtrate at their feete, with ſuch other
moſt reprochfull diſgraces as they haue offered vnto them. And
who knoweth not the conſtitution of Boniface the eight? That if
a man wilbe ſaued, he muſt beleeue that euery creature is ſubiect
to the biſhop of Rome. God commaundeth euery ſoule to be ſubiect
to princes: Not ſo ſaith the Pope: all princes, yea the

Emperour himſelfe ſhalbe ſubiect to me, nay his glorie is nothing
in compariſon of mine. And this is not onely, by the pride
of the Popes themſelues:Rebellion againſt princes but wheras ſtories teach that the godly
Chriſtians prayed for infidell Emperours▪ now their diuines doe
affirme it to be lawfull to diſobey, to rebell againſt, and to depoſe
ſuch kings or princes as they will call heritickes, yea to
kill ſuch is with them an action godly and honourable,1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. yea meritorious
too. Would any man haue thought, that S. Peter who
ſo humbly, as a fellowe elder intreateth the elders to feed the
flocke which God hath committed to them, not as Lords ouer
Gods heritage, could euer haue had ſo degenerate a ſucceſſour,
to haue ſit in his chaire (as they ſay the Pope doth) and yet in
pride of heart doth not onely aduance himſelfe aboue al biſhops,
but alſo ouer all creaturs? Or would a man haue imagined theſe
holy fathers would euer haue hatched ſo barbarous treaſons? Let
this then be recorded of a memoriall to all poſteritie, and for a
perpetuall ſtaine to that bloudy Church of Rome, the mother
of all treaſons and tretcheries, of al vnnaturall and villainous practiſes,
that ſhee doth not onely directly oppoſe herſelfe to the
worde of God, the doctrine of the Apoſtles and the very Law
of nature and nations, but alſo ſhee and her deere darlinges
by their moſt vile practiſes, doe crie it out vnto the world, more
ſhrill then the ſound of any trumpet, that they quite haue abandoned
the affections of men. Haue not we in England good
cauſe to deteſt ſuch doctrine and doctours, who haue wrought
ſo effectually in the heartes of many of our Engliſh fugitiues,
that their treaſons haue no ende, their crueltie hath no meaſure,
but that they deſire and attempt to lay violent handes vpon the
Lordes annoynted, which the Godly of all times haue feared to
purpoſe, or thinke againſt the moſt wicked? Yea doth not
the Catholicke Tyrant,The ſpaniſh tyrant. that calleth himſelfe by the name of
a king, but is in deede a reproch and ſhame to the verie name,
that he ſo hath diſhonoured, doth he not corrupt with gold,
and intice by all fayre promiſes, ſubiectes to kill their princes,
and to murther them whome they ought to defende, obey
and reuerence? It is too true, it is too playne. What kingdomes
hath he not tempted? what princes hath he not indaungered?
Howe many hath he gotten deſtroyed? So that I am

often times driuen to wonder and maruell,A warning to princes. what ſluggiſhneſſe
or ſecurity poſſeſſeth the heartes of Chriſtian kings and princes,
that they ioyne not their powers together, againſt that common
enemie, not to princes onely, but euen to mankinde. His ambition
increaſeth, as doe his daies, & his cruel purpoſes cannot be
numbred. He incrocheth cōtinually as he can vpon other mens
right, and vniuſtly if his might will ſerue, diſpoſſeſſeth the iuſt
heires of their kingdomes and dominions. His doings declare
that he enuieth all your glory (O you potentates) and aſpireth
to euery of your inheritances and principalities. And will you
thus ſtand gazing on, as men amazed at his ſtrange attemptes,
whileſt hauing preuailed againſt your neighbors, he alſo take you
in hand, when his power ſhall be increaſed, and yours diminiſhed?
Doe you not know that it is high time for you to looke
about you, when your neighbours howſe it ſet on fire? Bande
therefore and combine your ſelues together, to reforme or
reſtrayne his vnbrideled affections. I doe not wiſhe his ſubiectes
to rebell againſt him, for that we ſee is vnlawfull: but
I pray God to put ſuch a hearte and courage into his neighbours
and equals, that they woulde teach him to knowe, that his
omnipotente minde, made proude with his might and wealth
ſhall not alwaies be ſatisfyed with the ſpoyle of other. But to
leaue this Romiſh Catholicke, to his Catholicke practiſes, vntill
God ſhall eyther conuert his heart, or confound his power,
what cauſe hath the Pope ſo to magnifie himſelfe, and to claime
ſuch ſoueraigntie ouer them whom he ought to obey? we ſee
the Apoſtles would haue all without exception ſubiect to princes.The old Romiſh fath doth not once mention the popes ſupremacie.
The Popes ſupremacy is not once mentioned, although S.
Paule writing to the Romans might haue had good occaſion to
haue commended the glory of that ſeate, if any ſuch thing had
beene: and S. Peter, if he had any ſuch ſoueraignty, had iuſt
cauſe to haue required ſubmiſſion to himſelfe as wel as to kings,
and ſhould haue made more accompt of himſelfe, then to be
but a fellow elder with others. But the Apoſtles haue bin taught
to ſpeake by the ſpirit of God.1 Pet. 2. 13. The Popes haue done according
to the pride of their owne heart.1. Pet. 5. 1. And it is a verie ſtrong preſumption
againſt the ſuppoſed ſoueraigntie, which they ſay S. Peter
had ouer all, that S. Marke his fauorit and follower, who alſo

(if ſtories be true) wrote his goſpell at Rome, at the requeſt of
Peters wel-willers: yet the ſame his goſpell, neyther maketh
any mention of the great miracles, which they woulde haue vs
to Imagine that he wrought againſt Simon Magus (which is one
of their principall argumentes to proue Peters being at Rome)
neyther hath one worde more then the reſt whereby we may
gather any ſuch ſuperioritie in him. And if he make any mention
of Peter, it is without any ſignification of his iuriſdiction ouer
others. Yea when he ſpeaketh of his calling he thus barely deliuereth
it vnto vs.Mak. 1. 16. 
                  And (Ieſus) paſſing by the ſea of Galile, hee
ſawe Simon and Andrew his brother, &c. And reporting the contention
that was among the Apoſtles which of them ſhould be
chiefe,Mark. 9. 35 he taketh no occaſion to commend to them,Mark 10. 37. or to vs
that ſoueraignty,Mark. 8. 33 although the later time Iames and Iohn deſired
the ſame from him and the reſt, reporting how Chriſt reproued
him, he vſeth no excuſe, no mitigation of the offence. Now ſeeing
neither when he ſetteth forth his calling, neither in pointing to his
infirmity, neyther in noting theſe contentions, he hath ſo much as
any way ſignifyed his ſuperioritie: it followeth that eyther S.
Marke was iniurious to his maſter in not giuing to him his due
place, or vnmindefull of his duetie to Gods Church, in concealing
from it, ſo neceſſary an Article of religion, as nowe they
holde it, or elſe that there was rather no ſuch matter, and therefore
he coulde not write of it. For after Chriſt was once aſcended,Act: 2
and the holy Ghoſt ſent in viſible forme, then was it time
to knowe all the Articles of religion: ſo that our abuerſaries
cannot tell vs, that S. Marke for modeſties cauſe did not write
of theſe thinges. For not to write of that which is neceſſary
to be beleeued if hee knewe it, had beene greate wickedneſſe.
Subiection therefore to Princes was of the auncient
faith of the firſt faithfull Romans. But this ſoueraignty and
Supremacy of the biſhoppes of Rome, is but a poynte of
the newe learning or elſe the dregges of Simon Magus his
pride.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  THE Apoſtle hauing exhorted vnto ſuch
Chriſtian dueties as we may not omit:
commeth in his xiiii. Chapter to take order
for ſuch things as of themſelues being indifferent,
are according to the circumſtances
to be vſed or not.What are the things indifferent. Wherein we may alſo
marke, (and it is worth not
                     •
                  ing,) how farre they wander
from S. Paules rules. And firſt all external or worldly things,
are of themſelues, & in their owne nature indifferent, meats,
and drinkes,Rom. 14. 14. apparrell, daies and times and ſuch like, I know
and am perſuaded by the Lord Ieſus, that nothing is common
of it ſelfe (that is vncleane) ſaith S. Paul. And againe the kingdome
of God is not meate and drinke, but righteouſneſſe and
peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, as if he had ſaid, true holines,
religion, or the acceptable ſeruice to God, conſiſteth not in
eating or not eating, drinking or not drinking, but in this
rather, that thy minde beeing rauiſhed with true ſpirituall
ioy, thou ſhouldeſt ſéeke to ſerue God (not in ſuch toyes) but
in ſincere righteouſnes, and to cheriſh thy brother in perfect
peace. And therefore for the vſe of ſuch thinges he giueth
theſe rules, Let not him that eateth, deſpiſe him that eateth
not,
                  Exod. 3. 
                  and let not him that eateth not, iudge him that eateth.
So that he will not for ſuch thinges haue one man to iudge
another. Secondly it is neceſſary that Euery man be perſwaded
fully in his owne minde, whether he may with a good conſcience
grounded vpon the warrant of the worde,5. doe
that which he doth.22. For Happie is hee which condemneth
not himſelfe, in that which hee alloweth. For hee that maketh
conſcience is damned if he eate, becauſe hee eateth not
of fayth. For whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne. Thirdly,
we muſt not put a ſtumbling blocke, or an occaſion to fall
in our brothers waie,
                  13. or doe any thing that may greeue or
offende him,15. for whome Chriſt hath died. But yet we muſt
take heede, that we haue not ſo much regarde vnto man, to
pleaſe and beare with him in his weakneſſe, that we cheriſh

him in his ignorance or infirmitie;19. but withall we muſt Do
thoſe things, wherby one may edifie another. For euen Saint
Paul,
                  1. Cor. 9. 20. 22. 
                  who made himſelfe a Iew for the Iewes, and was made all
things to all men, that he might by all meanes ſaue ſome: Yet
reſiſted Peter to the face, that is plainly and openly, when he
had not ſo due regard to edifying of others, as he ſhould haue
had,Gala. 2. 11. as may appeare in that ſecond Chapter to the Galathians.
And this is the ſumme of that, which thapoſtle teacheth
the Romans of theſe things. For that which he addeth in the
beginning of the xv. Chapter, belongeth to ſuch points as I
haue alreadie touched. And in ſuch things muſt thoſe exhortations
be regarded,1. Pet. 4. 8. which Saint Peter hath. But aboue all
things haue feruent loue among your ſelues, for loue couereth
the multitude of ſinnes.
                  1. Pet. 3. 8. And that we ſhould all be of one
mind.
                  1. Pet. 5. 5. And that we ſhould Submit our ſelues euery man one to
another. Thus then we ſée, that theſe indifferent and externall
things, haue not in themſelues any holyneſſe, or vnholyneſſe,
but may be vſed, or not vſed, if we be rightly perſuaded
of our libertie therein, ſo that we offend not our weak brethren,
but ſéek their edifying. Therfore in ſuch things we
muſt neither condemne, or commend others. And this is
the auncient and Catholike faith of Rome. Which although
it were by ſome men (otherwiſe not euill) dangerouſly aſſaulted,
and that not long after the dayes of thapoſtles: yet
the godly of thoſe times, did hold faſt the libertie which they
had by Chriſt, and would not ſuffer the Church to be ſubiected
to ſuch obſeruations.Ignatius. It may be gathered by Ignatius
his Epiſtles to the Philadelphians, and to Heron, that ſome
there were then, that put ſome holyneſſe in eating, or not
eating, againſt whom he gyueth this charge in both thoſe
Epiſtles, that they eſtéeme not ſuch as kéepe not faſt the preſcript
rules, to belong to Chriſt, but to be wolues in ſhéepes
clothing, that ſéeke to deuour. And yet not long after, one
Alcibiades a good man,Euſeb. Hist. eccleſ. li. 5. ca. 3. and one that alſo ſuffered Martyrdome,
did by too auſter diet, (no doubt thinking therein to
conſiſt ſome ſeruice of God) refuſe to vſe Gods creatures,
and gaue to other example of offence, and therof being reprooued
by one Attalus, he afterwards reformed that his error.

Yea in the Church of Rome, Victor being Biſhop there, began
ſome impechment of this libertie, whileſt he ſought too
earneſtly to tye other churches to obſerue in ſuch things the
cuſtomes of the Church of Rome.
                  Euſeb. Hist. eccleſ. li. 5. ca. 25. But Ireny worte vnto him
in the name of the reſt of his brethren in Fraunce, letting
him vnderſtand, that neither his predeceſſors did, nor he
ought for ſuch things to diſſolue the bond of vnitie that was
among the Churches.cap. 26. And thus we ſée, how that a good
while after the Apoſtles daies, this doctrine commended héer
to the Church of Rome was continued both there and elſe
where throughout the Church, & that they would not ſuffer
any neceſſitie to be decréed in ſuch obſeruances.
               But now the new Romiſh Faith, doth beare another ſtamp, and
is of another making.Mark. 7. 18. For where Saint Mark out of Chriſtes
mouth ſaith, that meats defyle not the man, and alſo the Apoſtle,
that the kingdom of God is not in ſuch things, which elſwhere
he more plainly vttereth in theſe words:1. Cor. 8. 8. Meat doth not commend
vs to God, that is, to eat, or not to eat it maketh vs no better,
no holyer, no more acceptable to God. The Church of Rome
on the contrarie, hath almoſt all her Religion conſiſting in ſuch
outward obſeruances, all her holyneſſe in a maner is contayned
within theſe few precepts,Coloſſ. 2. 21. Touch not, taſt not, handle not, and
ſome other toyes like to theſe. What is more commonly taught
among them, then that to eat fleſh, egges, or whitmeat at certaine
times, is a grieuous ſinne, for any man of lawfull yeares and
in health? Or for ſome at any time to vſe them? I know they wil
aunſwer the Church hath otherwiſe commaunded, and therefore
to take libertie to vſe theſe things, is a ſinne, becauſe the
Church hath commaunded they ſhall not vſe them. But heer I
might examin who gaue aucthoritie to the Church to ſay that is
vnlawfull, that God ſaith is lawfull. Again I might ſhew, that
not onely in reſpect of the commaundement of the Church,
theſe things are obſerued, but euen in reſpect of ſome other opinion
in the meat it ſelfe, then ſhould be had, becauſe that more
ſuperſtitiouſly they obſerue it then Gods precepts. But if they
had regard onely to the commaundement, doubtleſſe there is
no man ſo ſottiſh, but would rather obey Gods expreſſe commaundement,
then any decree of the Church. But theſe and

ſuch other poynts I omit: onely purpoſing in this place to ſhew,
how great a piece of popiſh holines conſiſteth in theſe externall
ſeruices, wherin the Apoſtle telleth vs there is no ſuch thing. Holines
in abſtaining from certaine meats, in keeping of certaine
daies, in gadding to Rome, Ieruſalem or Compoſtell in pilgrimage,
in holy bread, holy water, palme croſſes, aſhes, in hairecloth,
in going barefoote, in not touching mony, in not ſpeaking,
in bearing in thy boſome a piece of Saint Iohns goſpell, in
Agnus deis or bleſſed grains hanging about thy neck, in a Monks
cowle, in his bootes, and great holines in S. Francis breeches, in
dead mens ſkuls, and bones, in the bloud of hayles, & many other
ſuch like thinges. Whereby the true holines, whichis the obedience
to Gods holy lawes, is almoſt forgotten, while men content
themſelues, with this vnholy and trifling traſh, which for want
of better ſtuffe, the Romiſh Church that now is, giueth her fooles
in ſteed of bables to play withall, or make them paſtime. For
why may I not accompt and proclaime them for fooles, who wil
not ſo much as heare the wiſedome of God, and will ſo readely,
nay ſo greedely follow ſuch follies of men? Or that wil imagine
that God who is a ſpirit, and will be worſhipped in ſpirite and
trueth,Iohn. 4. 24. can be any thing delighted in ſuch apiſh toyes? well
to this ende haue I ſaide thus much, that we may ſee, that wheras
the olde faith of the Romans, retayned a Chriſtian liberty,
in the vſe of all theſe thinges, to be vſed according to the rule
of charitie: the new Romiſh religion, bringeth them that beleeue
and followe it, into a great bondage and ſubiection,
to almoſt all the creatures, and make them to eſteeme themſelues
vnholy, if moderately, without breach of any Lawe of
God or offence of brethren, with thankeſgiuing as God appointeth,
they vſe the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  AND becauſe the Apoſtle maketh his praiers
and requeſtes ſometime for the Romans, I
thinke it not amiſſe to conſider of his petitions
that he maketh, that we may ſee whether
heerein the Church of Rome doe follow

his godly example, or in his prayſes and thankeſgiuinges
to God for his benefites towards them.Praying to God onely. Which his prayers
and thankeſgiuinges if we doe marke, are directed onely vnto
God, in the name of Chriſt for other mediatour hee did
not Knowe but onely one mediatour of God and man,
                  1. Tim. 2. 5. 
                  the
man Chriſt Ieſus.
                  Rom. 1. 9. He taketh God to witneſſe of the continuall
mention that he maketh of them in his prayers. And
why doth he call God to witneſſe thereof, but becauſe hee
prayed to him he deſireth that God of patience and comfort
will giue them on mind,Rom. 15. 5. and that The God of peace (will)
cruſh Sathan vnder their feete. Hee willeth them to pray for
him to God not to any other,Rom. 16. 20. 
                  Helpe me, or ſtriue with me
by prayers to God for mee.
                  Rom. 15. 30. And in his thankeſgiuings.
I thanke my God through Ieſus Chriſt for you all. And againe
To God onely wiſe be glory through Ieſus Chriſt foreuer.
The Apoſtle Saint Peter bleſſeth God the Father of
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Rom. 1. 8. For as the prophet Dauid ſaith, I haue
lift vp mine eies vnto the hils,
                  Rom. 16. 27. 
                  from whence commeth my helpe,
                  1. Pet. 1. 3.
                  my helpe commeth from the Lord that made heauen and earth,
                  Pſal. 121. 12.
The Godly know no other helpe but God, and therefore pray
to none but him, neither are thankefull to any but to him,
when they haue receiued any benefit. And for this cauſe,
Chriſt when he woulde haue a ſupply of victuals,Mark. 6. 41. to reléeue
them that followed him and were hungry, Hee looking vp to
heauen bleſſed as S. Marke reporteth.Mark. 7. 34. And ſo he looked vp to
heauen likewiſe when he would cure him that was deafe and
dumme.Math. 6. 9. For he who teaching vs to pray, inſtructeth vs to
ſay Our Father which art in heauen, doth by this his geſture,
teach vs to lift our handes and eies, and heartes vnto heauen,
to looke for helpe from our heauenly Father. To him
he prayeth Abba Father,
                  Mark. 14. 36. 
                  all thinges are poſſible vnto thee,
take away this cup from me. And a little before he did yéelde
vp the Ghoſt:Mark. 15. 34. 
                  My God, my God why haſt thouforſaken me?
The whole ſcriptures agrée with this that héere is taught.
They are full of commaundementes wherein we are charged
to call vpon God in the day of our trouble; full of examples
of the Godly, that make requeſtes to God onely:
full of thankeſgiuings, wherein the faithfull acknowledge

that euery good & perfect gifte commeth from aboue from the
Father of lightes,Iac. 1. and therefore they are moued to ſay with
Dauid, O giue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is gratious, his mercy
endureth for euer. Yea what way ſo euer we turne ourſelues
or what good thing ſo euer we conſider in our ſelues,
we muſt confeſſe, that all that we acknowledge our ſelues
bound to be thankfull for, is giuen vs of God. Whether life
or liuing, thinges temporall or eternall, or whatſoeuer other
bleſſing. And therefore to him onely muſt we make our
prayers, for that we want: to him onely muſt we giue
thankes, for that we haue. And ſuch are the prayers that
were made in the auncient Church of Rome. Yea ſuch are
the prayers of all the godly through out the ſcriptures. And
this was the faith of Rome alſo in the daies of Iuſtin the Martyr
who liued at Rome. For he writing againſt Tryphon the
Iewe, or conferring with him of religion, out of theſe words
of the Pſalms,Colloq. cum Trypho. 
                  Thou art my God, departe not from me ſaith
thus. He teacheth that euery man muſt repoſe his truſt in
God, and aſke for health and helpe of him. So that as the Apoſtle
did, ſo Iuſtinus teacheth vs that we ſhould doe. I might
to this end haue a whole cloud of witneſſes, out of the Fathers
of the purer age of the Church: but becauſe I will not
be tedious in ſo plaine a matter, I content my ſelfe with that
one place out of Tertullian Aske and ye ſhall haue,
                  De preſcript ad Haereticos. 
                  is ſpoken
to ſuch as know of whom they ſhould aske, that is of him that
hath promiſed anything, euen of the God of Abraham, Iſaac, &
Iacob. And for the doctrine of mediation this onely will I ſay
out of S. Auguſtine, That he only that maketh interceſſion for al,
and none for him, is the true Mediatour.
                  Contra Epiſtol. perueniam Donat. cap. For as he inferreth afterwards,
If Paul had beene a Mediatour, then other alſo his fellow
Apoſtls ſhould haue beene Mediatours likewiſe. And if there
ſhould haue bin many, then Paul himſelf had no reaſon to ſay one
God, one Mediatour between God & man, the man Chriſt Ieſus.
Thus we ſée that S. Auguſt. confuting the auncient heretiks
called the Donatiſts, who made other Mediators beſids Chriſt
doth euen by the ſame weapons, yea with the ſame blow beat
downe our aduerſaries the Romiſh Catholickes and giueth
their doctrine of many Mediatours a deadly wound.
               
                  
But the Romiſh Church that now is, as in all things els, they
frame vnto themſelues newe opinions, ſo heere alſo they haue
forſaken the old waies, yea they haue committed two euils, they
haue forſaken God,Ier. 2. 13. the fountaine of liuing waters, to digge to
themſelues pittes, broken pittes, that will holde no water. And
we need not heerein examine their doctrine: their practiſe doth
ſufficiently ſhew and proue,Vowes to the Saintes. what blaſphemies and ſuperſtitions
that Church cheriſheth, In perils and dangers by ſea and by
land, they will vowe and promiſe, offerings and giftes, which if
they eſcape they will alſo performe to ſuch ſaintes as they vowed
vnto. For euery ſickenes they had, and in that Romiſh kingdome,
of more then Aegyptical darkenes, they yet haue a
peculiar Saint, to whome they would call for helpe. Yea euery
beaſt had their leach among them, and their very pigs were not
without their Saint Anthonie.
                  Honour to Images. In euery Church they had their
Images, before which they kneeled, they knockt, they crept, they
prayed, they ſwete, thy cenſed, they offered and did before
them as much outwarde honour, as they would or coulde doe
to GOD himſelfe. In their names woulde they dedicate
Churches and Chappels, thereby the rather to binde them to
heare them when they pray, and helpe them when they ſtand in
need. And whereas that pattern of prayer that Chriſt hath deliuered,
teacheth vs onely to pray to him, whom we may call Father,
and ſay Our Father which art in heauen, yet theſe Romiſh
Rabbies (in heauenly matters as blind as beetels) can very well
ſuffer the people,Our father to hee Saints & ſhee Saints. nay they teach them to ſay that prayer, before
euery Image not of men onely, but of women alſo. What madneſſe
is this (if it were lawfull to pray vnto Saintes, which is
in trueth a greate diſhonoring of God, and manifeſtly againſt
the commaundement) to kneele before the Image of Saint
Mary the mother of Chriſt, or Mary Magdalen, or any other
woman ſaying Our Father to them? If they coulde heare vs,
woulde not they thinke we were mad? Or in like manner
kneeling before the Images of Saint Iohn, Saint Peter or any
man to ſay to them,1. Cor. 14. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  Hayle Mary full of grace? Can wee
thinke this to bee according to the rule that Saint Paule giueth
to pray in ſpirite, and vnderſtanding? And yet theſe were
their wordes that they muſt powre out before euery Idoll,

their beades did teach them to mumble vp ſo many creedes, ſo
many Aue maries, ſo many pater noſters. Their pardons and indulgencies
require the like order. God himſelfe coulde haue no
more of them then ſuch ſtuffe as they had learned to reckon or
ſcore vp on their beades, and the meaneſt Saint ſhould haue no
leſſe. Yea the learneder ſorte, yet among other their prayers,
muſt ſalute God himſelf if at any time they would pray vnto him
or Saint Peter or any other he Saint with Hayle Mary.
                  Hayle Mary to Hee Saints. Fie vpon
ſuch brutiſh and beaſtly blindnes, whereby men and women are
ſo beſotted,Pſal. 109. 7. that they doe not onely powre forth vaine prayers
that are turned into ſinne, wherein they can finde no comfort,
becauſe they ſeek it not of him that can help, but alſo abuſe moſt
fooliſhly the Lords Prayer which onely belongeth to our heauenly
Father, yet they will pray with it before euery their Saints
men or women. Well their prayers then we ſee are too abſurd.
So are their thankeſgiuinges as before I ſaide, in that they yeeld
all praiſe and glory of their deliuerance, not to God onely who
onely hath wrought it, but to their Idols of whom they asked it.
As for Mediator we haue none but Chriſt, we ſhould know none
but Chriſt: I know not (ſaith Saint Auguſtine) what other interceſſour
to ſende to thee,Meditat. cap. 
                        •
                     
                   but him onely that is the propitiation
for our ſinne. And afore what greater comfort, then to moue
the father to pity by remembring his ſonne. He was figured by
the high prieſt in Moſes his Lawe. He onely offered the peoples
offeringes, he onely entred into the moſt holy place, to teach vs
to content our ſelues with one onely Mediatour which is Chriſt.
Where learned our Romiſh Catholicks to pray to any other then
vnto God? Where learned they to ſeeke for other mediatours?
We ſee the auncient faith of the Romans, hath no ſuch commandement,
no ſuch patterne or example to follow, but the contrary.
Let not then from henceforth the Romiſh Catholicks, brag of the
auncient Roman faith, for they haue it not, they haue chaunged
well neere euery poynt of it, they haue made it almoſt all new,
ſo that in the Romiſh Church that now is, there remayneth not
ſo much in a manner as a ſhadow thereof.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  I Laſtly note in this Epiſtle to the Romans, what
kinde of treaſure it is, that he purpoſeth to bring
vnto them,What treaſure Saint Paule brought to the Romans. when he commeth vnto them. I
warrant you nothing ſo glorious and gliſtering
as the Popes Iewels are. I deſire (ſaith he) to
ſee you that I may impart or beſtow among you ſome ſpirituall
gift,
                  Rom. 1. 11. 
                  that you might be ſtabliſhed. Againe I am ſure that when
I come vnto you, I ſhall come with aboundance of the bleſſing
of the goſpell of Chriſt.
                  Rom. 15. 
                        •
                     9. We ſée then what are the giftes and
graces, that he is minded to giue them, what is the ſtore,
what are the bleſſings, that himſelfe reioyceth in, and ſéeketh
to comfort them, in that he is ſure he ſhalbe furniſhed
with them, when he commeth among them. It is the miniſterie
of the word, the preaching of the goſpel, the glad tidings
of ſaluation, that he promiſeth to them: which he alſo calleth
a ſpirituall gift, becauſe it teacheth heauenly and ſpirituall
things, it reioyceth, and inſtructeth, the ſpirit & inward man,
it is not effectuall and powerfull but by the ſpirit. And hée
calleth it a bleſſing, as in trueth it is the greateſt benefit and
bleſſing that héere we can haue. His meaning is to labour
earneſtly among them in preaching the word, as he did in all
places where he came, to teach them, that they may knowe
their duety, to exhort them that they may do it. To reproue
them if they be negligent, to councell them when they ſtand
in néed, to comfort them when they are in heauines, and
all by the goſpell of Chriſt, and this is it that he calleth The
bleſſing of the goſpell of Chriſt.
               
               To conſider how S. Paul was exerciſed at Rome, and to ſee
how the Pope is there occupied, it would make a man to maruel
that euer thoſe prophane mē dare giue vnto themſeues the name
of holy father, in whom you cannot find one ſparke of that heauenly
knowledge, painefull diligence, vigilant care, and continuall
trauell in labouring in the word that ſhould be in a holy father,The Popes bleſſings.
or was in Paul, in Peter, or the other Apoſtles. But I pray you
what are the ſpirituall bleſſings that this holy father of Rome beſtoweth.
Sometime he wil ſend to ſome of his dear ſons, a golden

roſe conſecrated, or ſome picture conſecrated, ſometime a ſword
in token that he would haue them fight for him, yea perchaunce
to embrew in the bloud of the Saints, and all muſt be hallowed
that he doth ſend. Sometimes perchaunce a Cardinals hat, to one
that hath ſhewed himſelfe ſtubborne enough againſt his Prince.
Sometime he will beſtow Kingdomes, if they vpon whom he
beſtoweth them, can get them from the right heires. Sometime
he will beſtow vpon ſubiects, immunities from performing their
dutyfull obedience, as he doth many times by his priuiledges.
As for indulgences and pardons, any bodie that will pray and
pay for them, may haue them. And they that dwell at Rome get
yet another maner of bleſſing with his two fingers, wherwith
he bleſſeth the people, that gaze at him when he is caried abroad.
To be ſhort, at certain times he bleſſeth thoſe that are
called bleſſed graines, or Agnus dei, or ſuch like ſtuffe, and cauſeth
theſe to be ſent into Countries far and neer, deluding and
deceiuing by ſuch toyes the hearts of the ſimple,Rom. 16. 18. & therwithall
filling their owne panches and purſes, as though they had gotten,
or thoſe had giuen ſome great ſpirituall gift, when they
haue ſome ſuch toy conſecrated by the Pope. Theſe are his gifts,
ſuch are his bleſſings.The Pope doth no duties of the miniſterie. If you would haue better, he cannot afford
them. For he is not for the moſt part able to preach & teach;
It is againſt honour and eſtimation to ſeek to comfort the afflicted
conſcience. No neither the Pope nor his Colledge of Cardinals,
will buſie themſelues in the Miniſterie of the word, in the
abundant bleſſing wherof Saint Paule reioyceth. Is the darkneſſe
more contrarie to the light,Epiſt. Iud. 12. then are theſe vain promiſes or
ſhewes of ſpirituall comfort (verie cloudes without water, and
trees without fruit of true conſolation) to that perfect peace of
mind, and ioy of conſcience, which the Apoſtle promiſeth vnto
them, and purpoſed to work among them, by the powerful preaching
of the Goſpell of peace. This, this is in deed a true conſecrated
ſword, which ſhall pierce euen to the heart and conſcience
of the ſinner, and make a deeper wound, then all the hallowed
ſwords, that the Popes can ſanctifie. And thus (to be
ſhort) we ſee, that where Paule commeth, he bringeth with him
ſpirituall gifts, euen abundance of bleſſing by the miniſterie of
the word. But the Pope, becauſe he cannot skill of ſuch bleſſings

vſeth other, be bleſſeth fire, water, ſalt, oyle, ſwords, roſes, books,
belles, candles, palmes, aſhes, wax, paper, parchments, lead, pictures
or payntings, falſely perſwading ſillie ſoules, that hee is able
to put holineſſe into them. And thus it appeareth, that if we
conſider the doctrine of the Church of Rome, examining it
with that that was taught in the dayes of Saint Paul and Saynt
Peter, they are nothing like. If their practiſe, they are cleane contrarie,
ſo that the new Romiſh Church, hath no cauſe to brag of
that old faith of the Romanes.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  AND theſe are if I bee not deceaued, all the points
of religion in controuerſie betweene vs and the
Church of Rome at this day. Whereof out of the
Apoſtles epiſtle to the Romanes, wee may gather
any certayne doctrine. Wherein if we diſſent from the religion
of the Romiſh Church that now is, that we may iumpe
and ioyne, with the auncient faith of the Romanes, commended
by thapoſtle, as ſpoken of, (and that worthilie) in all the
worlde, I truſt no indifferent Chriſtian, that in ſingleneſſe
of heart ſeeketh the trueth, either will or can iuſtly reprooue
vs. And as hitherto I haue ſhewed what conſent there is in
the groundes of their doctrines, betweene S. Paul who wrote
to Rome, to confirme them in the faith, & S. Peter who (they
ſay) wrote from Rome, and S. Marke alſo, who wrot his Goſpell
at Rome as in hiſtories it is recorded: ſo now in one point
let vs ſee what Saint Peter thinketh,Mariage and vou
                        •
                     s. in one poynt I ſay not
touched by Saint Paule in that epiſtle, although in other places
plentifully enough by him deliuered. Saint Peter therefore
in handling the dueties betweene man and wife, doth
thereby commend the honourable eſtate of marriage, as a
ſtate of life whereof God hath a care, and therefore giueth
lawes and rules, in obſeruing whereof huſbands and wiues
may ſerue and pleaſe God. And if he had ſo verie well liked
of ſingle life, as they who call themſelues his ſucceſſours
doe, hee woulde no doubte haue taken occaſion, to

haue put in ſome caueat for the ſame.Marke. 1. 30 vpon Math. 8 ver. 14. But himſelfe was maried
as the Rhemiſtes themſelues confeſſe, and though out of
Hierome they would proue, that being called to be an Apoſtle
he forſooke his wife: yet how falſe that is, Saint Peter himſelfe
doth plainely enough declare. For he exhorteth Husbands
to dwel with their wiues according to knowledge that is, to kéepe
and continue holily and kindly with them,1. Pet. 3. 7 not vngodly and
vncourteouſly to forſake them. And ſhall we imagine that S.
Peter would teach others and not himſelfe? or ſay one thing,
and doe another? or that in wordes exhorting them not to depart
from their wiues, by his example he would moue them
to leaue them? That be farre from vs once to imagine. And this
we may be ſure of, that if he had forſaken his wife, as our popiſh
Catholickes now, or ſome other in former times, iniurious
to that holy ordinance did ſurmiſe, he woulde yet ſo haue
tempered this his general commaundement, that his example
ſhoulde not haue béene manifeſtly repugnant to his doctrine.
Therefore that he was maried the ſcriptures report, and it is
by our aduerſaries confeſſed: but that he forſooke his wife, it
hath no ſhewe of proofe, no colour of trueth. Yea further the
Apoſtle doth inſinuate that the dwelling together of man and
wife in knowledge, is a furtheraunce to their prayers.
And therefore vnto that former exhortation he addeth theſe
wordes:1 Pet. 3. 7 
                  That your prayers be not hindred. Thereby declaring,
that the dwelling together of man and wife as they
ought to doe, is a furtheraunce to their prayers. Whereas
on the contrarie, their ſeparating of themſelues in bodie,
may breede ſuch an alienation of mindes, with other great inconueniences,
as may interrupt their prayers. And although
S. Peter meane not héereby that they ſhoulde ſo continually
dwel together, as that they might neuer withdraw themſelues
the more fréely to conſecrate as it were, and wholly giue them
ſelues to prayer and faſting: yet woulde he doubtleſſe according
to S. Paules rules,1. Cor. 7. 5. haue ſuch their abſtinence when anie
is, To be by conſent, for a time, and againe to come together,
that Sathan ſhoulde not tempt them for their incontinencie. For
all men and women are in danger of his aſſaultes, and therefore
To auoyd fornication,
                  2. 
                  let euery man haue his wife, and let

euery woman haue her owne husband,
                  1. Cor. 7. ſaith his fellow apoſtle.
And although men or women may for a time feele themſelues
voide of wanton and vnchaſt luſtes, yet becauſe, Not all men
can receiue this thing ſaue they to whom it is giuen,
                  Math. 19. 11. ſéeing I ſay
it is not in their power, but a rare gift of God, which how long
they ſhal haue it they are not certain, (yea to know who giueth
it is a high point of wiſdome the wiſeman ſaith:) what madnes
is it to promiſe that which thou canſt not performe? Or to ſéeke
for that which is not neceſſarie for thee? or to indeuor to pleaſe
God, with that which he requireth not of thée? How much better
is it for vs, to marke the good councell and godly aduiſe of S.
Paule,
                  1. Cor. 7. 9. 
                  It is better to marie then to burne, and this commandement
of the Apoſtle Peter, Let the husbands dwell with their
wiues, as men of knowledge. And this is the auncient faith,
and the holy practiſe of the Church of Rome in her purer
age.
               But the Church of Rome ſince that time, which would ſeem
more holy then euer god made her, or more perfect then he
requireth,Vowing of ſingle life. prophanely accompting of this holy ordinanuce,
as not pure inough for their vnpure Prieſts: will not admit any
into their holy orders of Prieſte or deacon that will not wholy
renounce for euer, this holy inſtitution, and vowe to lyue
alwayes a ſingle life. Which their impious and ſeruile ordinances
hath not one probable proofe, out of Gods word, neither
was it the auncient doctrine of the Church of Rome, in ſomuch
as ſome of them ſelues, euen halfe aſhamed of their forefathers
doings, confeſſe that in the primitiue Church there was no
ſuch thing required, but that all men that would might marye.
As for ſuch as are maryed, if they wilbe made prieſtes, or enter
into their orders, they muſt not by their tirannicall decree and
decretals any more dwell with their wiues as S. Peter willeth,1. Pet. 3. 7.
but they muſt rather defraude one an other foreuer which Paul
forbideth,1. Cor. 7 5. and with greate reaſon myſliketh. Thus this their
vowing of perpetuall ſingle life, they doe not onely highly
commend, but alſo do force their clergy to obſerue the ſame: &
yet it is not in al the Scripturs old nor new once commanded or
cōmended vnto that calling aboue any other, not once ſpoken
of or practiſed that can appeare in the old Roman Church. And

formance of the duties of mariage which ſo ſtraitly thapoſtles
require of all that are maried without exception, is not onely
not furthered in the Romiſh Church that now is, but alſo hindered
in ſome with great ſeueritie. And in ſuch ſort do they in all
points almoſt behaue themſelues, as if they were of purpoſe
diſpoſed or ſet vp, if not quite to aboliſh, yet dangerouſly to
corrupt, alter, and change, whatſoeuer Chriſt and his Apoſtles
left pure & ſincere. And thus much of the contrarietie of their
doctrine, that nowe call themſelues the Church of Rome, to
that which thapoſtles taught among the Romanes.Sup. Cant. ſer. 34
               
               Now therefore in reſpect of their cloked falſhood as Barnard
ſpeaketh, in that they hide as he ſaith that which is (true) & falſly
inuent that which is not, wee may iuſtly ſay of the Church of
Rome, as the ſame Father complaneth of the whole Church,
but eſpecially in reſpect of the pride and abuſe of that Church,
Al friends, and all foes, all neceſſaries, all aduerſaries, all of one
houſe, none that inſue after peace, al neighbors, all ſeeke their
owne,In Pſal. Qui habitat, ſer. 6 all Chriſtes ſeruaunts, all ſerue Antichriſt. Or as in another
place hee bemoaneth the pitifull eſtate of the Church.
Peace in reſpect of pagans, peace from heretikes, but no peace
with falſe children. Thou (O Lord Ieſus) haſt multiplied the
people, but haſt not increaſed our ioy: becauſe many are called
but few are choſen. And how little cauſe the Church of Rome
hath, to reioyce in her Catholikenes, and to brag of her multituds,
how little cauſe ſhe hath to increaſe her ioy if ſhe thinke
earneſtly of it, let the godly reader indifferently conſider. For
ſeeing ſhee leadeth men from the pure waters of the worde of
trueth, vnto the vnſauorie pudles of her owne inuentions, and
hath corrupted that ſincere milke, that the auncient Romanes
fed vpon,Reuel. 17. 2. & 18. 3. with the poyſon of her owne traditions, wherewith
the Church of Rome is now moſt dangerouſly aud deadly infected:Reuel. 18. 8.
the moe that follow her, the mo ſhall teſtifie that they are
deceaued by her, & the greater that the multitude is that ſhee
miſleadeth, the heauier in the end ſhall her iudgement be. For
ſeeing the inhabitants of the earth, and drunken with the wine
of her fornication, therefore ſhal her plagues come at one day,
death, and ſorow, and famine, and ſhee ſhalbe burnt with fire:
for ſtrong is the Lord God which will condemne her.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  NOW beſides theſe things, which this degenerat
Romiſhe Synagogue teacheth and doth, contrary
to the Doctrine and practice of the godly, in the
firſt and purer age of that auncient Church of
Rome: there are alſo many other things reckoned
now in the Romiſhe Church, for ſome principall poyntes of
religion, the denial or very doubting whereof, would be puniſhed
among them with death and diſtruction, which were
not then among the godly once named or thought vpon: nay
rather which doe mightely and manifeſtly impugne that which
they taught. But becauſe my purpoſe is in this treatiſe only
to ſhew how farre vnlike that auncient fayth of the Romanes,
is to this new religion of the Romiſh Church, by comparing
that olde faith, with this newe Religion, (which hitherto I
haue ſiucerly doone:) it ſhall be ſufficient onely to name theſe
doctrines and doings, which now they haue inſo great accompt
(as I can remember them) vntill they prooue out of ſuch hiſtories
of that Romane faith as are of good record, that they were
vſed in that primitiue Roman Church. Firſt for that their
gaynefull market and faire of Purgatorye fire: where doe
they finde it in the fore named writings?Purgatory. In what place of S.
Paules Epiſtle to the Romanes? in what text out of S. Peter
or S. Marke? Out of S. Paule to the Romans they will not ſo
much as dreame of anie proofe, neither yet dare the learneder
ſort of them, alleadge any thing out of ſaint Peter. But yet
the Rhemiſtes woulde fayne make the ignorant beleeue, that
there is ſomewhat in ſaint Peter,
                  1. Pet. 3. 19 for proofe of deliuering the
ſoules out of ſome place of torment after this life. What that
place is they dare not tell vs confidently: that it is Limbus patrum,
(the place where they imagine the faythfull Fathers
before Chriſt after death were kept) they will not affirme. And
they doe the more wiſely. For ſaint Peter there ſaith onely
thus much,20 that Chriſt (who was alwayes preſent with his
Church) Preached in ſpirit (not going downe in ſoule) to the
ſpirits or ſoules that are nowe in priſon, which were in time

paſt diſobedient: nowe this preſence of Chriſt, beeing but in
power of his ſpirit, to wit of his diuinitie of godhead. Agayne it
was to the deſtruction of thoſe diſobedient and ſtubberne men,
that would not heare Noah his preaching (for but viii. ſoules
onely were ſaued:) and therefore howe little this will helpe,
their Purgatorie now or Limbus patrum then, it is eaſie to ſée.
But on the contrarie S. Marke doth plainly wring from them,
one of the places which eſpecially they reſt vppon for proofe of
their purgatorie. For whereas our Sauiour Chriſt in ſainte
Matthew ſpeaking of the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt ſaith,Math 12. 32 
                  It
ſhall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world, not in the world
to come. (Therefore ſay they, there are ſinnes that are forgiuen
after this life, which muſt needs be in purgatory.) Saint
Marke who commeth after ſaint Matthew, and hearde belike
his Maiſter ſaint Peter expound Chriſts meaning concerning
that manner of ſpeech (for out of S. Hierom, and Clemens of
Alexandria,
                  Arg. in Evang. Marci. the Rhemiſtes themſelues confeſſe, that S. Marke
was Peters interpretor, and according to that hee had heard of
the mouth of S. Peter, wrote at Rome a briefe Goſpell, at the
requeſt of the brethren, which Peter alſo approoued and allowed
of.) S. Mark I ſay who had ſuch a teacher, doth thus teach vs
to expound or vnderſtand thoſe words of S. Matthew, that hee
that ſinneth againſt the holy Ghoſt,Mark. 3. 29. 
                  Hath not forgiuenes for euer,
but ſhalbe guiltie of eternall death. So that if S. Peter him
ſelfe be of that minde that S. Marke his diſciple was, we ſée hee
did not once dreame of any remiſſion of ſinne in another world,
by theſe words of our Sauiour Chriſt, but expoundeth S. Matthew
his ſence to be (for the latter muſt expounde the former,
when M. Bellarmine hath doone what he can to the contrarie)
that ſuch ſinne ſhal neuer be forgiuen.De purgat. li. 1. cap. 4. And then I truſt our aduerſaries
will not thus reaſon, The ſin againſt the holy ghoſt
ſhall neuer be forgiuen, therefore ſome ſinnes ſhall after this
life, or in an other worlde bee forgiuen, for then the children
would ſpit and laugh at their folly. And yet out of theſe words,
thus by S. Marke expounded, all the Prieſtes at Rome and
Rhemes cannot otherwiſe prooue this their concluſion. Neere
a kinne to this purgatory▪ is their Limbus puerorum, where they
place children not baptiſed,Limbus puerorum. but let them ſhewe what warrant

they haue for the ſame, what proofe that it was then beléeued,
when the Faith of the Romans was commended.Pilgrimages. Their Pilgrimages,Pardons.
pardons, and indulgences; are very holy things, if
we will beléeue the Popiſh Church, that now is called the Catholike
Church of Rome. But where doth Saint Paule commend
them to the Romans? Where doth S. Peter (that had as
good power to giue pardons as any Pope could haue) either
practiſe it,Agnus deies. or where doth he or his diſciple commaund ſuch
things?Bleſſed graines. And beſides ſuch pedlary ware, Agnus dei, bleſſed
graines, and ſuch paltry ſtuffe, ſent abroad in great packs into
all places to abuſe the world, are thought to haue many vertues,
and to be of great efficacie for many good purpoſes: But
I pray you my Maſters of Rome, when did S. Peter beſtow
his time in making ſuch trifles, or in packing vp ſuch wares (to
ſell vnto Chriſtians all Chriſtendome ouer) as it were in pedlers
packs?Croſſes. And how neceſſarie they will accompt the croſſe to
be, in all their ceremonies and ſeruices, he that readeth their
books cannot but ſée. And whatſoeuer antiquitie they wil pretend
for the ſame: yet they cannot teach, that S. Paule, and S.
Peter either taught the Romans to vſe it, or themſelues made
any either vpon themſelues or other.Reliques. Reliques they loue ſo
well, that if they cannot get the boans or reliques of good men
and women, yet any other ſuch like, be they of men or wemen
neuer ſo bad will ſerue their turne, ſo that they be ſaid to be
the Reliques of ſuch a Saint. Wherby it commeth to paſſe,
that ſome men and wemen, who while they liued, were like others,
hauing no ſuperſlous lymmes of their bodie, now when
they are dead, are by theſe Romiſh charmers turned into ſuch
monſters, as that they haue ſome many heads, others many
legges, others great numbers of armes: and ſo the parts of
their bodies are multiplied excedingly, (belike they were buried
in a fruitfull ſoyle) and yet euery Prieſt, that ſheweth theſe reliques,
commend that they haue to be the true relique, & ſome
miracle, or viſion, euery one of them alſo would commonly
faine, to proue that which they ſaid of their relique to be true.
And yet many of them muſt néedes be falſe: For one man or
woman had but one head, two armes, and ſo of the reſt accordingly.
And therfore all beſides that one head, or thoſe other

true parts of the bodie muſt needes be falſe. It is written that
one of our Kings of England named Edward, was euill troubled
with the toothache. And who knoweth not that Saint
Apolines teeth, are a préeſent remedie for the ſame diſeaſe, yf
their lyes may goe for true reportes. King Edward therefore
belike, being deſirous to haue the true teeth of S. Apoline, to
aply to his teeth, commaunded that the teeth of S. Apoline,
that were in all the Churches through the Realme kept for
reliques, ſhould be ſent to him, which being brought, were
ſound mo then would goe into ſome greate Hogſheades or
veſſels. And yet I warrant you yt in euery Church they were
perſwaded, that they had in deed S. Apolines teeth. But in
the auncient faith of the Romans, what mention is made, or
what example is found,Shrift. of any ſuch reliques. To theſe may
be added their ſhrift and Satiſfactions,Satiſfactions very iniurious to
Chriſt his death, and that ſatiſfaction which he in his body,
hath made for vs, by that one onely ſacrifice, which vpon the
altar of the croſſe he offered to his father.7 Sacraments. Their number of ſeven
Sacraments, hath no warrant out of any of theſe writings.Praying in an vnknowen tongue.
And to be ſhort their prayer in an vnknowen tongue,
and ſtrange language, not vnderſtoode of them ſelues that do
pray, I would haue them to ſhew how this together with their
halfing of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Chriſts bodie and bloude and many
ſuch like things, can be proued to be taught by word or deede
vnto that primitiue Church of Rome by S. Paule, S. Peter, or
S. Marke, which thing they can neuer doe. If then in all ſuch
poynts as are in controuerſie among vs, wherof we find anie
thing deliuered to vs, by theſe holy men & meſſengers of God,
the Church of Rome (if ſhee teach not cleane contrarie) wandreth
verie much from that auncient Romane faith, as in the
19. firſt chapters of this treatiſe it doth (I truſt) appeare: And
if in theſe latter points of religion mentioned in this laſt chap.
which they alſo make gret accompt of,) they haue neither word
nor example of theſe Apoſtles or S. Marke, to commende vnto
the world, ſuch doctrines & deuiſes: what cauſe is there I pray
you, why that apoſtolicall Church of Rome, that hath ſo manyfeſtly

reiected that old faith, and ſo wholy corrupted the auncent
religion that ther was taught, ſhould ſo confidently term
her ſelfe the Apoſtolicke and Catholicke Church of Chriſt.
With what face dare they tel vs, that the faith of Rome is commended,
when as nothing doth more conuince them of Apoſtacy,
then to try the leaden religion that now is there taught, by
the touchſtone of that faith that then was there preached. And
with ſhame enough may they tell vs, that that faith of the
auncient Romans is commended, which moſt cruelly and ſtubbornly
condemne the ſame, & perſecute it moſt bloodily in Chriſt
his members, as our faith ſo wholy and perfectly agréeing
with the Apoſtles doctrine, yet purſued of them with an immortall
hatred, intollerable rage, and tirannicall violence doth
plainly proue. We ſay therfore, that that auncient faith of the
Romans was worthely prayſed. By it we can and doe confirme
our doctrines: By it we may and haue diſprooued their errors.
If wee ſwarne one iot from that faith, we craue no credite, to
our words or writings,Pſa. 52. 11. ver. 50. &. 51. no preſence or acceſſe to our temples.
And becauſe they haue forſaken it,2. Cor. 6. we hold them as Antichriſtian
Apoſtates, and forſake their wil worſhipings and ſuperſtitious
aſſemblies, according to the prophetes preciſe and ſeuere
prohibition, and thappoſtles comfortable application thereof.
Beare not the yoke with, vnbeleeuers, but come out from among
them, and ſeparate your ſelues ſayth the Lorde, and touch no vncleane
thing and I will receaue you, and I wil be a father vnto you,
and you ſhall be my ſonnes and daughters ſaith the Lord God Almightie.
Whoſe aſſured and vndoubted kindneſſe becauſe wee
cannot but accept off, ſéeing we know him to be a moſt louing
Father, therefore we dare not but deteſt and hate, the ſeducing
wayes of the Church of Rome, becauſe ſhée is a deceauing and
a mercileſſe ſtepmother. Whoſe pathes doe lead to death, and
they that walke in her wayes ſhall finde deſtruction: the remembrance
whereof if it be fearfull to vs the Lord ſtrengthen
vs with his grace to ſtriue to auoyde it.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   