
      
         
            
            
            
               The Orator:
Handling a hundred ſeuerall Diſcourſes,
in forme of Declamations: Some
of the Arguments being drawne from Titus
Liuius and other ancient Writers, the reſt of
the Authors owne inuention: Part of which
are of matters happened in
our Age.
            Written in French by Alexander Siluayn,
and Engliſhed by L. P.
            
               LONDON
Printed by Adam Iſlip.
1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnorable
my moſt eſpeciall good Lord Iohn, Lord
St. Iohn, Baron of Bletſho.
            
               RIght Noble Lord, it is the
cuſtome of ignorant and
vnlearned ſtatuaries (who
are both defectiue in art and
faultie in iudgement) when they haue
either a Venus to carue, or a Cupid to
polliſh, to find means to reare them on
ſome high marble pillers, to the end
that the diſtance of the eie might ſhadow
the defect of their cunning. In
imitation of whom (knowing mine
owne diſabilitie to deſerue, and weakeneſſe
to achieue) hauing hewen out of
my rough wit this firſt fruit of mine oratory,
I haue thought good to ground
and rear them vpon the authority and
greatnes of your Lordſhip, whoſe fauors
and merits may aduance them to

that degree and eſteeme of reputation,
which of themſelues they diſpaire of,
except vnder your fauour and countenance.
The reaſon why I make you
my patron is for that I know you to be
a 
                  •
               auourer of the learned, and a maintainer
of the ſouldior; diſcreet in your
iudgement, and bountiful to all toward
and deſeruing ſcholers. Vouchſafe honorable
lord, that your generall affabilitie
and courteſie towards all men, admit
no inſtance in my behalfe, but as
both by bountie and other infinit graces
toward me you haue made me fortunate,
ſo now in countenancing this
labour of mine, make me happie by
your acceptance, who humbly beſeech
almightie God to ioine
intire felicitie to your
manie vertues.
            
               Your lordſhips in all dutifull affection,
Lazarius Piot▪
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               SInce he is to be counted a diſcreet man
(gentle Reader) that prouoked with
the deſire of glorie, and kindeled with
good affection, indeuoreth to profit his
neighbour by vertue, and procure himſelfe
a life and reſidence in the memory of poſterities:
I haue thought good (in hope to aduantage my ſelfe
with the ſame title) to preſent thee with certaine Rhethoricall
Declamations, the vſe wherof in euery member
in our Commonweale, is as neceſſary, as the abuſe
of wilfull ignorance is odious. In theſe thou maieſt
learne Rhethoricke to inforce a good cauſe, and art to
impugne an ill. In theſe thou maieſt behold the fruits
and flowers of Eloquence, which as Tully ſaith in his
Orat
                  •
               r, Bene conſtitutae ciuitatis eſt quaſi alumna:
vſe them to thy profit good Reader, and accept
them with as good a mind as I preſent them with a
vertuous intent. If thou ſtudie law, they may helpe
thy pleadings, or if diuinitie (the reformer of law)
they may perfect they perſuaſions. In reaſoning of

priuate debates, here maieſt thou find apt metaphors,
in incouraging thy ſouldiours fit motiues. Fathers
here haue good arguments to moue affections in their
children, and children vertuous reconcilements to ſatisfie
their diſpleaſed fathers: briefly euery priuate
man may in this be partaker of a generall profit, and
the groſſeſt vnderſtanding find occaſion of reformation.
The benefits then ſo generall, and my intent ſo
honeſt, I heartely intreat you to keepe Talions law in
this, and pay me like for like, giue me good thoughts
for great ſtudies, and at leaſtwiſe ſhew me this courtly
courteſie, to affoord me good words (which coſt you
nothing) for ſerious thoughts hatcht vp with much
conſideration. Thus commending my deſerts to
the learned, and committing my labour to
the inſtruction of the ignorant, I
bid you all heartely
farewell.
            
               L. P.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE MIRROVR OF
Eloquence:
Containing an hundred Hiſtoricall, or rather
Tragicall Declamations.
            
               Declamation. 1.
               
                  Of Fuluius, who cauſed the Senators of Capua to be
beheaded, without the conſent of the Senat and
people of Rome.
               
               
                  BY how much they of Capua were prone, and ill
aduiſed, to reuolt from the Romans vnto Hanniball,
after the battaile of Cannas, by ſo much
were they more obſtinatly beſieged, ſo that being
forced for want of timely ſuccours, to yeeld vnto
the mercy of the two Roman Conſuls, Appius Claudius,
and Quintus Fuluius, they were in the end more cruelly puniſhed
than any other rebels. The which Vibius Virius (the
ringleader, and chiefe author of the ſaid rebellion) together
with ſeuen and twentie other Senators foreſeeing, they all poiſoned
themſelues at a banquet: The reſt of them that yeelded,
were ſent to priſon, fiue and twentie to Cally, and eight & twentie
to Theana. Where without any commandement from the

Senat or people of Rome, and eſpecially without the conſent of
Claudius: Fuluius cauſed them all to be firſt ſcourged with
rods, and afterwards to be beheaded. Wherefore a doubt was
made whether he was more righteous or rigorous in his deed.
And therefore let vs imagine, that ſhortly after the reſt of the
Capuans accuſed him, ſaying thus:
               
                  WAs it not ſufficient graue Senators, & you bleſſed
people, that Vibius and his aſſociats the
chiefe authors and cauſe of the ſaid rebellion,
did ſacrifice themſelues vnto Fuluius his crueltie,
but that you muſt further ad therunto theſe ſeuen
and fiftie miſerable Senators? Is it poſſible that they
were all culpable? No ſurely: for ſeeing that they truſted
to the Romane clemencie, their conſcience was a
ſure teſtimony of their innocencie. But that could not
ſaue them from the furie of Fuluius, who to excerciſe his
crueltie, hath taken from the Senat & people of Rome,
the meanes as well to ſhew their pittie as their power,
not conſidering that the worthieſt part of a victorie is
to ſubdue the iuſt deſire of reuenge. Wherefore deſpiſing
all authoritie, & chiefely that of his Colleague and
companion of his victorie, he rather deſired to be accounted
cruell then mercifull, and neglecting the prouerb
which ſaith, That ſomtimes man ſheweth himſelf
a God vnto man, would rather verifie the cōtrary, That
man is euen a woolfe vnto man. Surely our miſerie cannot
but be great, yet ſhould it haue bene more tollerable,
if it had proceeded from the Senate, or people, for
then ſhould there haue bene ſome ſhew of Iuſtice conſidered
vpon by many, where now is ſeene but a reuenging
cruelty, thought vpon by one alone, and executed
on the ſuddaine. And ſo much more is this deed execrable,

in as much as ordinarily we ſee many conſultations
to be held, and that of many men, to pronounce
iudgement againſt one: but alas, almoſt al our Senators
haue bene condemned euen in a moment by one man
alone (if he ought ſo to be called) who hath ſhewed
himſelfe more cruell then any furious Lion or fierce
Tigre. For he not being ſatiſfied with the ſtripes and
death of thoſe which were ſent priſoners to Theana,
tooke yet further paines to make his iourney to Cally,
to torture and behead thoſe which were there alſo impriſoned:
and he not being thorowly appeaſed therewith,
did ad thervnto the miſerable death of Taurea Lubullus
a man euen beſides himſelfe, who although that
of his own accord he offered himſelfe to abide any puniſhment,
yet were his torments aggrauated the more.
All theſe acts (O Romans) are moſt lamentable, & worthy
of great compaſſion amongſt men. But yet the hatefull
contempt which this monſtrous man hath made of
your authoritie is moſt deteſtable: For as he was in acting
the ſecond execution at Callie, when the miſerable
ſoules were not yet all bound to the ſtakes, there came
(as it were by diuine grace, and your goodnes) letters
from the Praetor and people of Rome to ſtay their execution,
neuertheleſſe this man his rage alone, preuailed
more than did the clemencie of all the reſt of you. But
what is this man, who preſumeth to be more wiſe, and
taketh greater authoritie vpon him, then all the other
Romanes beſides? Surely if crueltie be wiſdome, and
preſumption carrie authoritie, hee hath reaſon? But if
humanity be decent for men, and to thinke no better of
himſelfe then others, be modeſtie, he hath done amiſſe?
for hee is worſe then a beaſt that thinketh himſelfe better
then any other man. If it were lawfull, I would faine

know what moued him, that he could not ſo much as
ſtay this laſt cruell execution? Or what hurt might
haue happened vnto the Romans therby? of whom we
are the true (though diſobedient) children, ſince heretofore
we freely gaue our ſelues, & all we poſſeſſed into
their hands. But if ſome amongſt vs, more ambitious
then the reſt, vpon hope to command the weaker ſort,
haue yeelded themſelues vnto Hannibal, was it conuenient
that euen thoſe who were diſpleaſed therewithall
ſhould die ſo cruelly, without being admitted not ſo
much as to ſpeake for themſelues. Alas this crueltie is
too extreame, and ſo much the more in that it was done
againſt the intention of the Senat & people of Rome.
But God graunt that vnder the colour of this horrible
deed, there be not ſome ſecret hidden, more pernicious
and hurtfull vnto the Romans then euer our rebellion
was. I know (beſides the difficultie thereof) how much
all true Romane hearts doe deteſt ſuch as do aſpire to
tyrannize ouer their owne countrey, yet I may ſay that
the deeds of Fuluius doe ſhew that he aimeth at that
marke, and it may be himſelfe ſuſpecteth that ſo much is
alreadie knowne by him; which was the only cauſe why
he was vnwilling that the Capuans ſhould be ſuffered
to ſpeake, leaſt ſome thing might haue beene diſcloſed
vnto his preiudice, the which I will not affirme, becauſe
that if it were ſo, it ought to be more then made manifeſt,
ſince that many haue not only bene ſuſpected, but
alſo greeuouſly puniſhed for matters leſſe apparent
then this: And amongſt others Coriolanus, Manlius, Spurius,
Caſſius, and Melius, only for ſhewing themſelues
ouer liberall. To conclude, I feele my ſelfe ſo ouercharged
with griefe, as I am not able to ſpeake in ſuch ſort as
I ought, pleading before this honorable Senat, who

may be pleaſed to beare with my weaknes, conſidering
that they neuer keepe decorum which are ouercharged
with extream ſorrow. May it then pleaſe you moſt worthy
Senators, protectors of equitie, by that little which
I haue badly expreſſed, to conſider what might further
be ſpoken vpon this matter, by one who is free from all
anguiſh and feare.
               
                  The Anſwere of M. Attilius in the
abſence of Fuluius.
                  I Thinke moſt graue Senators, that theſe men here
haue no other reaſon to complain of Fuluius, but only
becauſe he hath ſaued the liues of too many of the
Capuans. For it is very certaine that after the taking, or
ſurrender of Capua, Fuluius cauſed information to be
made of all thoſe that had borne any good will vnto
the Romans, and there were found no more then three
ſilie women, that is to ſay, Veſtia, Oppia, and Faucula Cluuia,
who by the hire of her bodie did ſecretly relieue
the Romans that were in priſon; and the other, did euery
day offer ſacrifice for the proſpertie & victory of the
Romans: The third being but a yong girle, was the
ſame that came vnto our campe, and gaue intelligence
that thoſe Numidians which fained to be runne away
from Capua, were ſent for ſpies, and ſome of them were
found with letters about them, to carrie vnto Hannibal.
Touching the reſt, it may be ſaid, that although they
were all guiltie, yet did Fuluius cauſe thoſe onely to die,
who ſurpaſſed the others in authoritie: Wherfore Fuluius
was no leſſe mercifull vnto thoſe whom he ſaued,
then iuſt vnto them that he executed. But it is the manner
of the wicked, yea of the moſt part of men, ſeldome

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
to ſay more rightly) none of their Citizens were worthie
to liue: ſo did Fuluius but well, hauing ſeene with
his eies your obſtinacie in fighting, your fauour to Hanniball,
and your hate to the Romans, therevpon to execute
iuſtice: as alſo becauſe the dignitie of the conſulſhip
carrieth with it the authoritie both of the Senate
and people, in ſuch affaires where expedition is required:
and it is not for the offenders to demand an account
of the iudges for the iuſtice which they haue executed,
but thoſe who by their fauor are yet liuing ought
rather to admire their moſt wonderfull mercie. Say
then that your cruelties haue bene the cauſe that Fuluius
may yet be called more mercifull then iuſt. Finally
he is the man, who leauing his Collegue hurt at the
ſiege of Capua, came with part of the armie to ſuccour
Rome, and fight with Hanniball, who was before our
gates at your inſtance: He it is who hath compelled you
to ſubmit your ſelues againe vnto the Romans: And he
it is who in the behalf of the people, hath yet the power
to puniſh you further. Wherefore it is but follie to anſwere
particularly to euery ſlaunderous ſuppoſition
which you would aſſert againſt him, ſince thoſe that
are conquered, do neuer loue their conquerors.
               
            
            
               Declamation 2.
               
                  Of the firſt Earle of Flaunders, who was accuſed
to the French King for hanging his eldeſt ſon.
               
               
                  THe Flemmings write very obſcurely in their
Chronicles, that their firſt Earle was named
Leideric, being the ſonne of one Saluart, a Foſter
of Flaunders, and they ſay that the ſaid
Leideric, while he was yet a Foſter and comming

to ſuruey his woods, did find the French king his daughter
bebloubered with tears, becauſe that in the ſaid forreſt, ſome
had murthered a Prince of England, who had ſecretly ſtolen
and carried her forth of France. Which Princeſſe, Leideric
married, and of her had ſeuen ſons; whom he cauſed to be all
apparelled with garments, the left ſide whereof was cloth of
gold in honour of their mother, and the right ſide was woollen
cloth, becauſe himſelfe was neither prince nor knight. Now it
happened that the ſaid French king (whoſe name they likewiſe
tell not) followed in chaſe of Hart euen vnto the cittie of Liſte
in Flaunders, where the ſaid Leideric dwelt, with whom the
king was lodged: who thorowly viewing Leiderics children,
thought that they greatly reſembled his daughters countenance,
and demanding for their mother, he preſently knew her
for his loſt child: Wherevpon he made the ſaid Leideric
knight, and created him Earle of Flanders. Now ſaith the hiſtorie,
that the eldeſt ſonne of the ſaid Earle being old inough to
court ladies, did meet before the court gates with a woman that
had a ſmall basket of fruit to ſell, which he tooke from her and
carried vp vnto the gentlewomen. The poore woman ſtaied for
money for her ſaid fruit, ſo long vntill it grew towards night,
and then departing homeward, ſhe loſt her ſelfe in the forreſt, ſo
as ſhe could not find her houſe vntill the next morning, when
comming home, ſhe found her child dead for want of the teat.
Wherevpon ſhe complained vnto the Earle, he fained to carrie
his ſaid ſonne abroad to tourney, but paſsing thorow the forreſt,
he cauſed him to be hanged. Wherefore let vs ſuppoſe that the
people accuſed the Earle vnto the king in this ſort.
               
                  EVery cruelty (if it may pleaſe your Maieſtie) is
aſſuredly very odious, but that which the father
committeth againſt his owne child is
moſt execrable: for the father his kindneſſe

ought to exceed all other loue, imitating therein, the
loue which God did beare vnto man, for the ſaluation
of whom, he hath not ſpared his only begotten ſon, our
Lord and Redeemer: whoſe example they are more
bound to follow that are choſen to rule others, then
thoſe which are more baſe in condition, becauſe the
people for the moſt part doe conforme themſelues to
immitate their actions which command, and eſpecially
the bad before the good. Wherevpon it followeth, that
he which commandeth ouer a Commonwealth or prouince,
cannot offend in any meane ſort, eſpecially if his
offence be publike, more if the cauſe be not ouer great,
but moſt of all if it be ſuch a vice as degenerateth from
the nature of man: all which ſaid faults are found in
this deteſtable deed of our Earle, hauing wrongfullie
put to death his owne ſon: and what ſonne? Euen his
eldeſt ſonne, and the ſame which ſhould haue ſucceeded
him and bene our Earle. But what offence can bee
more publike then to cauſe his ſonne to die by the moſt
ſhamefull death in the world? For by the halter, are
theeues executed: and yet he had no ſuch cauſe to put
him to death, ſeeing that notwithſtanding his fault was
remedileſſe: moreouer there is no 
                     •
                  ice thought more
vnbeſeeming a man then crueltie, and there is no greater
cruelty thē that which is committed againſt a mans
owne blood, the which crueltie is not only done againſt
himſelfe, againſt his ſonne, and againſt vs in putting
our Prince to death, but alſo againſt the mother
and brethren of the Prince, and that which worſt
is, againſt your Maieſtie; hauing executed the ſonne of
your daughter, your nephew, and your ſubiect, who in
proceſſe of time might haue done good ſeruice vnto
your crowne and ſtate. Wherefore this tyrant hath not

only ſhewed crueltie vnto all theſe aboue named, but
he hath further manifeſted his ingratitude vnto his
king and ſoueraigne; vnto your Maieſtie I ſay, who hath
made him noble by knighting him, creating him Earle
of this countrie, and accepting him for your ſonne in
law. What puniſhment deſerueth not a crime ſo manifeſt
committed againſt the perſon of ſuch a monarch?
But who is ſo ignorant that will not affirme that in this
action, froward fortune hath rather beene the cauſe of
the miſcheife happened vnto this woman, than the
prince himſelfe, or els it was her negligence or ill hap,
or the deſteny of the infant. What meant ſhe to ſtay ſo
long? Did not ſhe know where to haue found the
Prince the next day? Had ſhe loſt her money by ſtaying
for it? But to be ſhort, this woman did ſhew her
ſelfe to be both cruell and obſtinate, as their ſex are for
the moſt part, and it may be ſhe ſtaied ſo long tatling
with ſome of her goſſips, and boaſting that the Prince
had bought her fruit, as night ouertooke her before ſhe
was aware: for the prattle of a woman is oftentimes
without meaſure. But were it that the Prince his fault
were farre more manifeſt and hainous then it is, yet is
the cauſe to be iudged by none but by the king only, or
by ſuch as ſhould by his Maieſtie be deputed and appointed
for iudges, and it is more vnfit that the father
ſhould be iudge of his child then any other, becauſe
either too exceeding loue, or too extreame rage, may ouerrule
him: for when he is angry with thoſe whome
he loueth, his anger proueth more vehement and dangerous
towards them then againſt others. Likewiſe no
iudgement ought to be pronounced without counſell
and due informations: But what proofes was brought
againſt our prince? Where are thoſe which were called

to conſult vpon iudgement, or to giue aduice that
he ought to die? Alas, the father and the hangman
were both Iurie, Iudge, and Executioner. Well, God
graunt this miſchiefe proceed not from ſome other
ground: that is to ſay, leaſt ſome old malice long ſince
conceiued hath not made the father to find this occaſion
to deſtroy his ſon, it may be, chiefely to aduance his
ſecond ſonne, whom he loued better. I paſſe ouer in ſilence
how hee hath ſecretly endeuoured to haue the
world ſuppoſe that the ſame was none of his ſon, therby
meaning to ſlander your daughter, for thoſe which
know themſelues inferiour to their wiues, doe neuer
loue them heartily, but ſeeke all the meanes they can to
make them leſſe eſteemed, and eſpecially ſuch as are ingratefull,
of whom this Tyrant ſheweth himſelfe to be
the chiefeſt. It may be ſaid that it is not lawfull to accuſe
any man by coniecture, but what vileneſſe may
not a man imagine by ſuch a one, ſeeing that like as vertues
are knit together, ſo do vices follow one another?
To conclude (dread ſoueraigne) we doe better feele
this wrong done to your Maieſtie, to your daughter, to
her children, and to our ſelues, then we are able to expreſſe
the ſame in words; but our iuſt teares together
with our ſilence, demand iuſtice of your highneſſe.
               
                  The anſwere of the Earle.
                  
                     AS nothing ſurely can be more odious, or degenerating
from the nature of man then crueltie,
ſo alſo is nothing more neceſſarie for humane
conuerſation, then iuſtice ioined with
wiſedome; for indeed without it, iuſtice ſeemeth to bee
no better then crueltie, as wiſedome alſo without iuſtice

is eſteemed no other then meere malice, yet holding
theſe two vertues linked together, a man may put
his owne child to death, and not be taxed of crueltie,
but rather praiſed for his pietie and loue towards them
and Common-wealth. And ſuch were the Numantines
accounted for ſlaying their children, rather then they
would leaue them for ſlaues: So was Virginius who killed
his daughter to ſaue her chaſtitie. I paſſe ouer Manlius
Torquatus, Poſthumius, and diuers others who put
their owne children to death onely for the zeale they
had vnto the obſeruation of militarie diſcipline: yet
for all that not any of all theſe haue beene iudged to be
cruell or worthy of blame, but on the contrarie haue
thereby gained immortall praiſe and glorie. Likewiſe
there is no doubt at all, but that the fathers kindneſſe
ought to exceed all other loue: following the example
of our maker, who leaueth not to exerciſe his mercy together
with his iuſtice: and that it is ſo, he many times
puniſheth ſinnes both in this world, and in the world
to come: moreouer we muſt not thinke any father ſo
cruell to hurt his ſonne in the little finger without feeling
the griefe thereof himſelfe in the middeſt of his
heart, and therefore it is a meere folly to teach fathers
how they ought to loue their children, ſince nature
who is the miſtreſſe of all humane creatures inſtructeth
them therein ſufficiently: and as it is moſt certain that
princes or ſuch as rule, are aboue all others bounden
to be vertuous, and that they are conſtituted as guides
and examples for all their ſubiects to follow, ſo can it
not alſo be denied, but that ſeueritie of iuſtice is more
requiſit in them then any of the other vertues, (if vertues
may be feperated) and he which will well conſider
my deed without paſſion, ſhall find all the foure principall

vertues therein to be obſerued. For firſt of all I
haue done iuſtice in putting him to death, who was
not onely the death of an innocent, or at the leaſt the
ſame that cauſed the mother to ſuffer her child to die,
but alſo ſuch a one who defrauded a poore woman of
part of her liuing, in that he paied her not for the ſame,
which ſhe brought to ſell for her reliefe. My prudence
was ſhewed in putting him to death without any commotion
of the people, and in terrifieng all others from
offending, as alſo to take from euery malefactor all
hope to eſcape iuſt puniſhment for their miſdeeds. My
temperance I declared in cauſing the offender to die
by the ſhorteſt and ſecreteſt maner of death that I could
deuiſe, thereby ridding him from the ſhame to be a ſpectacle
vnto many. And my fortitude was manifeſt, in
that I was able to ouercome the deſire which I had to
pardon him both the ſame and all other offences. But
in the end conſidering that the firſt princes are bound
by their examples to ſtirre vp and prouoke their ſucceſſors
to execute iuſtice without partialitie, I haue for
that end ſacrificed my will, together with the life of my
beſt beloued ſonne, becauſe the euill cuſtomes of the
former princes are turned into lawes by thoſe which
ſucceed them, and thoſe which are good are quite forgotten
if they be not confirmed by verie memorable
examples. Therefore Saule did not amiſſe when hee
would haue put his ſonne Ionathas to death, ſeeing law
is to be adminiſtred vnto all alike: for where exception
of perſons is reſpected, there muſt needs corruption
of iuſtice follow, which marreth all, for nothing can be
permament which is corrupted. True it is that he was
my eldeſt ſonne, but being ſuch a one as he was, he neither
ought to ſucceed me, nor yet to liue any longer:

and accuſe me no more of crueltie, ſince to puniſh an
euill doer is a deed of mercie, for pittie without iuſtice
is follie or rather iniquitie; and the greater he is that offendeth,
the more ſeuere puniſhment he deſerueth: For
the poore wretch, or hee which is of baſe condition,
may excuſe himſelfe by his pouertie, by want of inſtruction,
by ignorance, by his lewd education, and ſuch
other like reaſons both vaine and friuolous; but the offences
of great perſonages is to bee attributed to nothing
but to pride & malice. Neither is one death more
ſhamefull then another, but only that death where the
partie is made a ſpectacle to the ſtanders by: for it is
not the death, but the offence that is ſhamefull. And
therefore in executing iuſtice I cannot be tearmed cruell
vnto mine owne blood or my ſonne, nor vnto your
Prince, vnto the Kings daughter, neither vnto our
children: for he not being ſuch a one as hee ought to
be, was now no more to be regarded by any of vs, but
was no better then a thiefe, and a murtherer. Who is
then ſo mad as to be called a grandfather, father, mother,
brother, or a ſubiect to ſo vild a man? Neither muſt
theſe be the meanes to begin thoſe good ſeruices that
ought to be done vnto the crowne of France, which
was inſtitituted and preſerued hetherto by vertue. It is a
vaine thing to goe about to perſuade fathers of the valor
or worthineſſe of their children, ſeeing that for the
moſt part they beleeue it more then is requiſite, and alwaies
doe excuſe their faults more then they ought; of
which ſort I confeſſe my ſelfe haue beene one, ſo long
as there was any hope of amendment. I aſſure you, that
a long time was my heart moſt greeuouſly perplexed,
before I could conſent vnto the puniſhment, & death
of my ſonne. But omitting all other circumſtances I

will ſhew you the reaſons which moued me to put my
ſonne to death, for the ſonnes diſcredite, muſt needes
bee the fathers diſgrace, becauſe they doe alwaies cocker
their children but too much: and therefore it was
not without cauſe that the Romanes (from whence all
good lawes haue their beginning) did giue vnto fathers
all power ouer the life and death of their children,
knowing that without moſt iuſt occaſion they would
neuer put them to death. No ſonne could be more dear
vnto me then mine eldeſt, but equitie commandeth me
to loue the Common wealth better; which in no ſort
can be regarded, when he which ruleth the ſame is not
vertuous, becauſe none therein ſhould be in ſafety if
the prince were vicious. My life and death is in the
mercie of the kings Maieſtie; but to die, I would not
haue failed to doe that which I haue done, being (as we
are) mortall, and death may only be delaied, but not eſcaped.
Our life alſo is not to be meaſured by our years
but by our deeds: for he hath liued long inough who
is by good men deemed moſt worthie of long life, and
he cannot die too ſoone, who ſpendeth his life in wickedneſſe.
Wherefore it was no reaſon that my ſonne
ſhould haue liued any longer, and I would to God that
ſo his reproch might die with him, as I wiſh my renowne
may liue after me. Touching iudgement, he
which gouerneth the Commonwealth, muſt needs be
iudge in the ſame. Such were the Dictators or Conſuls
amongſt the Romanes, and ſuch at this day are kings
and princes. And Plato ſaith: Happie is that countrie
where Philoſophers are kings, and kings be Philoſophers:
whereby it appeareth, that rulers ought to bee
iudges, as you your ſelues doe confeſſe, in ſaying that
the king ought to haue iudged my ſon: which indeed

had ben reaſonable, if his Maieſtie by his prerogatiue
had not giuen me free authority in matter of iuſtice; in
ſuch ſort then as I am ſubiect to the iudgement of the
king, is my ſonne ſubiect vnto mine, and I am not to
yeeld an account of my actions vnto any other then
vnto his Maieſtie: and eſpecially becauſe the witneſſe
of a father againſt his ſonne is more ſufficient then all
other teſtimonies, according to the reaſons aboue ſaid:
and ſauing my dutie vnto his roiall maieſtie, and this
noble aſſiſtance, this is moſt falſe which you obiect againſt
me, touching my ladie the Counteſſe; who hath
thought me worthie to bee her husband, and the king
accepting me for his ſon inlaw, I haue euermore loued
and honored: and ſo far am I from cauſing her to bee ill
accounted of, as with the price of my life I would ſeeke
to defend and increaſe her honour, which being ſo, it
may pleaſe his highnes not to ſuffer him to be vnpuniſhed,
who hath ſpoken ſo ſlanderouſly as thou haſt
done, as if any perſon liuing might doubt of her chaſtitie.
In ſaying that I thinke my ſelfe to be inferiour vnto
her, thou doeſt therein alſo ſhew thy ignorance together
with thy malice: for beſides the difference of the
ſex, which maketh euery man better then a woman, it is
moſt manifeſt, that loue and marriage doth alwaies
make the man and the wife equall. It is likewiſe to bee
conſidered, that they are no leſſe noble which attaine
therevnto by deſert, then thoſe which come vnto it by
deſcent, for which the heires are the more beholding
vnto their anceſtors: and to ſay that I deſerue not the
dignitie which I enioy, it ſhould be a reproch vnto the
king, who of his grace reſpecting my deſerts, hath himſelfe
thought me worthy of what he hath beſtowed vpon
me. Laſtly, I appeale vnto your maieſtie for the

wrong which my ſubiects doe offer me in accuſing and
ſlanderidg me vniuſtly, and conſequently I demand iuſtice
vpon the ſame.
               
            
            
               Declamation, 3.
               
                  Of Pacuuius, who hauing by his ſubtilty ſaued the
Senators of Capua, is accuſed of Treaſon.
               
               
                  AFter the ouerthrow of Cannas, many cities
yeelded vnto Hanniball, and in
ſome of them the people rebelled againſt
the Senators, as thoſe of Capua
did, where the Senate were in great
danger to be cut in peeces by the communaltie,
the which Pacuuius foreſeeing,
being a ſubtile man, and of
the number of the Senators, but better beloued and eſteemed
amongſt the people then with the Senat, he determined to appeaſe
the people by a wile: Whereof conſulting with the reſt of
the Senators, and they finding no better meanes for their ſafeties,
they conſented therevnto. Wherevpon Pacuuius fained
to detaine all the Senators as priſoners in the pallace, appointing
certaine Ploebeians there to guard them: then he ſaid vnto
the people which were already aſſembled before the pallace, I
haue the Senators our enemies in priſon, and am of the opinion
that all of them ſhould be put to death: but to the end that the
citie may not be deſtitute of Magiſtrates, it behooueth that
you your ſelues doe chuſe amongſt you new Senators in the ſteed
of the others which we ſhal kill, to the end that we may not be
ſurpriſed vnawares, either by the Romans or any other of our
enemies, and haue not ſuch as may command and gouerne vs.
Then hauing a Catalogue in writing of the names of all the

Senators, he ſaid: Firſt ſuch a one muſt be killed (who was a mā
of great authoritie) name one amongſt you who may be thought
worthy to ſucceed in his place. Then the people began to looke
one vpon another, and there was not found any that was deemed
ſufficient to take that charge vpon him. Wherefore they
began to accuſe Pacuuius of crueltie, and in the end they confeſsed
that there was not men enough to be found amongſt them
worthie to be Senators, and therefore they concluded to leaue
the Senate euen as it was. Wherevpon the Senators were both
deliuered, and confirmed in their former authoritie. Yet let vs
ſuppoſe, that it happened, that one amongſt the Senat (no leſse
enuious of Pacuuius his authoritie, then ioifull that he was
ſaued by his ſubtiltie) did long time after accuſe him at Rome,
affirming that hee onely induced the people vnto this ſedition,
and that his intention was not to ſaue, but rather to ſlay the Senators,
and began his accuſation in this manner:
               
                  VNdoubtedly ſuch as ſuffer a wicked or vicious
man to liue in a citie, doe either firſt or laſt repent
it, yet is it rather commonly too late:
How much more then ought they to be ſorrie
that ſuffer ſuch men to obtaine the gouernement of
the Commonwealth, and the honors only due to righteous
and vertuous men, who for the moſt part doe
ſhun ſuch authorities, becauſe it is a hard matter to execute
ſo waightie a charge well. For ſince the weakneſſe
of man is ſuch, as euen the wiſeſt doe miſtake bad
things for good, and good things for bad, vntill the effect
of that which afterward happeneth doth make thē
know their error: How can vitious or wicked men be able
to doe any thing that is good? Surely honours are
the true touchſtone whereby the vertue or goodneſſe
of a man is knowne: for in authority vertuous men do

manifeſt their goodneſſe, as wicked men do lay open
their badneſſe, as Ariſtides, Epaminundus, Licurgus, and
others in all their authority did ſhew that vertue was incorruptible:
And Periander, Piſiſtratus, Liſander and others
declared, how much ambition preuaileth ouer
ſuch as are not perfectly vertuous, whoſe example Pacuuius
was deſirous to imitate, for being born in Capua
a wicked man, and ſeeing that he was there in ſuch ſort
ſuffered to remaine, he durſt wel make claime vnto dignities,
and obtaining the ſame did afterwards aſpire to
be tyrant. For by how much they which are vnworthie
of authoritie, and yet doe attaine there vnto, by ſo
much the more doth their inſolencie thereby increaſe;
and that in ſuch ſort, as they not only doe preſume the
ſame to be due vnto them, but alſo that there is no gouernement
great inough for them, and therefore ſuch
oppreſſe euen thoſe who haue moſt fauoured them,
which truly is a iuſt puniſhment which the Gods ſendeth
vpon thoſe who fauour the wicked, that euen by
the ſame themſelues are oftentimes deſtroied. And ſo is
it iuſtly fallen vpon our Senators, who knowing the vices
of this man, haue not only permitted him to attaine
the moſt principall honors, but alſo by their negligence
haue ſuffered him to tiranniſe ouer the Senate
and people, euen to the danger of the liues of the ſaid
Senators; being ſo audacious as to affirme vnto them,
that he only was able to defend them from being hewed
in peeces by the people: and afterwards by his raſhneſſe
put all their liues in danger of the peoples inſolencie.
But what had it bene if the people had reſolued
to doe that which he counſelled them vnto? what aſſurance
had he that ſuch his folly ſhould haue come vnto
a good end? Truly that was euen the leaſt of his caro,

ſeeing that it could not happen amiſſe vnto him, for if
the people ſlew the Senat, he ſhould remaine the prince
of the people, and the matter falling out as it did, hee
ſhould remaine lord of the people and Senat together,
perſuading both the one and the other, that they were
highly bound vnto him: Whervnto the Senat was forced
to yeeld, conſidering the authoritie which by their
fault, he had gained amongſt the people: yet this had
beene a ſmall hurt if he had beene contented that but
onely himſelfe ſhould haue beene king, but his actions
declared that he would confirme the kingdome vnto
his poſteritie by the means of Hanniball, vnto whom he
not only brought his ſonne Perolla, but himſelf did ſtay
him from the killing of Hanniball, and from the procuring
of the freedome of his countrie by this his moſt
noble act. Finally this noble yong man did very well
ſhew himſelfe to be the ſonne of a Roman matron, holding
that noble mind of his mother: How could hee
chuſe but be greeued at the heart ſeeing that by his fathers
words (who rather ought to haue exhorted him
therevnto) his moſt couragious purpoſe was broken
from the which this hairebraine man in all vild actions
did not only diſſuade him, but alſo conſtrained him to
giue it ouer, affirming that if he would not bee ruled by
him, he would aduertiſe Hannibal thereof, yea & would
couer him with his own bodie in ſuch ſort as he ſhould
not be hurt vnleſſe Pacuuius were ſlaine. Thus he alone
did corrupt the faithfull zeale which the child ought to
the Romans and his countrie. I paſſe ouer with ſilence,
how that hee was the cauſe that Decius Magius was ſo
euilly intreated by Hanniball in the preſence of all the
Citizens, and then afterwards clogged with chaines to
be carried to Carthage, if the gods had not ſuccoured

him better then this honourable perſon, who had ſuch
credit with Hanniball, that at his banquet was the ſecond
man at the table, and his ſonne the third, and yet
did not once excuſe, but rather moſt greeuouſly accuſed
poore Magius to haue alwaies fauored the Roman
faction. Thus hath this vnhappy man betraied his
countrie foure times. Firſt when hee put the life of the
Senators to the diſcretiō of the people: ſecondly, when
he cauſed Capua to reuolt from the Romanes: thirdly
when he made an agreement with Hanniball, and ſuffered
him to enter into Capua: and fourthly, when hee
kept his ſonne from killing Hanniball. He will anſwere
that he alone neither cauſed Capua to reuolt, nor to receiue
Hanniball, I ſay he did, for vnder the colour of his
protecting the Senate, no man durſt gainſay him in any
thing, except Magius who was puniſhed therefore. If
thoſe who (without calling any ſtranger) doe by no
ſuch execrable meanes aſpire vnto tyrannie, are greeuouſly
puniſhed, What torment then may be ſufficient
to bee inflicted vpon this wicked man? Who not
content to haue vſurped the gouernement, and called
in a ſtranger for his defence, did alſo by threats corrupt
the good nature of his ſonne. Remember O you noble
Romans that you haue for leſſe fault puniſhed and
driuen away your kings, and conſider alſo the cauſes
why we cannot, much leſſe will not be vnder any other
then you, doe vs iuſtice then vpon him, who hath withdrawne
vs from you.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     AMongſt reaſonable and vertuous men, al vices
are odious, but aboue all, ingratitude is a vice
moſt deteſtable, for it is the cauſe that manie
good turnes are left vndone: for euen as the

iuie cauſeth that tree to die about the which it windeth,
and which ſuſtaineth it, ſo an vngratefull man ſeeketh
the death and deſtruction of him, to whom he is beholding
for many good turnes, which maketh a number
fearefull to employ themſelues either for the particular
good of any, or for the the publicke benefite of many.
But the noble minds leaue not for all that to doe their
endeuors, for euen as the ſum is nothing infected by the
mud vpon which it ſhineth, and as the ſlanders of the
ingratefull can no way hurt the true vertue, which euen
in the middeſt of vices, ſhineth as the light doth in darkeſt
places, euen ſo this damned man, the more he thinketh
to impair my reputatiō, the more doth he increaſe
my renowne. For firſt he ſaith, that I haue obtained the
chiefeſt dignities in Capua, it is then a ſigne that either
I am vertuous, or els the reſt of the Citizens that haue
aduanced me to ſuch authoritie, are al vicious: for euery
one fauoreth his like, & repugneth his contrary. You
ſay that I thinke my ſelfe a tyrant: Where do you find
that tirants do ſuccor or ſaue the life of ſuch as pretend
to be equall with them in power: can you denie that
by mine induſtrie the Senat was ſaued? Hath not the
effect made the ſame apparent? You ſay that I brought
them in daunger, hazarding their liues to the diſcretion
of the inconſtant people, how is he brought in danger
who alreadie by his owne fault is fallen thereinto? Do
you call it a hazarding, to ſaue mens liues? If you had
knowne any other meanes more expedient, you ought
therein to haue giuen your aduiſe? But that in extream
euils extraordinary meanes ought to be vſed: So I knoing
that the euill proceeded aſwell from the ouergreat
preſumption of the Senat, as from the inſolencie of the
people, thought to find out the fitteſt remedie: for each

partie, perceiuing his error framed himſelfe accordingly.
Thinke you before I ſeemed to make it a queſtion
whether the Senators ſhould liue or die, that I had not
firſt gained the chiefeſt of their enemies, and that I did
not know the weakneſſe of the reſt? And as touching
this point of the yeelding to Hanniball, the authors of
his receiuing they did poiſon themſelues, which taketh
away the ſuſpition that anie other was the cauſe thereof:
How could I then be able to reſiſt Hanniball more
then you and others? True it is that I was ſecond perſon
in his bancket at the table, but the ſame was rather a
ſigne that he did it to win me, then that I was ſuch a one
as you tearme me to be. For the ſubtile Barbarian, did
not embrace thoſe who did already fauor him, but ſuch
as he would draw vnto him: and the better to proue
that true, my ſonne whom he knew to bee a Roman in
heart, was the third man at his banquet, whom trulie I
confeſſe I did diſſuade from killing Hanniball, becauſe it
was a thing impoſſible, being alwaies armed, enuironed
with his gard, and chiefly becauſe he euermore ſuſpected
my ſonne greatly: So that the beſt that could happen
by his raſhneſſe, would be but the death of him &
manie others, and it might be the vtter ſubuerſion and
ruin of Capua. What hurt then haue I done preſeruing
ſuch a one as is moſt affectioned vnto the Romans, and
alſo in ſauing the cittie which could not faile but fall
into their hands againe: for al violent things as was the
fortune of Hannibal are of ſo long continuance, but being
at their Periode, turne vpſide downe in a moment.
Therefore in ſuch a time more wiſdome conſiſteth in
diſſimulation, then in obſtinate boaſting, as appeared in
that of Magius, which was nothing profitable vnto any
man, and beſides it was not only hurtfull to himſelfe,

but alſo Hanniball did thereby know the cowardlineſſe
of the whole Senat, and Citizens of Capua, ſince that
before their faces they ſuffered one of the nobleſt amongſt
them, to be bound and carried away vnto his
campe. It was then that they ſhould haue reſolued or
taken occaſion to haue run altogether vpon Hanniball,
and to haue maſſacred him, as my ſelfe and ſonne were
deſirous to doe, if we had ſeene any likelihood to haue
ben ſeconded by any: but there was then no ſhow of
ſuch courage in you, & the more you accuſe me to haue
brought you in bondage, the more vnworthie are you
to be beleeued. Yet if it were ſo, why did you endure it?
you will ſay for feare of the people: why could not
you win or keepe the people in obedience, as well as I?
Surely becauſe your ambition, and pride was more
great to grieue them, then was your wiſdome or pollicie
to gouerne them. You will impute me for fauoring
more the Plebeians then Patrician faction: ſo was the
like heretofore obiected to the Fabians, who afterwards
enterpriſed particularly to defend Rome from
the Veians at Cremera, where they all died ſauing one,
who hath raiſed vp again their race, which is at this day
ſo profitable to the Common wealth. To conclude, miſerie
is alone without enuie, wherefore it is not to bee
wondered at if thou doeſt vomit a thouſand leaſings againſt
my vertue, long time guided by good fortune,
yet for all that canſt thou not ſay that I haue aſpired Tirantlike
to rule, nor called the ſtranger, but the greateſt
hurt that I haue done, is that I haue ſaued you and others
like vnto you, amongſt the good and faithfull
friends (ſuch as my ſelfe) of the Romane Commonwealth.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 4.
               
                  Of him which would vſurpe the inheritance of a
Prince, that went to the warres against his fathers
will.
               
               
                  THere was a Prince who forbad his ſonne to
goe on a certaine iourney to the warres, threatning
if he went, to deſherite him. The ſonne for
all that went thether: wherefore the Prince
made a nephew which he had, his heire, leauing
notwithſtanding a great reuenue for his ſon, which is augmented
by the new Prince. Neuertheleſse, ſhortly after he redemanded
the principality, ſaying:
               
                  I Hauing done nothing vnworthy for a Prince
or a gentleman, my father could not diſherite
me. Wherefore it is as fit for the father, in commanding,
to be wiſe, as it is for the ſonne in obeieng,
to be willing. What if my father (fearing to loſe
me) had forbidden me to defend the Church, or my
countrie, Ought I to obey him in this commaundement,
being no leſſe diſhonorable and preiudiciall vnto
himſelfe then to me and our poſteritie? Verily I confeſſe
that fathers ought to bee obeied in all reaſonable
things, but when their commandements are to no end
nor reaſon, they muſt bee neglected; and after, as they
may, obtaine pardon; if of themſelues they confeſſe not
their fault: beſides, it muſt bee diſtinguiſhed what the
matter is, and what it importeth. Indeed I will confeſſe
that I ſhould greatly haue miſdone (my father or countrie

being in war, or in any danger) if then I ſhould haue
forſaken them for any thing that might happen, but
when there was not ſo much as any ſhew of daunger,
what hurt haue I done, if in the wars els where I haue
ſerued, to learne the better how to defend our owne
countrie? or rather if I made knowne abroad to ſtrangers,
and our borderers, that they ſhould not ſo much
as thinke to offend me, and not looke for requitall therof;
ſince that I did voluntarily vpon mine owne pleaſure
goe to defend others? Tell mee then wherein I
haue either offended my father or countrie by this gentlemanlike
act, or whether you ought not your ſelues
to haue accompanied me, if you had beene as valiant
as you ſhould haue beene? but it is alwaies the cuſtome
of daſtards to couer their owne cowardiſe either with
the ſhadow of a certaine obedience towards their parents,
or by a ſhew of wiſdome, as ſometimes alſo by a
ſigne of their innocencie, more ſuperſtitious then religious:
ſaying they ought not to kill any man, or if they
ſhould as often haue their hearts and courage conformable
to their wicked wils, there could not bee more
cruell people in the world then they: Is there any in
the world more deſirous of reuenge then women, and
yet is there no creatures liuing more baſe and fearefull
then they: for as impoſſible is it for a noble heart to be
cruell, as it is for a cruell man to be couragious: if you
had not bewitched my fathers vnderſtanding, he could
not chuſe but haue beene very deſirous to haue left his
principalitie to ſuch a ſonne of his owne, as had made
proofe of his skill in keeping, as alſo in augmenting the
ſame if need were: and eſpecially being bound vnto
his people to leaue them ſuch a ruler: for princes are
not or ſhould not be other then fathers or tutors at the

aleſt vnto their people, whome they ſhould after their
edath leaue to be guided by ſuch a one as ſhould maintaine
their laws and rights, and which ſhould defend
them from ſuch as would offend them: wherefore not
without reaſon did Pirrhus king of the Epirotes anſwer
his children (who asked him to which of them hee
would leaue his kingdome) that he would leaue it vnto
him that ſhould haue the ſharpeſt and beſt edged ſword
amongſt them al. This valiant king did very wel know,
that ſuch realmes where the king is not held for a ſouldiour,
are alwaies moleſted by their neighbours or by
ſtrangers: Haue not we ſeene as much by proofe? that
whileſt the Macedonians were vnder Philip, Alexander,
and other valiant kings, yea euen vnto the laſt Philip,
they were alwaies in proſperitie: but after Perſeus was
their king, they were ſubdued by the Romans, and Perſeus
being vanquiſhed, was carried in triumph to Rome
by Paulius Emilius. But why ſtand I vpon ſuch needleſſe
examples, ſeeing they are infinit and without number?
Whether had the Romans euer finiſhed their new citie
amongſt ſo many enuious and euill diſpoſed neighbors,
without the valor of Romulus their king? Finally if
my deceaſed father had well conſidered of theſe reaſons,
and that hee had not beene badly counſelled by
you and ſuch as you are, he had not diſherited me, but
ſhould greatly haue reioiced to ſee, that during his life
I endeuoured to make my ſelfe worthie to ſucceed him
in his ſeat. I need not to make a doubt whether hee
might for any cauſe giue the principalitie to you or to
any other, ſince himſelfe hauing receiued it by inheritance
from my grandfather, and I being borne vnto it,
and not vnworthie of it, ought to enioy it as my due,
and lawfull ſucceſſion; for hee was no other then gardian

and protector thereof: how could hee then take it
from me and giue it vnto you, who deſerue the ſame in
no ſort, neither by reaſon nor by valor: Had you bene
ſo wiſe as you thinke your ſelfe to be, to gaine a dignitie
or an aſſured principalitie, you ſhould haue immitated
ſome ſuch, as it may be being leſſe cowardly, but more
wiſe then you, and knowing themſelues not valiant enough
by armes to winne any authoritie, doe become
firſt begging friers, and ſo well behaue themſelues therin,
as afterwards they become cardinals, yea and oftentimes
obtaine the Papall ſeat, in ſuch ſort ſhould you
haue become a Prince; You I ſay who haue neither
vertue nor valor, but in your tongue, by the which you
could ſo well perſuade my deceaſſed father to diſhonour
himſelfe, and to wrong his onlie ſonne, preferring
you before him. But I haue ſuch an aſſured hope in the
Emperour his ſacred Maieſtie who is our iudge, as that
ſhall be reſtored which of right belongeth vnto me, and
I aſſure that but for the reſpect I beare to the ſame Maieſtie,
I would doe that, as you ſhould know you ought
not to vſurpe my gouernement, but thinke your ſelfe
verie happie in ſurrendring the ſame ouer to me, & not
receiue the puniſhment due for your raſhneſſe.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  RAſh and vnaduiſed may he be tearmed, who in
the end of his reaſons addeth threatnings in the
preſence of his imperiall Maieſtie, whom he faineth
to reſpect, & vpon whom ſuch an iniurie redoundeth
rather then vpon me who am here vnder the protection
of his ſaid Maieſtie. But to anſwere vnto this
your deed, I ſay that it is not the act of a gentleman to

diſobey his father either whileſt hee liueth, or after his
death, in deſiring to take that from me which he charged
me to keepe by his laſt Will. Touching the firſt diſobedience;
Durſt you be ſo preſumptious to vnderſtand
the cauſe why your father did forbid you to goe
vnto the wars? You were ouerbold therein, ſince he
knowing your indiſcretion and wauering mind would
not truſt you with ſuch a ſecret matter: How manie
things ſeeme aduantagious, honourable, and profitable
vnto yong men, which old men doe foreſee to be a manifeſt
ruin? What doe you know what they doe keepe
in ſtore for you whom you haue offended in this war?
Or if he who euen by your aid is become more mightie
ſhall vſe the ſame his power to your preiudice? For ſo
did the Romans, who being ſuccoured by their confederats,
did firſt vanquiſh other nations, and then afterwards
ſubdued thoſe their confederats likewiſe: what
do you know if your father foreſaw the ſame, or a greater
danger? If we are bound to beleeue old men, how
much more then ought euery one to beleeue his father,
of whom (next to God) he holdeth his life and his being?
And therefore they are double in fault which do
not onlie giue no credit to their words, but alſo do diſobey
their commandements as you haue done: for if
one way you ſhall lay the fault vnto your frailtie, which
hindered you from beleeuing the truth, and ſhall ſay it
is mans nature ſo to doe; Yet your diſobedience added
therevnto, doth another way make the ſame vnpardonable.
How manie are there that haue put their children
to death for leſſe fault then yours? It may eaſelie
be ſeene by the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine hiſtories:
As for example; Saule the firſt King of the Hebrewes,
would not he haue put his ſonne Ionathas to death for

taſting a little honie againſt the commandement of his
ſaid father, although he did it ignorantlie? Epaminondas
the Theban, did not he cauſe his ſonne to die, for fighting
cōtrarie to his cōmandement: did not Aulus Poſthumius,
and Manlius Torquatus Romans, do the like? what
would they then (thinke you) haue done, if their children
contrarie their wil and commandment, had gone
to the wars as you haue done? Teaching them who
were with you to diſobey their prince, as you did your
lord and father: and not content to haue offended him
during his life, will confirme and ratifie your diſobedience
after his death, in reſiſting his laſt Will and teſtament:
and to his great diſhonor accuſe him with want
of wit. For leſſe fault was Cham the ſonne of Noe, not
onlie diſherited, but alſo curſed of his father for euer,
yea and his poſteritie after him, who could not do with
the faults of their father and grandfather. The Romans
had not the power ouer the life and death of their children:
So that but for ſuch men as you, that law at this
law had not beene inuented; for from the vniuſtice and
wickedneſſe of men, do good, holy, and righteous laws
proceed: Wherefore it is a true Prouerbe, that offences
beget laws, and afterwards thoſe laws doe diſcouer and
puniſh offences: for where no fault is, there law is not
requiſit; and where no law is, there can be no breach
thereof: Wherevpon S. Paule ſaith, That the law onlie
made me know that to deſire is ſinne. Your father did
not prohibite you from the defence of your countrie,
or the church, therefore you need not make a queſtion
of that which he did not, but of that which hee did,
which was his diſſuading you from this war, and for
the ſame cauſe hee added threatnings vnto his commandement.
And notwithſtanding for all this, you

would not obey him, but it may bee the great griefe
which your father tooke for this your obſtinacie hath
procured his death: and yet you ſay (although he hath
not wholly diſherited you) that he did you wrong to
giue the principalitie vnto him, whom he knew to bee
beſt able to keepe it: ſee how farre the loue of the father
exceedeth all the malice that the ſonne can imagine:
for notwithſtanding after this your fault, hee
thought vpon your profit more then you deſerued, and
therefore he had a deſire to leaue you wherewithall to
liue like a Prince, but not the power to looſe your ſelfe
and your people: Doe you thinke the good Prince did
not know, that in the warres vices are ſooner learned
then vertues? And that you were more inclined to wickedneſſe
then wiſedome? For how can he be a louer of
vertue, which deſpiſeth both his father & his commandements?
Moreouer hee knew very well that the countrie
whoſe Prince is accuſtomed to the wars, is neuer in
peace; and not being in peace it cannot proſper. Alſo he
ſaid, that as count
                        •
                     ies had long ben kept, ſo they ſhould
be maintained, becauſe euerie alteration or change is
dangerous, and if there come any profit thereby, it is
not in their daies to bee expected who are then liuing.
Wherefore knowing that his predeceſſors and himſelfe
had more encreaſed and conſerued their gouernement
by wiſedome, equitie, and iuſtice, then by armes, it ſeemed
nothing reaſonable vnto him, to leaue for ſucceſſor
ſuch a one, who only ſeeking to be counted valiant,
would forſake all vertue, which takes her beginning frō
the feare of God; and he which feareth him, is another
manner of man to his father, then you haue beene to
yours. Now ſince your father had all theſe reaſons on
his part, can you ſay he was not a good protector both

of his people, and alſo of you: Likewiſe he knew that
Numa Pompilius did more conſerue and increaſe Rome
by his religion and good lawes, then Romulus did in the
building thereof by his wars: the which to ſpeak truth,
are verie neceſſarie in euerie new gouernement; but
where the people doe honour their Prince, and he is in
loue and peace with his neighbours, there warlike men
are more dangerous then defenſiue, the which we may
ſee by the Romanes, who neuer were ouercome but by
their own proper forces, alſo the ſouldiors which were
in the citie were the deſtruction of the ſame. Therfore
thoſe princes do wel, who haue the means to ſend ſuch
people to exerciſe their furie in ſtrange countries, for
armes are alwaies hurtfull in a countrie, vnleſſe it be for
the defence thereof. You ſay that becauſe you haue
beene in the warres, your neighbours and ſtrangers
will ſtand in feare of you: better were it for you to bee
beloued of them: for euerie one deſireth their death,
of whom they ſtand in dread. I would haue followed
you to the wars my ſelfe, if you had gone thether by
commandement or conſent of your father, vnto whom
it was griefe enough to bee diſobeied by his ſon, without
encreaſing the ſame by the like offences of his nephew;
for if I had followed your courſe, I ſhould haue
thought that I might haue giuen him iuſt cauſe to think
me none of his ſubiect, much leſſe his kinſman. God
graunt that this your ingratitude, cauſed him not to
doubt whether you were his ſonne or not. Touching
Pirrhus, his anſwere was as wicked as the end of his
life was wretched. And Perſeus was ouerthrowne onlie
becauſe he truſted in his forces, prouoking by his preſumption
the Romanes againſt him. You ſay that I deſerue
not the gouernement; 
                        〈◊〉
                      your father being farre

more wiſe, hath iudged me worthie, and you vnfit. I
will no further anſwere to your aſſertions, which do as
much diſcouer your impudencie together with your
contempt of God and good things, as alſo the malice
which aboundeth in you; but will leaue you to your
owne diſcretion: and will onelie conclude thus, that all
thoſe reaſons aboue ſaid, and it may bee the leaſt onelie
more then al the reſt ioined together, haue incited your
father to giue me that which I deſerue, and I praie you
compel me not to take that frō you, which of my own
liberalitie I haue beſtowed vpon you. Touching that
which I poſſeſſe I doe ſo much truſt in the ſacred Maieſtie
of the Emperour, as I am aſſured that hee will maintaine
me in my right, who am his moſt humble & moſt
faithfull ſeruant.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 5.
               
                  Of Spurius Seruilius, who defended himſelfe againſt
the people, being by them accuſed for his cowardly
fighting at the hill of Janicola.
               
               
                  NOt long time after that the Kings were baniſhed
Rome, and that the death of Tarquin the
laſt king thereof was made manifeſt, the Conſuls
and Senat began to grow more prowd and
couetous then they were accuſtomed, and the
people being on the one ſide ouerburdened with taxes, and on
the other ſide ouerlaid with vſurie, and impriſoned for debts,
they began to riſe againſt the Senat, in ſuch ſort that they being
in armes vpon the holy mountaine, they would in no wiſe
be perſuaded to depart, before there was granted vnto them

that they might haue two Tribuns for the people; by meanes
whereof, their inſolencie grew to that heigth, that when they
had not warre abroad, they troubled the Senat at home, intending
t
                     •
                   ſet new lawes abroch, and amongſt others, the law called
Agraria: and on the other ſide, the Senat reſiſting their
demands in that behalfe, they were cited before the Tribuns,
and condemned ſometimes into exile, and otherwhiles great
fines ſet vpon them: by reaſon whereof, ſome of them did voluntarily
baniſh themſelues before that iudgement was pronounced
againſt them, and others made themſelues away by
ſome kind of death before the pronunciation of the ſentence:
amongſt whom was Coriolanus, who died in exile, and Menemus
the ſonne of Agrippa, who died with anger, being condemned
in 200 aſſes, becauſe in the time of his conſulſhip, he aided
not the Fabians who were ſlaine at Cremera. Afterwards
Spurius Seruilius was accuſed, that he was the cauſe that the
Romans loſt the batiaile at the foot of the mountaine Ianicola,
againſt the Tuſcanes, who defended himſelfe courageouſly
againſt the Tribuns ſaying after this maner:
               
                  NOt in vain did Plato ſay, that the common people
are like vnto the beaſt Polipus, which hath
many feet & wanteth a head, by reaſon whereof
not ſeeing the way which he holdeth, he ouerthroweth
himſelfe: in like maner the ignorant people
doe go on forward without anie conſideration, ſeeking
their owne ouerthrow whileſt they imagine to
giue the Senate a fall: and that which is worſt of all,
they who ought to guide thoſe blind men in a better
courſe, are ſuch as by force would bring them into the
bottomeleſſe pit of confuſion, or headlongdowne fall
of raſhneſſe. It is vnto you that I ſpeak, O you Tribuns,
yet no Tribuns, but rather ſeducers of the poore people,

and ſcourges of the Common-wealth: Surelie the
Senat, and people, doe now receiue worthie puniſhment
of their faults, the one hauing deſired, the other
hauing ſuffered you to be promoted to ſuch authoritie.
Trulie worthie Agrippa did neuer doe other harme to
the Commonwealth, thinking to doe good, then in appeaſing
the people with this cōdition, that they ſhould
haue Tribuns appointed them; as if at the length the
people knowing the confuſion of their weakeneſſe,
would not by the ſame meanes haue acknowledged
their fault: for without you they would haue vnderſtood,
that the Senat executing right and iuſtice, (as it
doth) is inuincible, as depending onlie vpon the lawes,
and the gods. O Romans, know you not that the kings
haue honoured, and in a manner ſubmitted themſelues
vnto them? And ſo long as they held that courſe, they
were like vnto the gods in honour, and proſperitie: but
after that Tarquin the prowd, would haue put downe
the Senat, he himſelfe was exiled with perpetual ſhame,
to the confuſion of all his poſteritie: O bleſſed people,
who then knowing what was needful for them, did endeuour
themſelues to hold vp the Senat, not ſuffering
ſo much as that any kinſman or fauorer of the name of
a king ſhould remaine in Rome, whervnto Collatin (the
rooter out of kings, and one of the firſt Conſuls, who
was baniſhed onlie becauſe he was by name a Tarquin)
was a witneſſe, they hauing no deſire to ſuffer neither
king nor Conſull of his race: Shall we then indure the
tirannie of the Tribuns? Doe you not ſay, O you people,
that they would (if it were poſſible) aboliſh the Senat,
that they might afterwards tiranniſe ouer you: for
ſuch is the manner of thoſe, who of nothing doe riſe
vnto ſome dignitie, as through pride and ingratitude,

they doe make themſelues intollerable, which is to bee
ſeene by theſe Tribuns, who when they could not
ſhew their pride & ingratitude to Agrippa, for the ſhort
time he liued after their creation, haue manifeſted the
ſame to Menenius his ſonne, being the cauſe of his
death, with the griefe that hee tooke in ſeeing himſelfe
condemned by thoſe, who not long before durſt not
preſume to conſort with anie his fathers ſeruants: I ſay
this noble Agrippa died ſo poore that he left not onlie
ſo much as to burie himſelfe withall, as it likewiſe chanced
vnto manie others. Behold then in whom the ambition
and couetouſneſſe remaineth, which you would
impute to the Senators: who as a candle do conſume
thēſelues for the publick good, whilſt you (which were
it not for the office that the Senat hath beſtowed vpon
you, ſhould oftentimes haue no bread to put in your
mouthes) endeuour to perſecute the Senat, and deſtroy
the people. You accuſe me to be the cauſe that the battaile
was foughten ſo vnluckilie, vnder the mountaine
of Ianicola, I ſubmit my ſelfe to the report of the Senat
and people whether my endeuor were wanting. Menenius
was condemned for not aiding the Fabians in the
time of his conſulſhip, and I for fighting vnluckilie: as
if the one & others fault proceeded not from the inſolencie
of the Tribuns, who did ſo animate the people
againſt the Senat, as hardlie would they march vnder
the Conſuls: but who knoweth not that the ſouldiors
neuer doe anie good ſeruice, if they loue not their leader,
who alſo can doe no worthie act, if he be not thorowlie
aſſured of the good will and obedience of his
ſouldiours: but concerning the Fabians, they were cut
in peeces in the field, before the conſull was aduertiſed
that they were in anie danger, yet was hee condemned

vniuſtlie by you. Is it not alſo manifeſt that you by your
croſſing & hindering the enrolling the ſouldiosr, haue
ben the cauſe for the moſt part that ſuccour hath come
too late: this is all the good that you doe in the Common-wealth,
O you Tribuns, plagues of the ſame: it is
not before you (who are vnworthie to take account of
my actions) as I will iuſtifie, much leſſe excuſe my ſelfe:
condemne me if, you can, I ſpeake not to the end to diſſuade
you: I will not be aſhamed to be the companion
of ſo manie vertuous men whom you haue wrongfullie
condemned; but I do verilie aſſure you reuerend fathers,
that as much hangeth ouer the heads of euerie
one of you, vntill that the condemnation of ſuch a one
(not more louing to the Common-wealth, yet more
happie then I) do prouoke you not to endure anie more
the inſolencie of theſe heddie fellowes: who doe onelie
maintaine their authoritie they haue with the people,
in quarrelling with the worthieſt Senators: and you
O people, no leſſe ingratefull, then ignorant, of the euill
which threatneth you, bee you full aſſured, that theſe
men will bring you to that paſſe, that you will deſire
(but neuer obtaine) that the Senat may bee reſtored to
their firſt authoritie.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     IF the people ſhould not haue ſome better head
then yours, it were better they had none at all,
for although euerie one liued after their own
fantaſie, yet ſhould it be leſſe hurtfull for them
then to bee led or gouerned by ſuch a one as ſeeketh
their deſtruction, and it cannot bee ſaid that the commendation
or condemnation that the Senat deſerueth

by means of the election of the Tribuns, is rightly due
vnto them, becauſe the ſame election neuer was allowed
by their good wils, but being compelled, they conſented
thervnto, although in effect they were the cauſe
that the people would both haue them, and alſo obtained
them: For they vſing the people more rudely then
ſlaues it cauſed them to looke vnto their owne ſafeties,
and to take vp armes and force the Senat to conſent vnto
the chuſing of Tribuns, to defend them from thoſe
who ſought to tiranniſe ouer them: neuertheleſſe you
would on the contrarie haue vs to ſerue the Senat, and
to conſent that not onlie they ſhould haue al the honor
and profit of that which was gotten with the price of
the peoples blood, but alſo that they ſhold deuour the
authors of their dignitie, by impoſition, and vſuries,
bringing them into captiuitie for debts, keeping them
in priſon and irons, and tormenting them at their own
pleaſure. Although you doe not acknowledge, O you
Senators, how much you are beholding vnto the people,
yet remember onlie when you had need of their
valour to confirme your authoritie, or to defend you
from the enemie, how friendlie you could ſpeake.
When Porſenna king of Tuſcan came to beſiege Rome
to eſtabliſh the Tarquins therein, you then ſaid that the
people were oppreſſed, that it were reaſon to diſcharge
them from taxes, that the cuſtome of ſalt ought to bee
taken away, and to giue them corne in common, ſince
that they were at charge enough in begetting and bringing
vp of their children for the warres; but as ſoone as
the ſiege was raiſed, this conſideration and liberalitie
did vaniſh away both together: King Tarquin being
once dead, then began you by little and little to vſe
thoſe free people like ſlaues, ſo as nothing remained vnto

to them but the name of freedome, but as in greateſt
harmes extreame remedies are ſought, ſo had the people
or els the Senat periſhed without the mitigation of
the Tribuns, and it cannot bee denied but that otherwiſe
the miſerie of the people had alwaies encreaſed,
ſince that amongſt ſeuē kings there was but one which
was hurtfull vnto them, and now hardlie can there bee
found amongſt a number of Senators, one that is good
or fauourable vnto them; or if anie ſuch bee; yet dare
they not make anie ſhew thereof, for feare to diſpleaſe
others thereby, and be called fauourers of the people,
as it happened to the Fabians, who rather deſired to die
in fighting alone with the enemies, then to bee odious
to the Senat, and not to bee able without danger to fauour
the people: tell vs onlie whether you are rulers or
lords ouer the people; and conſider, that if you bee
their rulers, you ow them equitie and iuſtice, or if you
will be their lords, you ought to fauor and protect thē,
notwithſtāding they can obtain nothing at your hands
but by force: you affirme, that if we had not beene, the
confuſion and weakeneſſe of the people would haue
made them acknowledge their fault: but you confeſſe
not that the people might ſooner bee able to make a
new Senat, then the Senat a people, all theſe proofes are
dangerous, becauſe they are extreame, and vertue conſiſteth
in a meane. The kings haue honoured the Senat,
ſo alſo haue they not deſpiſed the people, for without
them, the king could not bee, and the firſt Senate was
choſen from amongſt them: if Collatin were baniſhed
for his name onlie, Why ought they not to bee condemned,
whoſe deeds deſerue no leſſe? Trulie neither
Conſuls, Senators, nor Tribuns ought to be ſuffered, if
they doe not their dutie: neither was it ingratitude to

condemne the ſon of Agrippa, but equitie, and as there
are but a few Senators who die poore as he did, ſo are
they nothing like the candle, but onlie in that they are
too fat with the coſt of the poore people, and with the
danger of their liues; for the Conſuls command, but
the ſouldiours fight. Concerning this, that you warred
vnluckilie, the blood of the dead, and the cries of the liuing,
beare witneſſe thereof: and trulie hee is not worthie
to be a Senator, much leſſe a Conſull▪ who cannot
gaine the good will of the ſouldiours. Laſtlie, we had
not oppoſed our ſelues againſt the enrolling of the
ſouldiours, if in due time the demaunds had beene
thought reaſonable: and therfore either you muſt iuſtifie
yourſelfe, or els are you worthie of double condemnation,
becauſe your talke tendeth to ſedition, in
deſiring to mooue the Senat and people againſt vs, who
are no common officers, but moſt holie Magiſtrats, appointed
to keep in peace both the one and the other:
alſo the time will come when we ſhall greeuouſlie puniſh
ſuch vnluckie Southſaiers and Prophets, who doe
ſeditiouſlie foretell and prophecie euil to the Senat and
people, like as you now doe.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 6.
               
                  Of a maimed man, who for ſmiting an officer, is
condemned to loſe his hand, but it cannot be prooued
with which hand he did ſtrike him.
               
               
                  
                  A Man that was maimed of one of his hands,
did ſtrike an officer of the Magiſtrates, for the
which he was to loſe his hand: it could not bee
proued with which hand he did ſtrike him, he
ſaid that it was with his left hand, which was
the ſame that was maimed: notwithſtanding the iudge would
the ſound hand to be cut off, alleaging theſe reaſons following.
               
                  IT were better that laws were neuer made, then
not to be executed, for the law that is not kept,
maketh the Magiſtrats deſpiſed, and ſo conſequentlie
maketh men to doe euill, but the meaning
or gloſſe of the law is to be conſidered, as alſo the
qualitie of him which breaketh the ſame together with
his intention: for if a man kill another in his owne defence,
or he which ſtealeth, being by extreame want vrged
therevnto, ſuch a one is in leſſe fault, then he which
killeth a man of ſet purpoſe, or he which ſtealeth, hauing
no great need: It behooueth vs then to conſider
that the meaning of the law is, that hee which ſmiteth
an officer muſt loſe a member, and not that which is
maimed alreadie by ſome other meanes: but concerning
you, who are the breaker of the law, you had little
cauſe ſo to do, being lame, becauſe ſuch men ſhould rather
keep themſelues from ſtrokes, then deſire to ſtrike
anie man, becauſe they are the weakeſt: alſo you were
not conſtrained therevnto, and therefore you were rather
to expect for more hurt, then anie good to happen
vnto you by the ſame blow; whethereby it may be ſeen
that anger is an enemie of good counſell, and forbearance
is the beſt meanes to bridle rage: for if you were
not wronged by the officer, you deſerue double puniſhment

for ſtriking him: and if you were iniuried, yet
the badge of his office might haue ſerued for a warrant
that there was a Magiſtrat, of whome you might haue
had right, if you had accuſed him boldlie, alleaging that
he which was to redreſſe wrongs, had wronged you:
but in not doing ſo, wee muſt come to this that you
haue done, which is, that you haue beaten the Magiſtrate
his officer: you ſay it was with your left hand,
the which is verie vnlikelie, becauſe few men are left
handed, and you eſpeciallie cannot ſo be, ſeeing that
if you were ſuch by nature, yet were you conſtrained
of long time to vſe your right hand, and verie hardlie
could you euer remember your left hand, vnles it were
when you ſtood in anie need thereof: if you ſay that it
ſerued you onlie to ſtrike withall, it is a ſigne that you
had a will, or that you were accuſtomed to ſtrike, which
is a kind of offence. Finallie there is ſufficient proofe
that you haue ſtroken, and you confeſſe the ſame, but
you cannot prooue that it was with the left hand, neither
is there anie likelihood at all of your ſaieng, wherfore
if you haue no other proofe, you may account
your ſelfe for a condemned man, for the law intendeth
that you ſhall loſe a hand: how can one now take away
that which you haue wanted long ſince? bethinke you
then to prooue your ſaieng, or ſuffer the law (which
you haue miſtakē) to be executed vpon you, to giue example
to others, that hereafter they be not ſo raſh. For
to cut off your vnprofitable hand, ſhould bee rather a
pleaſure then a puniſhment to you.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THe zeale which I bear vnto the Commonwealth,
maketh me to confeſſe my great preiudice, that
lawes are both to bee kept and executed: and I

                        〈1… pages missing〉
                     
                     
abundance, but do you verily beleeue, O you Cenſors,
that your impoſition can in anie ſort be the ouerthrow
of Mamercus? Doe you not know that the more vertue
is oppreſſed, the more ſhe doth flouriſh, much like
vnto ſaffron, which the more it is beaten, the better it
groweth? Hath not Mamercus beene greater then you
alreadie, and may he not ſo bee againe? What might
then befall if he were ſo full of reuenge as you are? Do
you think that it would be any benefit vnto the Common-wealth?
Doth he want any meanes, friends, or
fauour, as well of the Senators, as of the people? No
truly: but thanks be to the Gods, he neither hath, nor
euer had anie wicked intention: this one thing which
aboundeth in you, is wanting in him. But what hath
moued you to perſecute him ſo cruelly? Wherein hath
hee offended you? Forſooth hee hath abridged the
tearme of your authority, is not this all? Hath hee not
more abridged his owne? Deſiring therby to make you
know, that offices are not to bee ſought for: but when
any one is called thereunto, hee ought to thinke vpon
nothing, but the good of the Commonwealth, and for
the aduancement thereof, he muſt neglect his own profit,
the which vertue is ſildome in any man, but if any
ſuch be to be found, then were it good for them & their
family that they ſhould not continue long in office, and
if they bee otherwiſe, it were farre better for the Commonwealth
that they neuer had office at all: I dare not
iudge or ſay what you are, ſeeing you deſire the office
for fiue years, not conſidering whether you may liue ſo
long or not, but this is the miſchiefe, that your ambition,
I will not ſay auarice, doth deceiue you in ſuch ſort,
that without any other reſpect, you hate euen thoſe
who take care, both for the Common-wealth and for

your benefit, and you muſt not think although Mamercus
be eſteemed a noble gentleman, that he will alwaies
pocket vp theſe your ſlight faults, and leaue the matter
at this ſtay, whereby you may be emboldened to abuſe
either his, or any other mans patience hereafter; for
henceforth we doe appoint that thoſe which haue ben
the former Cenſors, ſhall be the correctors and iudges
of ſuch as ſhall newly come forth of their office.
               
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     WE do confeſſe that the Dictator ſhould be ſuch
a man as you ſay, but you did not or at the leaſt
would not tell what els was requiſit for him to
doe, which is, that he ought alſo to conſider to
what end he was created, whether to repreſſe the Tuſcans,
or to aboliſh, or abridge the authority of the officers,
appointed by the Senat and people, as if he alone
were wiſer then all the reſt. There was neuer any Dictator
made, vnleſſe it were to withſtand thoſe caſualties
which could not otherwiſe be redreſſed: We doe not
ſtand vpon the neceſſity of this abridgement, but doe
onely demand if it could not be done vnleſſe a Dictator
ſhould by this deed embolden the people euery day
to attempt new matters? And giue an example vnto
the ſucceeding Dictators, to do other things, thē thoſe
for which they are ordained: for of all things as well
good as bad, the beginning is the chiefe point, ſo that it
is moſt dangerous to be the ringleader vnto others to
doe amiſſe, becauſe ſuddainly they alleage the example
of him that went before them? For the greater his authoritie
is, that was the firſt inuenter of any ſuch matter,
ſo much the more pernicious is the ſame vnto the

Commonwealth: therfore we haue not done amiſſe, if
that ſhould happen which you ſay, becauſe thoſe which
would follow his example, ſhould alſo remember that
ſuch preſumptuous acts do not ſo greatly profit, as they
are ſuppoſed. But we haue not burthened him for this
cauſe, but only becauſe it was our dutie ſo to doe, and
we are no more bounden to giue an account of our actions,
then he is of his, the which ſeeme no leſſe contrary
to the Senat, then fauourable to the people, who are
ouer inſolent of themſelues already: and although we
will not ſay that Mamercus entendeth by this popular
fauour, to performe ſome bad act: yet who ſhal hinder
ſome to thinke that by ſuch like means a man may imagine
to aſpire vnto ſome ſuch vniuſt matter: I will not
ſay to be tyrant, for there is more then one way to attaine
vnto the ſame: as there are many ſorts of tyrannies:
Wherefore it is the duetie of a good Citizen to
ſhew that he doth quite deteſt euery act that may breed
any ſuſpition. Therefore it were no wiſdome to come
vnto this extremitie of the deſerts, either of his or our
actions; for the diſputation thereof would be no leſſe
difficult, then dangerous: ſo that it were better to deferre
that vntill you haue obtained (as you ſay) that we
muſt be adiudged and corrected by our predeceſſors, in
the meane ſeaſon let vs now pretend that our authoritie
is more then your vnderſtanding doth allow it. We
are not ignotant of Mamercus his vertue, neither can we
but know what fauour, kindred, and meanes he hath,
nor hath he offended vs, but rather the Magiſtrat, and
the Common-wealth; for hauing abridged the office,
he taketh away the men euen then, when they might
doe moſt good therein: for there is no man ſo perfect,
that at the firſt committeth not ſome faults, or at the

leaſt wiſe doth not execute a charge better, after he hath
beene exerciſed in the ſame ſome years, then when he
firſt began to vſe the ſame, the which neither he himſelfe,
nor you can with reaſon denie: neuertheles, there
is no malice in vs, but rather in you, that doe not only
accuſe vs, but threaten vs, aſwell with the future authoritie
of Mamercus, as alſo that we muſt anſwere our actions
vnto thoſe that ſupplied this office before vs: but
conſidering that threatned men doe liue long, and ſuch
as do moſt fear, do ſoreſt threaten: and becauſe threatnings
are for the moſt part ſure weapons to defend the
threatned, we will make no account thereof: and the
rather becauſe they come not from him, whom you
pretend to haue the greateſt wrong, who is ouer wiſe to
vſe ſuch ſpeeches, and though he ſhould, yet could we
anſwere him well inough, no man knoweth better then
himſelfe whether his wealth be increaſed, and whether
his impoſition be ouer burdenous or no: if he doe either
affirme it, or you doe prooue it, we will anſwere
you, and if we haue heretofore ſpared him, it was becauſe
the time did ſo require it, and for ſome other reſpects,
wherewith we are not to acquaint you: Finally
Mamercus during his office, did that which he thought
good, and we during ours, neither haue, nor will doe
any thing but that which is good, honeſt, and reaſonable,
and we are not to anſwer you for our actions. God
graunt that the people doe not beleeue that Mamercus
hath abridged the office of Cenſors, for the ſame end
and purpoſe as Spurius Melius extended his liberality of
corne vnto them.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 9.
               
                  Of the husband that ſlew his wife, for hauing loſt
two of his children, the one by fire, the other by
water.
               
               
                  A Certaine woman as ſhe was waſhing and wiping
her little ſonne, did ſee her yong daughter fal into
the fire, wherevpon being ouer haſtie to helpe
it, ſhe let her ſonne fall into the boule of water,
wherein he was drowned, herevpon her husband
happened to come in, who preſently ſlew her: The womans kindred
apprehended him & accuſed him vnto the iuſtice, ſaying:
               
                  THis wicked fellow not being content with
two miſchances, would needs ad therevnto a
third miſchiefe: O what griefe ought ours to
be, that hauing not only loſt our yoong nephew,
and his mother, but being iuſtly prouoked thervnto
by this damned deed, we muſt likewiſe procure
the death of this wretch, which in an vnluckie houre
was our kinſman: ſeeing that he alone muſt be the diſhonor
of all our linage, dying as a publique ſpectacle
by the hands of a hangman, according to his deſerts,
becauſe he hath ben worſe then a hangman to his poor
wife, whoſe only company he deſerued not, being ſo
chaſt, honeſt, and vertuous, as ſhe was, bearing a ſincere
and deuout loue vnto him who was her butcher, ſo as
I dare ſay and beleeue that this ſoule of hers, no leſſe
louing, then innocent, dooth yet lament in another
world, not only in that ſhe was martired by him, who
ought to haue loued, cheriſhed, and defended her from

all others that would haue burther, but alſo taketh pittie
vpon the moſt iuſt miſerie of this murther, and as
whiles ſhe liued, ſhe alwaies preferred his contentment
before her own, ſo now ſhe would thinke her ſelfe happy,
if it were poſſible, that ſhe might once more die to
ſaue his life: as did the charitable Alceſt to ſaue her
moſt deare Admetus: but I would demand of this
wicked man, wherein his wife had deſerued to die by
the hands of him, who had ſworne to keep and defend
her from all iniurie? Alaſſe, an ouer vehement charitie
made her commit a fault, which as it fell out was great,
but to be blamed for it, ſhe is not: For a motherly loue
and a naturall charity (ſeeing her daughter fallen into
the fire) made her forget that ſhe held her ſonne in her
armes. Alack her ſorrow might very well haue ſufficed,
not only for a penance, but alſo as a moſt ſharp puniſhment
for her offence, the which this cruell monſter
would neuer conſider, but heaping miſchief vpon miſchiefe,
ſhame vpon ſhame, hurt vpon hurt, murther vpon
murther, had a deſire with the price of his life to
ſlaughter her, who loued him more then the bals of her
eies, euen the ſame who deſired not to liue, but only to
pleaſe him: but there are ſome men (of which number
this is one) who the more the poore women are obedient
vnto them, the more froward and cruell doe they
become towards them, neuer cheriſhing them but with
reproches, blows, & threats, ſo that they being alwaies
poſſeſſed, or ouercharged with an exceſſiue feare, doe
commit a thouſand faults, becauſe their minds are neuer
free, to thinke vpon that which they are to doe: and
who need to doubt but that the feare of this cruel man
made the poore innocent forget that ſhe ſhould not
haue hazarded the loſſe of one of her children, to haue

ſaued the other: Wherefore if therein there was any
fault, he is to be blamed for it, and notwithſtanding, he
hath made her endure a moſt cruell puniſhment therfore,
is there any loue more great then that of the mothers
toward the child? Had not her pittifull lamentation
for her fault committed, ben a ſufficient pennance
for the ſame? Alaſſe noble iudges, the more ſtrange this
caſe is, the more great is our griefe, which maketh vs to
doubt, whether our complaints may be heard; and if
they be heard, whether they are vnderſtood; if being
vnderſtood, whether they be felt; for as much as hardly
may they be felt by thoſe whom they concerne not ſo
neerely, becauſe another mans hurt doth neuer ſeem ſo
heauy vnto any, as it is to himſelfe. Wherefore we doe
throughly aſſure you, that we can better feele our harm
then expreſſe it: for when the mind is occupied with
paſſion, the ſpirits muſt needs fai
                     ••
                   whereby our ſences
are ſtopped, and our ſpeech hindered. Conſider with
your ſelues, O you iudges, if it be poſſible, how great
our miſery is, and let our ſilence ſuffice to manifeſt that
which we cannot vtter, be you then as iuſtly ſeuere, as
this accurſed man is wicked and cruell.
               
                  The kindred of the accuſed doe
Anſwere.
                  ALthough you doe imploy all your skill together
with your malice, and ignorance, which you
would hide, yet is the ſame more manifeſt then any
other thing. You thinke that you haue ſhewed a
great cunning in perſuading that it is fit to put a man to
death, who would willingly be dead already: to what
end ſerueth ſo much vaine prattle? Seeing that he denieth

not his fault, and that the iudges doe know better
then you, what puniſhment he deſerueth: to what end
is it to accuſe ſuch a one as accuſeth himſelfe? Where
doe you find that it is reaſonable to vex the afflicted,
with iniuries? Or that which is worſt, to encreaſe his
affliction? It is you that would heape miſchiefe vpon
miſchiefe, ſhame vpon ſhame, hurt vpon hurt, and finally
you would increaſe the number of the dead, without
conſidering that the ſame paſſions which made this
dead woman careleſſe of one of her children, to ſaue
the other, did alſo ſtirre vp this poore diſgraced man, to
doe that which he ought not to haue done: I paſſe ouer
with ſilence, the occaſions, that ſhe might more thē
once, haue giuen him to haue vſed her ill, the which he
hauing hitherto patiently reſiſted, hath alwaies endured,
conſidering that he could not offend her, being the
halfe of his fleſh, without hurting himſelfe: but at the
laſt being prouoked in ſuch ſort as he was, blinded with
a rage, no leſſe extreame then iuſt, he hath done that
which was no ſooner executed, but he would haue reuoked
it with the price of his owne life, the which he
yet doth offer, to make ſatiſfaction for his fault, for the
which he is ſo penitent, that he will thinke himſelf happy
to finiſh his griefe by death: but euen as iuſtice ſuffereth
not thoſe offenders to die, who would afterward
liue honeſtly and well, ſo is it not reaſonable to put
thoſe to death that deſire the ſame: and like as they do
not excuſe, or diſſemble with thoſe, although no great
accuſation is brought againſt thē, that be malefactors,
ſo alſo ought not their ſentence, to be the more ſeuere
for the multitude, or ſharpe and cruell words of the accuſers,
but moderating the rigour of the lawes, according
to the equity of their conſcience, they ought to

iudge rightly, not laying all the fault vpon him that is
accuſed, nor alſo wholie acquiting her that is dead, ſeeing
that ſhe is not altogether faultleſſe. I will not here
alleage any more reaſons vpon coniecture as you do, of
the loue that ſhe did beare vnto her husband, for he
might ſay, that he loued her as well, for againſt ſuch as
we do beſt loue, are we moſt extreamely angrie, when
the cauſe is great: but let vs put the caſe that he was teſtie,
froward, and cruell, as you ſay, ought not ſhe then
to haue hidden her fault for a time, and after haue cauſed
ſome other to haue told him, or rather haue hidden
her ſelfe, to auoid his firſt anger? You will ſay, that her
paſſion did blind her iudgement: this excuſe ſerueth as
much for him as for her: but this is the miſchiefe, that
the moſt part of women are neuer readie nor aduiſed in
doing any thing but miſchiefe, Wherevnto they applie
their wits ſo much, that they are to ſeek in doing good:
for if it were otherwiſe, a man ſhould not ſee a woman
naturally more readie to frame an excuſe, inuent a deceit,
or a leaſing, and other ſuch like remedies then a verie
wiſe man could doe, Whereof alſo they make their
boaſt: Finallie none can know their ſubtilties, malice,
forwardneſſe to miſchiefe, and ſlackneſſe to goodneſſe,
ſo well as he that is married, and yet they that haue ben
often married know beſt, for if thoſe which are once
married, deſerue to be placed in the rancks of ſuch as
are diſeaſed, the others may be accounted in the number
of thoſe that are mad. Touching your other reaſons
there is no need to anſwere them, ſauing only that the
womans friends and kindred haue their ears continually
full of the imperfections of their husbands, the
which when anie miſchiefe happeneth, they can tell
how to augment them, without conſidering that their

own wiues doe ſay as as much of them: Laſtly, it may
pleaſe the iudges to haue more regard vnto this poore
accuſed ſoule, then to the inſolent babble of his ſpightfull
accuſers: for who can be more worthie of pittie,
then he vnto whom life is more bitter then death.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 10.
               
                  Of Caius Seruilius, who is accuſed to haue ſlaine
Spurius Melius, that had releiued the people during
the famine.
               
               
                  AT Rome during the time of the ſixtie
eight Conſulſhip, the famine was ſo exceeding
great, that many of the common
people did throw themſelues into the Tiber:
then Spurius Melius, one of the
order of the knights, a verie rich man,
hauing great acquaintaince in Tuſcane,
cauſed a great quantitie of corne to bee
brought from thence, the which he did freely diſtribut among
the people for a gift, ſo that by this meanes hauing gained the
peoples loue, he aſpired to the kingdome, wherevpon being warned
before the Dictator, he not only refuſing to come, but alſo
moouing the people to ſedition, was ſlaine by Caius Seruilius
Hala, maiſter of the knights; who ſhortly after was for this fact
accuſed as an offender, by one of the Tribuns of the people, who
ſaid:
               HOw can a cittie be tearmed free, or well gouerned,
where it is lawfull to kill a Citizen vnder
the colour of a crime, before he be not only condemned,

but alſo before his cauſe be tried, or his accuſer
knowne: and what man was he? Surely a man who
in ſuch a time being dead, ought to be raiſed to life againe,
if it were poſſible: a man noble by his vertue, abounding
in riches, the which he knew how to diſtribute,
not onely according to the true order of liberalitie,
but with a wonderful and more then humane
charitie: but what charitie can be more great then immitating
the gods, to preſerue the poore from death?
and eſpecially from hunger, which in truth is the horribleſt
death of all others: how wicked then is the nature
of thoſe, who deſiring not to follow his vertue,
haue borne him ſuch hate, that being prouoked to rage
at the report of one only accuſer, (and it may be ſuborned)
haue depriued him of life: ſome will ſay that he
would not appeare before the Dictator: was there no
other meanes to cauſe Spurius appeare, but firſt by placing
guards through all the ſtreets, and afterwards to
ſend vnto him the maſter of the knights, to tell him that
the Dictator demanded for him, and conſequently that
he was accuſed for aſpiring to be tyrant? What man in
the world is ſo reſolute, that he will come on the ſodain
hearing that he is accuſed of treaſon? That knoweth a
Dictator to be expreſly choſen to condemne him, the
which officer is neuer made, but vpon ſpecial cauſe, and
to repreſſe the enemies to the Commonwealth? That
beholdeth a maiſter of the knights, choſen of purpoſe
to carrie him away: Who would not be meruailouſly
aſtoniſhed at this, becauſe the more innocent a man is,
the more amaſed is he in the like extremitie? for it is
very manifeſt, that thoſe that are culpable, foreſeeing
the dangers wherein they aduenture themſelues, doe
alſo foreſee to prouide for remedies, or at the leaſt, whē
                  
dangers do happen, they are leaſt aſtoniſhed: but this
man being as much afraid, as innocent, endeuoured to
flie, to the end he might haue ſome leaſure to conſider
from whence this ſo ſuddaine miſchiefe proceeded, or
to auoid the firſt rage of the Dictator: who hauing his
ears cloied with accuſations, and his mind occupied
with paſſion, and anger againſt the accuſed (as he did
very well manifeſt, ſending to ſeeke him with ſuch furie,)
he diſpaired to find anie place reſerued to heare,
much leſſe to waigh his iuſt excuſes: was there no
meanes to ſend for him after a more modeſt order? It
ſeemeth no; becauſe they would find an occaſion to do
that which was done. If the commiſſion of Seruilius
was to ſlay him? There was no need to expect anie further
courſe of law. If his authoritie were but to fetch
him, he could not kill him, without being in verie great
fault, although Spurius had beene an offender? For hauing
purſued him ſo neere, he might as well haue taken
him, and brought him away with him, as murther him.
Is it poſſible that a maiſter of the knights was ſuch a coward,
that he durſt not, being armed on horſeback, lay
his hands vpon a man running away? But I pray God
that this be not true, which the people do murmure abroad:
to wit, that Seruilius doubted of the truth of the
accuſation, wherefore finding in his owne iudgement,
an occaſion to depriue the partie accuſed, of audience,
and a means to iuſtifie himſelfe, he ſerued his owne
turne fitlie: to ſatiſfie the malice of the Senators, and
the greedie auarice of the vſurers, who by the liberalitie
of Spurius, loſt the meanes to finiſh the deuouring
of all the poore people: for ſuch is the nature of the malicious,
enuious, and couetous people, the one kind
of which, doe thinke themſelues vndone to ſee another

man proſper; the other imagine that they are diſgraced,
if any one attaine vnto honor; and the third ſort more
worſe then all the reſt, doe thinke that to be loſt out of
their owne goods, which they cannot wreſt foorth of
the ſubſtance of another: wherefore ſuch people are
hurtfull to all men, and worſt of all to themſelues, for
they take as little pleaſure in that which they haue of
their owne, as in that which they haue not at all: ſo that
they poſſeſſing nothing but riches, doe neuer any good
but when they die: for then is their vnprofitable treaſure
ſet at libertie, and the Commonwealth is freed
from their greedie deuourings. I paſſe ouer with ſilence
that ſome doe preſume, ſeeing Seruilius triumph thorow
the cittie, with his ſword all bloody in his hand, that he
had ſome particular malice againſt him, and the more
conſtantly is it affirmed, becauſe he might as well haue
taken him as ſlaine him: others doe ſay that this blocke
was throwne in his way, to confiſcate his goods, and
they ſay that if it had been otherwiſe, all the Senat together
had more cauſe to appeaſe the people, then Spurius
alone; for they knowing how he was by dutie
bounden, had no occaſion to ſtand in any doubt at all
of Spurius: but it is pittie when men will not only do no
good themſelues, but alſo perſecute thoſe which do it.
God graunt that this which the people ſpeake ſo raſhly
concerning the Senat, be not very true: but as touching
Seruilius he cannot denie, ſeeing that (beſides the boaſting
that is made thereof) there are ſtore of witneſſes,
that he hath killed Spurius, and not one will ſay that the
other made any reſiſtance, wherefore we demaund that
iuſtice may be executed vpon him who hath beene the
cauſe that the ſame was not done vpon Spurius, if he
were culpable, and if he were not, then we require it,

becauſe he hath ſlaine an innocent.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     AS he whom I haue ſlaine was not guildeſſe▪ ſo
alſo I haue not only ſeene iuſtice executed vpon
the offender, but haue further done it my
ſelfe, becauſe I could not other wiſe chuſe; for it is manifeſt,
that he is a malefactor that denieth to come to his
anſwere, and he doth ſufficiently reſiſt and make his defence,
that flieth from him that is ſent to bring him:
touching the proof, how can thoſe be witneſſes againſt
him, whom he had already ſuborned? Eſpecially ſuch
as aſſembled themſelues to reſcue him from me, if I had
taken him aliue; I will not ſay thoſe which euen now
called him their God, and preſeruer of their liues, a matter
illbeſeeming the Citizens of Rome, who ought rather
to reward me for hauing rooted from amongſt
them ſuch a one, who like vnto the fiſher, and fouler,
(that with a little bait, deceaueth both the fiſh and
birds, depriuining the one of their libertie, the other of
their liues) would alſo doe the like by them: but it is
commonly ſeen that as the belly hath no eares, ſo alſo
hath the ſtomacke no diſcretion, the which is apparently
prooued by the confederats of Spurius: wherefore it
belongeth to you noble citizens, that are not bounden
vnto him, and which haue not ſold your libertie for a
morcell of bread: to you I ſay it belongeth to conſider
what I haue deſerued, hauing ſlaine him, who with the
helpe of a few faint hearted fooles would captiuate
your ſweet libertie: as for that which the Tribun ſaith
of the peoples mourning againſt the Senat, if he himſelfe
be not the inuenter thereof, yet it is a ſigne at the

leaſt, that the people which vſe ſuch conference with
him, doe very well know, that he taketh pleaſure therein,
for if there were no eares that delighted in hearing
ſlanderous ſpeeches, there would be few ſlanderous
tongues: but how could I bring him aliue, ſeeing the
people do yet ſo greatly affect him, becauſe time which
changeth all thinges, hath not as yet changed their
minds, but rather increaſed the ſame. If that be true
which the Tribun doth raſhly ſay againſt the Senat? A
man may eaſily tearme Spurius another manner of man
then you ſay he is, although the crime had beene leſſe
dangerous then it is: but when the matter concerneth
the preſeruation of our libertie (ſeeing there was no reſpect
had vnto the ſonnes of Brutus being faultie, nor
vnto Collatin being innocent, and partly the author of
the ſaid freedome) why ſhould Spurius be reſpected?
And as you ſay that the Dictator is not choſen, but in
great extremitie, his election doth ſufficiently witneſſe
the extremity wherein the Commonwealth remained:
true it is, that I told him, wherein he was accuſed, to the
end that if he were guiltleſſe, he might be leſſe afraid to
appeare before the Dictator, and being guiltie, haue the
better meanes to thinke vpon his excuſe; but he had no
deſire to take the benefit of my aduertiſement, but as
one alreadie condemned by his owne conſcience, he
endeuoured to flie away, for a true ſigne, that he is a
malefactor which diſtruſteth as much in himſelfe, as in
the iudges: if he had not beene faultie, why was he ſo
fearefull? Seeing that innocencie dooth alwaies aſſure
thoſe that imbrace her: but we may ſee by him, that
Tyrannie is like vnto a faire and pleaſant pallace, that is
high enough, but yet without ſtaires or ſteps to come
downe without breaking ones necke: euen ſo thoſe

which by pride and ambition thinke to attain vnto honour
and profit, doe for the moſt part meet with ſhame
and confuſion: he needed not to feare that he ſhould
not haue had time and place to excuſe himſelfe, ſeeing
that there was neuer anie Citizen condemned in
Rome, if his cauſe were but only doubtful: if his meaning
were good in diſtributing the corne, why did he
not come to declare the ſame vnto the Dictator? Finally
if he had beene as innocent as he was culpable, I am
not in any ſort to be blamed, ſeeing the Dictator hath
not only allowed, but alſo publickely lauded my deed.
I liſt not therefore further to diſpute of his innocencie,
or his offence, but rather the accuſer that did accuſe
him: And it appertaineth vnto the Dictator to defend
me, hauing performed my charge according to his
commandements, ſeeing that euen when I had done it,
he allowed my fact to be good: and worthie for a
maiſter of the knights as I was. But who will any
more obey the Dictators, if when after their authoritie
is expired, it may be lawfull for any man to ſue thoſe
which doe accompliſh their commandements?
               
            
            
               Declamation. 11.
               
                  Of the wife of a Tyrant, who hauing ſlaine her huſband,
required his ſonne for a recompence.
               
               
                  THe law appointed, that whoſoeuer killed a Tyrant,
ſhould obtaine of the Commonwealth
whatſoeuer he demandeth, except onely the gouernement
thereof: Moreouer, the ſame law
ſaith, that after the death of the Tyrant, all
ſuch as were neereſt of kinne vnto him, muſt likewiſe die, although

they be nothing culpaple: Whervpon it happened, that
the wife of the Tyrant (not knowing any cauſe why) did ſlay
her husband, and required for recompence of her fact, that
her ſonnes life might be ſaued, and exempted from the foreſaid
law: but the Citizens declared that the ſame could not bee
done, ſaying:
               
                  THe ſame law that promiſeth you a reward,
doth denie you him whom you demand, ſeeing
that it commandeth expreſſely, that all the
kindred of the Tyrant ſhould die: wherefore
if any other then your ſelfe had ſlaine him, you ſhould
haue beene one of the ſame number, yea and the firſt
of all, as ſhe that was neerer vnto him then any other of
his kinne, and ſo conſequently the chiefeſt partaker of
his Tyrannie: but yet to fauour you, we will not now
diſpute vpon the cauſe of your killing of him, whether
the ſame was done through hate, anger, or for ſome other
particular reaſon, without anie regard at all of the
common good: for although no act, be it neuer ſo
good, is to be performed by any wicked meanes, yet do
we allow your fact for good and laudable, and you may
induce vs, to beleeue that you haue done it in a good
zeale, and for our benefit, ſo that you will not deſire to
ſaue the Tyrants ſonnes life: for in preſeruing it, you
ſhall not haue ſlaine, but reuiued the Tyrant, neither
yet ended, but prolonged the Tyrannie, becauſe it is
more likely that a yoong man will liue longer then an
old: for ſurely, although the Tyrants ſonne be neuer ſo
well diſpoſed, yet ſhall we alwaies ſuſpect him, can there
be anie greater tyrannie then to ſtand in doubt of it
continually, ſeeing that of all euils, feare is the cruelleſt
part, for without it death it ſelfe ſhould be a ſoueraigne

good: Truly a knowne Tirannie, were farre leſſe greeuous
then a daily feare to fall into it would be, for the
Prouerb ſaith, That much better is a knowne miſchiefe,
then a doubtfull pleaſure: how much then ought we to
preferre a certaine good, before a manifeſt euill? of the
which good we can neuer be aſſured, ſo long as the tyrants
ſonne doth liue: for the deſire of reuenge is ſo
whot, and the couetouſneſſe to commaund and rule ſo
vehement, that hardly may he forget who was his father:
alſo it is to be feared that you would neuer haue
ſlaine the fire, if you had not thereby hoped one day to
ſee the ſonne in his ſeat: which would be worſe for vs,
then if the father were yet liuing. You will ſay, that the
baniſhment of him whom we feare, might very well
put vs out of doubt, the which can in no ſort be ſo, becauſe
our enemies which might helpe him with their
fauour and counſell are abroad. Coriolanus being baniſhed,
would haue deſtroied Rome; had not his mother
by her wiſe perſuaſions preuented him, ſo alſo would
this our enemie not be the firſt, that of an exile would
aſpire to be king, for ſuch as are farre from their countrie,
experience and want, maketh them much more induſtrious,
and reſolute; ſo that ſo long as he liueth, wee
ſhall be like him that holdeth the wolfe by the eares,
who no ſooner is let loſe, but he doth miſchiefe, and to
hold him ſtill, is both irckſome and dangerous: for as
the wolfe hurteth thoſe whom he ſeeth, before he be
ſpied, euen ſo this race of aſpiring Tirants infect the
righteous minds of thoſe which are not well acquainted
with their nature. But would you willingly incurre
this blame to haue ſlaine your husband for ſome other
cauſe, rather then for the good of the Commonwealth?
we haue no ſuch bad opinion of you yet, let your good

deed then be ſound, and without ſpot, rather then to
demand ſuch a thing, whereof vnto you there would
come exceeding miſchiefe, and vnto vs moſt great danger;
like as you know, that the law ſaith, that the Tyrant
killer ſhould be rewarded, ſo you may remember as wel
(as the reward) that it alſo ſaith, that all the Tirants kindred
ought to be put to death. If you haue ſlaine your
husband, neither for loue of the law, nor for the good
of the land, you are greatly to be blamed, and to be
puniſhed for murthering your husband: but if your
zeale be good, ſuffer then that good may come therof.
You will ſay, my ſonne is yoong: true it is, and therefore
he may the more eaſily grow worſe then better, as
thoſe doe who are by nature borne vicious, and they
are ſuch for the moſt part as are borne of tyrannous parents,
as his father hath ben prooued, and ſo ſhall you
likewiſe be, if you obey not the law. Finally the father
and the mother haue ben both very reſolute, the one to
vſurpe, the other either to ſuppreſſe or deſirous to renue
the tirannie: vntill now we doe not know whether of
the twain was meant: but we know very well how dangerous
the preſeruing of a ſon borne of ſuch parents
is, whoſe qualities he may very well follow: reſolue you
then to put vs out of doubt (in asking ſuch a reward as
may be graunted) that to a good and vertuous end you
murthered the tirant, or els prepare you to receiue ſuch
puniſhment as a woman deſerueth, that for her owne
particular paſſions hath ſlaine her husband.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  HOw now my good lords and friends? Are you
deſirous that in you this deteſtable Prouerbe
ſhould bee verefied, which ſaith, That there is
nothing more vnconſtant, vnthankful, and more exceeding

inſolent then the common people, ſo ſoon as they
perceiue themſelues free from feare? It ſhould ſeeme
then by this, that tyrannie, keeping you in awe and ſo
conſequently in obedience, would be more profitable
for you then libertie: but God forbid that ſo it ſhould
be ſaid of my countriemen: I had rather die a thouſand
times if it were poſſible: and ſeeing I haue not ſpared
mine owne husband for the good of the Common-wealth,
neuer thinke that I would ſpare my ſonnes life,
yea or mine owne vnto your preiudice. But I feare that
we thinking to doe well, both you and I ſhall be blamed:
I of crueltie, and you of crueltie and ingratitude
together: for greater crueltie is it to ſlay an innocent,
then to pardon an hundred offenders; conſider then
that her ſonne who hath ſet you at libertie, hath neuer
offended the Common-wealth, but as yoong as he is,
he hath alwaies ſeemed to abhorre the cruelties of his
father, who being put to death by my hands, the child
hath verie conſtantly ſhowne himſelfe to be more glad
for the benefit of the Commonwealth, then ſorrie for
the death of his father, and with a great contentment
hath he left off his gorgeous apparell, and his accuſtomed
delicacie, to conforme himſelfe after my will, like
vnto the reſt of the Citizens: Why then my very good
lords doe you deſire the death of an innocent, which
ſheweth himſelfe ſo affectioned towards you? And
ſuch a one as may one day do you good ſeruice? wherfore
doe you not as well conſider the good which he
may doe vnto you, as the miſchiefe which you imagine
to be done alreadie by him? But the hate which you
did beare vnto the father, you turn vpon the ſon; when
you ſay that he is the ſonne of a Tirant, why doe you
not as well ſay that he is her ſonne that ſlew the tirant:

If you wil not loue him for my ſake, at the leaſt let your
hate be as little as your loue, and condemne him not,
before he haue offended: let him liue a while, and if
he commit the leaſt offence in the world puniſh him
with death: loe then the gift which I doe craue for the
reward of my deſert, not the life of my ſonne, but the
delay of his death: you ſay that it is not you, but the
law which requireth his death: it is to be conſidered,
that all the interpretations or gloſes of the laws, ought
rather to tend vnto clemencie then vnto rigour; and
principally when the effect thereof tendeth vnto crueltie:
for this law which ſaith, that all the kinne and adherents
of the tirant muſt die, ought to be vnderſtood of
thoſe which haue aided and aſſiſted him to exerciſe his
tirannie, or that haue beene his partakers therein: but
wherein might this poor innocent haue offended, who
knoweth not as yet what tirannie meaneth? you muſt
then remember my lords, that he is her ſon who hath
made the zeale of her countrie ſtriue and triumph ouer
the name of a Princeſſe, ouer the delights of the world,
ouer ſoueraigntie ſo greatly deſired of women, the
which they themſelues are vnapt to obtaine, ouer
wealth, the which they ſo much eſteeme, and finally ouer
a husbands loue, and a vowed faith: and that which
is not the leaſt, eſteeming all impartial pleaſures as baſe,
in reſpect of your generall profit. Remember that I
haue depriued my ſelf of my husband, that I haue ſlain
my child his father: what zeale would you haue more
great towards our fellow countrymen? But if there
were the leaſt ſhew in the world that he would euer be
preiudiciall vnto you, I would not let for any thing to
ſacrifice him by and by for your ſafetie: but ſeeing I am
certaine that he will become a very good Citizen and a

faithfull louer of his countrie: following the ſame example
which I haue giuen, beleeue me ſirs that I had rather
die then he ſhould, as alſo I will not liue any longer
after his death. Will you iuſtlie deſerue this infamie
O you Citizens, not onelie to haue beene vnwilling to
giue the promiſed reward vnto her that redeemed
you? But alſo to haue ben the cauſe that ſhe ſuffered a
death more ſorrowfull then the miſerable Hecuba? Alas,
alas, why doe you not as well beleeue that he may
prooue good as his mother, which is the ſurer ſide? and
that he may not be ſo bad as the father of whome you
haue beene reuenged by the hands of her, who more
then any other was bounden vnto you. You muſt beleeue
that the gods are iuſt and pittifull, and in this onlie
point of pittie, men may follow them, and make
themſelues almoſt like vnto them, as the Prouerb ſaith,
That one man is a god vnto another, and ſometimes a
wolfe vnto a man; take you thē that part which is moſt
commendable. O courteous lords beware that you incurre
not the anger of the gods & the reproch of men,
and that which is worſt of al, take heed leaſt your ingratitude,
or your ouer great deſire of reuenge, be not the
cauſe to make you loſe the good wils of ſuch, who in
ſome other vrgent affairs may aid, or doe you ſome
worthie ſeruice: For ingratitude and crueltie are abhominable
both before God and men.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 12.
               
                  Of him who vnder coulor of obeying his father, diſpleaſed
the prieſt that adminiſtred the ſacraments
vnto him.
               
               
                  
                  A Certaine honourable ladie being at the point of
death, made her laſt will and teſtament after the
deſire of her curate: who had more reſpect vnto
his owne particular profit and the commodity of
the church, then to any the benefite of her kindred:
wherevpon ſo long as the ladie was able to ſay I, he alwaies
added ſomething or other vnto the will: when neither
any of the ſonnes, nor the father himſelfe either would or durſt
gainſay him in any thing he did, for feare of troubling the
mind of the ſicke woman: but after her death and that the funerals
were inded, there was ſome motion made to haue the
ſaid will reformed: wherevnto the curate would in no ſort conſent,
but compelled the heires and executors to performe the
ſame, vnto their great griefe. Some ſmall time after, the huſband
of the deceaſſed chanced to fall into the like ſickneſſe, and
the curat handeled him after the ſame ſort, as he vſed his wife,
euen vnto his laſt gaſpe, ſo that the poore man becauſe he would
leaue the world in peace, did still anſwere I: the which the eldeſt
ſonne perceiuing, (who but a little before was returned
from the warres) he began to bee exceeding angrie: and imagined
which way he might be reuenged of the Prieſt: Wherefore
comming neere vnto the bed, he alſo began to increaſe the
number of the maſſes, and dirges, wherevnto the pacient ſtil anſwered,
then in the end he ſaid alowd, Is it your will that the
curate be preſently throwne down the ſtaires? the ſicke man ſaid
I, againe, not vnderſtanding what his ſonne ſaid: the ſame
was no ſooner ſpoken, but the ſonne tooke the Prieſt by the neck,
and throwing him downe the ſtaires, brake one of his armes.
The curate accuſed him, and proteſted that he had wronged
him, ſaying:
               
                  
                  WHat treaſon may be more execrable then this,
being committed vnder the coulor of pittie? I
was called to comfort the ſicke, to adminiſter
vnto him the holy ſacraments, & to admoniſh
him of his ſouls health: when this vngodly fellow approched
neere vnto the bed, and faining to aſſiſt my deuout
intention, did wickedly betray me, as is manifeſtly
of be ſeene by the maiming of my limmes. The deriding
of the ſacred reliques, and abuſing of the patients
will, might well haue ſufficed, without further adding
therevnto this outrage. Who ſhal henceforth be the paſtor,
that dare inſtruct the diſeaſed to haue a care of their
ſaluation? Seeing the thanks which they haue, and the
recompence which they receiue therefore, is the aſſaying
to breake their necke? Verie true is that, which is
commonly ſpoken of ſuch as follow warres, which is,
that they neuer take pleaſure in anie thing, but in doing
miſchiefe; and that they as much deſpiſe thoſe things
which are ſacred and holie, as they doe eſteeme ſuch as
are prophane. This lewd fellow hath not only ſticked
to ſlander his owne father, at the houre of his death,
but alſo careth not although he be damned for euer. O
child of perdition, doeſt thou not know that at the laſt
gaſpe conſiſteth either the ſaluation or damnation of
men? How manie are there, who hauing alwaies liued
godlie, doe damne themſelues at the laſt houre; and others
hauing bene wicked, that by their end haue been
ſaued? The good Diſmas who was crucified at the right
hand of our Lord, ſheweth vs an example of the one,
and Iudas an Apoſtle of the ſame Chriſt, is a figure of
the other: how durſt thou thē trouble the laſt thoughts
of thy father by thy inſolencie? Eſpecially outraging

him whom with all thy might thou oughteſt to defend,
ſeeing that we doe here repreſent the Diuinitie: for the
Pope repreſenteth God, the Archbiſhop the Pope, the
Biſhop the Archbiſhop, and the Curate the biſhop. I require
then that the wrongs done vnto God, the Pope,
the Archbiſhop, the Biſhop, and to my perſon, may be
repaired, and that he which hath committed it, may be
puniſhed according to his deſerts: to the end that all
ſuch inſolent perſons, that will not bridle their affects,
for the reuerence which they owe vnto God and his
Church, may by his example beware that they incurre
not the like puniſhment.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     DO you call that Treaſon, to performe the ſame
thing, the which you heretofore by law compelled
vs to doe? That is, to fulfill the teſtators
laſt Will: Now it is to be conſidered, that in al
things we doe, we muſt begin at one end; as for me, I
began firſt with the laſt, and the rather becauſe the ſame
not being ſet downe in writing, I feared that it might
haue ben forgotten, or leaſt by deferring of time (which
is verie often the loſſe of occaſion) I might be hindered
from effecting the laſt commandement of my father: as
alſo becauſe he long before made a ſigne vnto me, that
I ſhould rid him from your companie, who had no other
talke with him, but of temporall matters, that he
might wholie apply his mind vnto God, and therefore
he graunted vnto euerie thing which you demaunded;
thinking that the beſt way to diſpatch him from your
importunities; but had you had your owne will, I beleeue
you had ben there yet to trouble him: wherefore

I am not to be blamed, if I had a deſire to doe this laſt
ſeruice for my father, vnto whom I am more bounden
then to you: for I remember verie well, that you your
ſelfe (at ſuch times as in my youth I came vnto you to
ſhrieue) did alwaies inioine me to doe whatſoeuer my
father and mother commanded me, without exception
of anie thing: and if otherwiſe I did, I ſhould be damned:
thinke not then maiſter Parſon, that for reſpecting
you ouermuch, I will be damned: Moreouer you haue
ſo manie times preached vnto vs, that a man muſt honour
his lather and mother, and that it is the firſt commandement
that hath anie reward promiſed vpon the
earth: how could I then better honor my father, then
hauing compaſſion to ſee him ſo importuned, to deliuer
him from ſuch a paine, according to his good commandement?
If you had taken as great care to the patient,
as you did to the Notarie, you ſhould verie well
haue perceiued how he made a ſigne with his head that
the ſame ſhould be done which I did, though not ſo
ſoon as I ought, becauſe I would firſt be informed what
his will was, which ſo ſoone as I vnderſtood, I ſuddenly
put it in effect, without ſuffering it to be ſet downe in
writing, for feare leaſt others ſeeing this teſtament,
ſhould alſo put in practiſe this laſt point, whē you gaue
them the like occaſion: could I then offend you when
I thought vpon you chiefeſt benefite? Alſo I cannot
beleeue that I haue ſlaundered my father, in yeelding
ſuch obedience as was due vnto him, and giuing him
the means to apply his laſt thoughts vnto his true ſaluation:
if there be anie fault done, it proceedeth of this,
that I did not exactly vnderſtād the progreſſion of your
dignitie, for I did thinke that men ſo worthie, ought to
approch more neere the perfection of him, whom you

ſay they doe repreſent: This is all wherein I may haue
failed, for the reſt I referre me to the iudgement of
thoſe, which are of more knowledge then either you or
I am.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 13.
               
                  Of him that would diſherit his brother, becauſe he
had ſmitten his father.
               
               
                  IT was an ancient law, that whoſoeuer
did ſmite his father ſhould be diſherited:
wherevpon it chaunced that a certaine
yoong man being drunken, did ſtrike his
father, who imputing the fault vnto the
wine, both diſsembled the matter, and
pardoned the offence: but the father being
dead, without making anie will, the yoonger brother would
haue his elder brother to loſe his inheritance, becauſe he had
offended the law, ſaying:
               YOu know O you iuſt iudges, that which the law
hath appointed for thoſe that ſtrike their father, I
require the execution thereof, and it muſt not ſerue his
turne to ſay that the wine made him to doe it, for ſuch
an anſwere in ſteed of an excuſe, would make him double
in fault, and he is as well worthie to be excluded
from anie part of his mothers good, as he is to loſe euerie
whit of his fathers inheritance: the one becauſe he
did beat his father, and the other becauſe he vſeth to be
drunken, for the drunkard is more worſe then a brute
beaſt, which neuer drinketh but to maintaine life, but it

ſeemeth that the drunkards liueth to no other end but
onely to drinke. What miſchiefe happeneth not thorow
this vice of drunkenneſſe? The Partriarke Noe was
the firſt that planted the vine, ſo alſo he was the firſt that
was drunke therewith: what happened vnto him thereby?
Nothing but onelie ſhame, anger, and diſpleaſure;
Lot alſo being drunken, committed inceſt with his
daughters: Cambiſſes being reprooued by one of his
faithful counſellors, becauſe he was commonlie drunk,
did with an arrow ſtrike through the heart of the ſaid
counſellors ſonne, ſaieng, can he be drunke that ſhoots
ſo faire a ſhot? That great conqueror Alexander ſlew
his Foſter brother Clitus, comming from his banquet,
and afterwards being ſober, he would haue ſlaine himſelfe
for ſorrow: but who knowes not that ſuch fruits
come of drunkenneſſe? Wherefore they being double
in fault which commit wickedneſſe thorow that vice,
deſerue double puniſhment. And now to returne vnto
our firſt matter, who will not ſay that my brother ought
to loſe his inheritance, ſeeing that he hath ſtrooken our
father, becauſe the ſame maketh a doubt whether he be
his ſonne or no; and if he be his ſonne, as I beleeue he
is, the greater is his ingratitude, wherefore there is no
need to ſtand vpon my fathers diſſembling or pardoning
of the wrong, for as much as I ſhould likewiſe
haue conſented therevnto: but I will ſtill ſay that it is
fit to hang vp the veſſels which doe containe ſuch peſtiferous
licquor, and that there is too much fauor ſhown
vnto thoſe, who for drinking ouermuch, and afterwards
beating their father, are but onlie diſherited.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  YOu blame me for an offence, the which I know not
whether I did it or not, or if I did it, at the leaſt it

was againſt my wil, but were the matter as you ſay it is;
Yet were it not to be attributed to my fault, becauſe I
did not know him whom I offended. Trulie I confeſſe
that I haue miſdone in drinking too much, but you do
moſt wickedlie ſinne through malice, in going about to
alter the meaning of your deceaſſed father, and to diſherite
your brother, that neuer did you anie wrong.
Wherefore do you deſire that a fathers kindnes ſhould
be abuſed? Why doe you make the world to doubt
whether you be his ſonne, and my brother? That he is
my father his pittie hath declared, but your ambition
and extreame auarice makes me doubt whether you be
my brother, for brethren ought to loue together, and
helpe one another, yea if need were to die one for another,
as did Caſtor and Pollux, Agamemnon and Menalaus,
with diuers others, whoſe fame ſhall be immortall;
for this affection wanting, vndoubtedly they are no
more brethren, but far greater enemies then ſtrangers
can be. I confeſſe alſo that wine is the cauſe of great
miſchiefes, and therefore I will keepe me from it, but
you your ſelfe, do bring in a ſufficient excuſe for me, in
ſaying that ſo manie great parſonages, being ouercome
with wine, haue committed verie great faults, as
well as I: as touching the double puniſhment which
you would haue, your paſſion maketh you to giue that
counſell, which neuer heretofore hath been allowed
for currant, but tell me who hath made you more wiſe
then our father, and thoſe that ſit in iudgement, that
you will make new lawes? Seeing that you haue receiued
no offence thereby, and that our father hath made
no complaint thereof at all. It is manifeſtlie to be ſeene
that couetouſneſſe, and not a ſonnes loue, inciteth you
againſt me; for if ſuch a zeale did ſtirre you vp, why

made you not your requeſt during our fathers life? But
you knowing verie well, that he was not, or at the leaſt
thought himſelf not offended, haue ſtaied for his death
to ouerthrow your brother.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 14.
               
                  Of one that to eſcape his enemies, took away a Prieſts
horſe byforce.
               
               
                  A Crtaine man flying from his enemies that
would haue ſlaine him, met with a Prieſt on
horſebacke, whom he praied to ſell or lend him
his horſe in that extremitie, the Prieſt flatly denied
him: the other tooke the horſe by force: and
afterwards hauing eſcaped, he ſent home the horſe againe together
wtth a good reward, neuertheleſſe the Prieſt accuſed him
of theft, and ſaid:
               THe chiefeſt point of iuſtice, by the which the
Common-wealth ought to be maintained in
peace, is that euerie one may quietlie poſſeſſe
without anie let or diſturbance, that which he hath iuſtlie
gotten: As for me I will prooue verie well that I
haue bought, and trulie paied for my horſe, neuertheles
it hath beene violently taken from vnder me, euē when
I had moſt vrgent cauſe to vſe him, for I was going to
confeſſe and comfort a ſicke perſon, who through the
fault of him that tooke away my horſe, is dead without
confeſſion: behold now by this meanes a ſoule in danger
of eternall damnation, for it is the burthen of ſins,
that cauſeth ſoules to be loſt: in like ſort I was in double

daunger of my life; one way, if his enemies had
knowne that he had preuailed by my horſe to eſcape
from them; another, for the feare that he did put me in
together with the force that he did vſe in taking away
my horſe, as alſo becauſe I was compelled to goe well
three long houres a foot before I could find any houſe,
whereby I caught ſuch a quartine feuer as will eaſilie
bring me to my graue, for as the quartine feuer purgeth
and maketh yoong men to grow, ſo doth it kill ſuch old
men as I am: but although all this were not likelie, yet
ought iuſtice to be done, as an example for theeues, otherwiſe
ſhall no man be able to trauell the countrie: if
ſuch a one be pardoned as robbeth a Prieſt, why ſhall
not he hope for the like that robbeth a Marchant? You
will ſay I haue reſtored your horſe, and rewarded you
with a gift as much as the horſe might bee woorth; the
matter conſiſteth not therein, but in that you did take
him from me againſt my wil, with violence, and threats;
But in reſtoring of my horſe, haue you raiſed the dead
to life againe to receiue confeſſion? And am I cured of
my diſeaſe? Eſpecially if your enemies had ouertaken
you, who ſhould haue reſtored me my horſe: Seeing I
knew not who you were, but onelie hee which robbed
me. I require and hope that ſuch iuſtice ſhall be extended
towards mee as will make others by your example
to reſpect thoſe, who are recommended vnto them
from God and the church.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IF I had taken your horſe through malice, couetouſneſſe
or other vild meaning, your reaſons were to be
eſteemed, but I did pray you either to lend him, or
ſell him vnto me to ſaue my life, yet you being more
hard to bee entreated then the boiſterous wind or raging

waues, had no pittie of my diſtreſſe, wherevpon
your crueltie conſtrained me againſt my will, to commit
that which in no ſort I had determined to doe, but
what is he that will not endeuour by all the meanes he
can to eſcape death? Aſſure you that in ſuch a daunger
I had no leaſure to conſider the inconueniences that
might happen, nor to thinke vpon either of our deaths
that might haue chaunced by this deed; for I might
haue died without confeſſion as well as the other, and
in a worſer ſort then by a quartine ague, whereof you
feare to die. I confeſſe that I haue offended you, and am
readie to make you ſuch amends as ſhall bee thought
meet, but I could doe no leſſe, without loſing my life at
the ſame time. If one will do much to deferre his death
a little while, why ſhould it not bee lawfull for me to
ſaue my life altogether? The which for a need, I would
beſtow for you. Finallie neceſſitie hath no law, and
that cannot be tearmed a robberrie which I haue done:
for there is nothing ſo well done, if one will haue reſpect
vnto the chances that may come thereof, but may
be thought ill done: for humane actions are ſuch, that
in all things, there is more danger then aſſurance: therfore
our actions are not to be iudged by the euent therof,
but by the intent of them that do them: what would
be ſaid then, if being willing to draw you forth of a pit
(wherein you might happen to fall) I ſhould chance to
breake your necke, Should I be guiltie thereof? How
manie men are killed by the Phiſitions, thinking to cure
them? Are they puniſhed therefore? No truly, becauſe
their meaning was not hurtful, no more alſo was mine,
as I haue declared by my liberall reſtitution: but conſider
that neceſſitie maketh many things lawful, and that
it is ſo, it is writtē that Dauid (being compelled through

hunger) entred into the temple, and he and his man
did eat vp the ſhew bread; The which was lawfull fo
none but the Prieſts to eat: alſo manie times ſacred and
holie things are gaged, & ſold through neceſſitie, how
much more lawful then is it for a man to take a horſe to
ſaue his life, with a good intent to make ſatiſfaction? although
you are a ſacred parſon (ſir) yet I hope you are
too wiſe to beleeue that your horſe is one, ſo alſo I wold
not haue the Prouerb to be verified in you, which ſaith,
that neuer Prieſt nor woman could either pardon an
offence, or acknowledge anie ſeruice done vnto them:
this were a vice farre vnfitting your profeſſion: but finally
ſeeing you will in no ſort be ſatiſfied with reaſon,
you are as much bound to beleeue the iudges, as I am
to endure that which it ſhal pleaſe them to adiudge me,
and ſo ſhall I neither be bound to you in any thing, nor
for anie thing, ſeeing you haue brought mee to the extremitie
of the law.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 15.
               
                  Of him that after he had bargained with a ſouldior
to kill his enemy, did forthwith repent him of the
fact.
               
               
                  A Certaine man bargained with a ſouldiour to kill
his enemie, but afterwards repented him, and
forbad him in any ſort to touch him, to the end
to hurt him: and this hee did in the preſence of
two witneſſes: the ſouldiour notwithſtanding
went on forward and killed him, and afterward was taken and
condemned to die, but the Attorney Generall accuſed the man

that had hired him of this capitall crime, ſaying:
               
                  SHall it then be tollerated in a Commonwealth
that anie man may hire one to murther another,
at his owne pleaſure? As if there were no
iuſtice to determine their controuerſies and
quarels? If ſuch faults may be excuſed, or wincked at,
who ſhall be anie where in ſafetie? If it bee an offence
but onlie to imagine ſuch a wickedneſſe, how much
more then is it to commit it? And ſo much the greater
is this fact, as that he was not contented to offend himſelfe
alone, but that he hath likewiſe prouoked another
to be partaker of his villanie, eſpecially with the price
of his monie, moreouer it is a capitall crime when one
enemie killeth another, how much more hainous is it
then, when one goeth about to cauſe him to be murthered
by ſuch a one, as not onlie wiſheth him no hurt
at all, but alſo by ſuch a one as skantlie knoweth him?
What infection? What plague? What abhomination
can be more great in a Common-wealth then this? If
whooredome be puniſhable, the which were it not for
the reproch thereof, is rather an encreaſing, then a loſſe
vnto the Common-wealth; What puniſhment may be
ſeuere inough for thoſe as will infect the ſame with
ſuch murthers? If this crime be not ſharplie puniſhed,
euerie one will boldlie enterpriſe vpon anie ſmall occaſion
to cauſe his aduerſarie to be ſlaine if he can, and if
he cannot, he will ſay then that he is ſorrie that euer hee
thought to doe ſo bad a deed; as this man ſaith: One
would not beleeue that ſuch a wickneſſe would bee inuented
amongſt men, or if a man did know it, hardlie
ſhould it be beleeued: but thoſe which doe beleeue it,
ought alſo to know, ſee, and beleeue the puniſhment

due vnto the ſame, and the miſchiefe that for ſuch hainous
crimes doth happen vnto thoſe that commit thē.
This man ſaith, I did forbid him in the preſence of two
witneſſes, commanding him not to kill mine enemie; as
for me, I thinke but ſuſpitiouſlie of thoſe witneſſes, for
if they had ben honeſt, and iuſt men, they would haue
found the means to warned the other, wiſelie to beware
of him that had alreadie conſpired his death, as
alſo of him that was to take away his life: or els they
ſhould haue aduertiſed the iuſtice, that there was a murtherer
in the cittie, that for monie would vndertake to
ſlay men, and by that meanes, there had not happened
ſo great a wickedneſſe: and that which is worſt, it is verie
likelie that after he had forbidden him, he did againe
command him without anie other witnes, but the monie
giuen to doe the deed: but were it not ſo, yet is it
verie euident that you are the author of this miſchiefe:
and the cauſe of the death of two men, therefore it is
but right that you ſhould make the third, for he which
maketh ſuch a bargain once, hath either done it before,
or will doe the like another time, ſo that it is beſt to preuent
the worſt by cutting you off betimes. You ſay that
he ought not to haue killed him, ſeeing that you forbad
him; but you ſhould not haue induced him to kill him,
leaſt afterward you might not be able to reuoke his wil
at your commandment, for all the while that he ſought
for the means and oportunitie to doe the murther, an
hatred againſt the ſame man did enter by little and little
into his heart, which you did afterwards think by your
forbidding, might be wholie rooted out at one inſtant:
but the ſame is not eaſilie to be done, for men are naturallie
more enclined to miſchiefe, then goodneſſe, ſo
that they doe alwaies more hardlie forgoe it, and eſpeciallie

ſuch as of long time hauing followed the wars,
are vſed to kill men, ſo that they doe as it were thirſt after
humane blood: wherefore you ought to haue beleeued
that after you had perſuaded him to act the murther,
it was not eaſie for you to diſſuade him from it, &
ſo conſequentlie you ſhould not haue perſuaded him,
much leſſe haue giuen, or promiſed him monie for the
ſame intent: but you ſhould haue remembred that the
pleaſure of reuenge laſteth but a litle while, and the ioie
that commeth of mercie endureth for euer: Moreouer
that for the moſt part in ſeeking to reuenge vs vpon another,
we doe find our owne deſtruction, wherefore it
is better, and the ſureſt waie to leaue the reuenge vnto
God, who is iuſt, and knoweth the hearts of all men.
But if deſire of reuenge, or to haue right of your enemie,
had ſo greatlie vrged you, you ought to haue had
your recourſe vnto the iuſtice, and ſo to haue had him
chaſtiſed, without anie danger or diſhonour vnto you
at all: or els if you would haue needes choſen a worſe
courſe, you might haue determined to haue taken reuenge
your ſelfe, without making another man a murtherer
for you: and it may be, that euen then, when
you had repented you of the fact, you had beene as little
able to haue withholden your ſelfe from doing that
which you had determined. All theſe reaſons aboue
ſaid, doe make your treſpaſſe the greater, and I ſee not anie
of them that may make it ſeeme leſſer, ſo that it ſeemeth
verie reaſonable, that the offender ſhould be puniſhed,
to giue an example vnto all thoſe which haue
the like wicked deſire.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  TRulie I confeſſe that I haue greatlie ſinned againſt
God: but as for the world, our thoughts and minds

are free, prouided that they ſtretch not to the affecting
of miſchiefe, ſo that I am not by iuſtice reproouable,
much leſſe puniſhable: for to ſin is incident vnto man,
but to perſiſt in ſinne is diueliſh, the which I haue not
done: But knowing that repentance commeth by diuine
grace, I would not ſeeme to neglect it, but ſhewing
that it had taken effect in me, I forbad the murtherer
not to hurt mine enemie; if he for anie particular quarell
hath ſlaine him againſt my will, what could I doe
therewith? You ſay that I ought not to haue perſuaded
nor bargained with him to doe it, it is true, but the Euangeliſt
ſaith, are there not foure and twentie hours in
the day, Wherein a man may fall by the temptation of
the diuell, and riſe againe by the grace of God? euen ſo
did I fall and riſe againe, as the like may chance vnto euerie
man, ſeeing we are all conceiued in ſinne; and by
that means (as your ſelfe affirmeth) more naturallie enclined
to doe hurt then good: ſo that it is not a ſmall
vertue, to repent before a man commit a miſchiefe. Dauid
of whom God ſaid, that he was a man after his own
heart, and that he ſhould wholie obey his will, what
wickedneſſe I pray you did he commit? And neuertheleſſe
by repentance be obtained pardon and grace: we
muſt not ſay that all thoſe who haue ben ſomwhat badlie
minded, are wicked men; or that which is worſe, notorious
offenders, as you ſay; for if it were ſo, the moſt
part of men ſhould be ſuch, and it may be, you your
ſelfe that accuſe me ſo ſharplie, ſhould not be free from
crime. As touching your aſſertion, that I am guiltie of
the death of twaine, and that I ought to be the third, I
vtterlie denie that, fot as much as the firſt mans death is
rather happened through his own misbehauiour then
my malice, for if he had not done me wrong and outrage,

I ſhould neuer haue imagined to procure his
death, and hauing not thought it, I had not ſpoken vnto
the other, who knowing him not, would not (after my
forbidding him) haue taken a new occaſion to kill him:
but who knoweth whether he hath ſlaine him at the inſtance
of ſome other, and will not confeſſe it? Knowing
that if he did, yet he ſhould not eſcape vnpuniſhed. Finallie
he trulie confeſſeth, that I forbad him to proceed
anie further therein, and that afterwards I neuer ſpake
to him thereof: how can I then be guiltie? Seing that I
cannot be ſo, although I were the cauſe of the miſchief
as you ſay: for as much as mine intention was not ſo,
wherefore we muſt iudge, not according to the chance
or ſucceſſe of actions, but according to the meaning of
him that doth them: otherwiſe for the moſt part, when
the ſicke doe die, the Phiſitions ſhould be blamed: or
he who hauing an intent to kil a man, and ſhould lanch
his impoſtume ought to be praiſed, the which cannot
be, for when the intent is wicked, the fault is no leſſe
ſo long as it laſteth; but the wicked intent ceaſing, the
crime doth end together with it. Wherefore, if I did
amiſſe, in perſuading this man to kil mine enemie, I did
well in forbidding him to proceed no further in the
ſame. Touching this point, that whereas neither the
witneſſes, nor I haue aduertiſed the other; There are
manie men ſo bad to be dealt withall, that one cannot
aduertiſe them of anie thing, without daunger of great
reproch; ſo alſo was it not reaſonable to accuſe one vnto
the iuſtice which had not as yet offended, alſo they
were no more then witneſſes, that I did forbid him to
hurt mine enemie, but yet they knew not what had paſſed
before betweene vs. Moreouer the remembrance
of the ſhort pleaſure of reuenge, and the euerlaſting

continuance of the ioy of mercie, had made me repent
that euer I had a deſire of reuenge, wherefore I did remit
all vnto God, without ſeeking redreſſe either by iuſtice,
or anie other way. If then this miſfortune be fallen
vpon him for his ſinnes, or otherwiſe, I am not to bee
blamed, and there is no reaſon which may make me an
offender, ſeeing that al the foreſaid reaſons, mine innocencie,
and good meaning is prooued, according vnto
the which I require to be iudged by the equall doome
of our iuſt iudges, who doe verie well know, that Socrates
himſelfe confeſſed that he was inclined to wickedneſſe,
as well as to Philoſophie, but that by vertue and
the good ſpirit, he reſiſted the wicked deſire, as I haue
done thorow the grace of God.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 16.
               
                  Of a woman that would forſake her husband, becauſe
he ſtood excommunicate.
               
               
                  A Certaine man was excommunicated and accurſed for
diſobedience to the church: wherevpon his wife would
needs be diuorced from him, but he would not reſtore
her mariage good, but alleaged theſe reaſons:
               HAue you not promiſed me before the Prieſt and
the aſſemblie of our kindred and friends, to bee
my ſpouſe, and lawfull wife? And neuer to forſake
me for anie chance whatſoeuer? Haue you not alwaies
bene partaker of my proſperitie? Wherefore wil
you then abandon me in my firſt aduerſitie? As for me
I will not let for anie thing that may happen, to eſteeme

you for a verie honeſt wife, but I know not what others
will thinke of your deed: for as much as the cuſtome
of honeſt women is, neuer to forſake their husband in
anie matter, nor for anie thing, but they doe ſtill abide
conſtant with them in loue and vnitie, and they do obſerue
the faith which they haue promiſed, when they
were not onlie made companions, but euen the one
halfe of their husbands: ſeeing that men cannot, and
much leſſe ought not to ſeperat thoſe whom God hath
coupled together by marriage, which is the moſt ancienteſt,
moſt holieſt, and moſt approued by God of all
other whatſoeuer: for God himſelfe did inſtitute the
ſame, not in the world, but in terreſtriall Paradice, euen
when man was yet in his innocencie, and afterward he
honoured this holie eſtate with the firſt of his miracles
that he wrought, at the mariage in Cana of Galiley,
where he turned the water into wine: Moreouer you
muſt conſider, that God tooke from man the ſubſtance
whereof woman mas made, to the end that ſhe might
thereby be bound not to forſake him; wherefore Saint
Paule ſaith, that woman was created for man, and not
that man was made for woman: in like ſort the words
of our God himſelfe doth witneſſe the ſame, when he
ſaith, It is not good that man ſhould be alone, let vs
make him therefore an helpe; what libertie then hath
the woman to forſake her husband? Although it was
by the woman her prouocation that man ſinned, and
was iuſtlie curſed by the mouth and power of God, yet
would he not for all that ſeperate them, but gaue them
hope of ſaluation, if they remained together: For he
ſaith, that like as by a woman ſin came into the world,
ſo alſo of a woman, ſhould he be borne which ſhould
ouercome ſinne and death. Saint Paule alſo biddeth the

beleeuing wife to abide with the vnbeleeuing husband;
ſaying: Woman what doſt thou know whether
thou ſhalt ſaue thy husband or not? Wherefore then
will you forſake me? Whether it be by right or wrong
that I am ſequeſtred from the church, yet am I not vtterly
excluded from the ſame: time may make it known
whether I deſerue to be excommunicated or not, and
although I may haue deſerued it, yet contrition, and
Gods fauour cannot be denied vnto me: now is the
time that you ought not to forſake me, (not ſo much as
with your eie onlie if it were poſſible) were you but
ſuch a wife as you ſhould be: Trulie a wife can giue no
greater token of her chaſtitie, then by ſhewing a perfect
friendſhip, and an inſeperable loue vnto her husband:
for they are ſhameleſſe and immodeſt women, that doe
change their loue, according to the fortune of him
whom they faine to loue: how manie haue there been
found euen amongſt modeſt women, that haue with a
maruailous conſtancie continuallie loued and followed
their friends, as Thisbe, who followed her Pyramus,
and would liue no longer after his death, Briſeis followed
Achilles; Ariadne, Theſeus; Medea, Iaſon; and the concubine
of Alcibiades, he being ſlaine betweene her arms
when ſhe could not better prouide for him, ſhe wrapped
him in one of her beſt garments to burie him: will
you then bee much leſſe conſtant, then vnchaſt? will
you imitate and be accounted like vnto Clitemneſtra,
Thebe, Helena, and other bad women? Doe you not
know that ſuch as are good, are alwaies honourable euen
after their death? As Alceſt, who willinglie deſired
to die to ſaue her husband Admetus his life; the famous
Iphias ſeeing her husbands bodie burned, would in no
ſort forſake him, but leaped into the ſame fire, and was

burned with him. Hipſicratea becauſe ſhe would not forſake
old Mithridates her husband, did cut off her faire
haire, and being armed, did alwaies ſerue him as his
companion in the wars. Cornelia alſo neuer abandoned
hir Pompey, but followed him into Aegypt where he was
ſlaine. Octauia the ſiſter of Auguſtus would haue followed
her Marc Anthonie in all places, if he would haue
ſuffered her: & although he loued Cleopatra, yet ſo long
as ſhe liued, ſhe maintained him in peace with her brother.
Triaria the wife of Lucius Vitelius, did alſo accompanie
her husband in the warres, ſhe being armed as
he was. What ſhal we ſay of Herſilia, Hipermineſtra, Laodemia,
Oenone, Clita, Arganthona, Democrita, Gumilda, Caia,
Valeria, Terentiana, Iulia, Arthemeſia, Panthea, Soſia, Tarſa,
Paulina the wife of Seneca, Portia, Turia, Sulpitia, Aegeria,
Alcione, Procris, Camma, Sara, Michol, & an infinit number
of others, which are all famous for the great loue
which they did beare vnto their husbands: wherefore
doe you not couet to be of the number of theſe? Seeing
that my diſgrace offereth you the meanes to make
proofe of your loue and faith towards me, loſe not this
occaſion, bad for me, but good for you, your glory may
be a comfort to mine affliction. I do not withhold your
marriage good through couetouſneſſe, but to keepe
you from doing that thing which may redound vnto
your diſhonour, and I would not in anie ſort that it
ſhould be ſaid that I was conſenting vnto it, and I proteſt
before God and men, that I doe it for no other
cauſe at all: for I am not ignorant how much all women
are importuned, eſpecially ſuch as are knowne not
to abide with their husbands for any great loue; but as I
haue ſaid, I will neuer conſent that it ſhall be reported
that I haue ben the cauſe of your follie. Wherefore I remit

all vnto the iudges, without anie further ſpeaking
of the matter, being to ſtand to their cenſure whether I
am to reſtore your marriage good or not: the which
ſhall be a ſmal loſſe vnto me, if I may be ſo good cheape
rid from her who loueth me not at all.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     I Should think my ſelfe happie in hazarding but
only my goods, and life to remaine with you:
but when the queſtion concerneth the ſoule,
we ought to conſider, that we haue nothing
more precious, ſeeing that the ſame is none of ours: but
God hath made it immortall to gouerne this bodie, the
which ought to be wholy obedient vnto the ſoule, that
we might afterwards by the onely helpe and grace of
God, reſtore the ſame vnto him vnſpotted, if it were
poſſible, the which I cannot doe if I remaine with you:
for all thoſe that doe but onely ſpeake vnto ſuch as you,
are guiltie, except they doe only ſpeake to conuert you,
the which hitherto I could in no ſort doe: but how
ſhould I doe it? When neither the exhortations of the
church, nor yet your excommunication both together,
were able to turne you? That which Saint Paule ſaith,
that the beleeuing woman ought to remaine wth the
vnbeleeuing man, is nothing pertinent to this matter,
for more faultie is the Chriſtian which ſinneth maliciouſly
of ſet purpoſe, then is he which ſinneth of ignorance,
being yet vncalled of God. I doe well remember
what I haue promiſed you at our marriage, and I will
performe it, ſo that it be not to the condemning of my
ſoule and that it is ſo, I haue alwaies ſhown; that dutie
which an honeſt wife oweth vnto her husband, and am

yet readie to continue the ſame if you doe returne againe
vnto the boſome of the church, and then you
ſhall truly know that I will not forſake you for any occaſion:
I am not alſo ignorant what the worthineſſe of
mariage is, and I would not haue you thinke that men
doe ſeperate me from you, but God himſelfe, for as
much as he is head of the church: I doe confeſſe that
the woman was made for man, but for al that it followeth
not that ſhe ought to damne her ſelfe for him. As
touching the hope which you doe ſhew you haue to
returne vnto the church, it were better that it were too
ſoone then too late, for then ſhould I haue no occaſion
to depart from you, and I doe promiſe to turne vnto
you when you ſhall be abſolued. There is no loue
wanting in me, but there lacketh goodneſſe in you, becauſe
you remaine obſtinat. I cannot be tearmed in the
number of thoſe that haue left their husbands without
cauſe, but my greateſt griefe is becauſe I haue too iuſt a
cauſe, and I beleeue that Alceſt, Iphias, and the other ladies
which were truly vertuous, would haue done as I
doe in the like caſe as mine, had they liued in theſe our
daies: for euen as it was an honor and vertue in them,
to doe that which they did for their husbands, ſo likewiſe
ſhould it be but a ſhame and a ſinne in me not to
forſake you. The ſame which you ſay prouoketh you,
not to reſtore me my marriage good, induceth me not
to leaue you, ſo that I may abide with you without offence
and diſcredite, as I would not alſo that any one
ſhould think that I were conſenting or partaker of your
obſtinacie, no more then you would be thought to bee
conſenting vnto my ſeperating, and vnder this falſe colour,
you would keepe backe my marriage good. I doe
aduertiſe you that I will rather forgoe it if it be not ad-

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
alwaies procure them enemies, and do make quarels in
publicke places, to the greater daunger of honeſt people
then their owne. But I would to God that I had ben
dead before now, at the leaſt with my husband, ſeeing
that life is more bitter vnto mee then death: and my
greateſt griefe is, becauſe I am not onlie harmed by this
Homicide, but as manie of the noble kindred which he
and I haue, are greatlie interreſſed in it, manie of the
friends whom he fauoured are damnified: the poore
hath loſt much thereby, for he was a good almes giuer;
Laſtlie, the Commonwealth is weakened, loſing ſuch a
Citizen who liued ſo well, that he had manie friends,
and not one onlie enemie; that did pleaſure manie, and
neuer diſpleaſed anie. Conſider then you righteous
iudges, what puniſhment is to be done vpon him, who
depriuing vs of ſo manie benefits, hath been the cauſe
of ſo great miſchiefe.
               
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IF mens actions ought to be iudged, not according to
the euent of the ſame, but according to the intent of
him that dooth it, I cannot in anie ſort bee blamed,
for I did neuer know this man whether he were honeſt,
or diſhoneſt, wherefore ſeeing I neither loued him,
much leſſe hated him, I had no deſire to doe him either
good or hurt. But ſince by miſfortune it is ſo fallen out,
that being conſtrained to defend my ſelfe from thoſe
who ſought to kill me, he hath had a blow both againſt
my will, & vnwitting, mine enemies are more to be blamed
then I, for they are the cauſe thereof: Wherefore
ought I then to beare the puniſhment thereof? The
ſorrow that I haue had becauſe this fault is happened
by my hand, is ſufficient inough, although it was done
againſt my meaning, without that I ſhould be further

troubled for the ſame: and were it not that my wife,
and my children, (whoſe liuings I doe get) could not
liue without me, I had rather die then liue, hauing ben
ſo diſgraced by you, to haue depriued you of your future
hopes and your preſent happineſſe; but if it be a
crueltie to cauſe the innocent wife and children of a
guiltie man to ſuffer, what is it then to take away the
life from the wife and innocent children of ſuch a
man that is no waies faultie? For it is ſufficientlie manifeſt,
that this woman which accuſeth me of crime,
not knowing me no more then I doe her, is carried away
with her paſſion: ſeeing that alſo ſhe doth altogether
condemn my fact without hauing anie reſpect vnto
the innocencie of mine intent: I will not ſay for
my defence, that her husband hath rather ben the cauſe
of his death then I, ſeeing that he would needs paſſe by
ſuch a place where manie men were fighting; for not
onlie they which are wiſe and well aduiſed do ſhun the
like meetings, but alſo fooles, children, and the verie
brute beaſts doe flie from them: as touching the criminall
coniectures, that it was a thing done of ſet purpoſe;
the ſharpe purſute of mine enemies, doe ſufficientlie
excuſe me, and if there be anie other proofe, more ſufficient
then hers of ſuch a fact, trulie I will condemne my
ſelfe as worthie of death, but being otherwiſe, I cannot
be ſo: where ſhe ſaith, that I ought not to throw ſtones
at anie man, I anſwere that he which would iudge of
that, it were fit that he did prooue the like daunger as
mine was: to affirme alſo that to haue manie enemies
is a ſigne of a wicked man, is a verie abſurd iudgement,
for it is often ſeene that the good are hated as well as
the bad, and that which is worſt, It is of the wicked, that
the good are hated; ſo that they are in far greater danger,

and verie often conſtrained to defend themſelues:
euen ſo it fell out with me. But who was, or euer ſhall
be milder then Socrates? And who had more wicked enemies
then he? who neuer ceaſſed to ſlander him, euen
to the procuring of his death as an offender. What
ſhall we ſay of Phocion, and of Ariſtides, likewiſe of Solon
and Licurgus, and of the great Scipio Africanus? I
paſſe ouer with ſilence, our Sauiour Chriſt and other
Saints, leaſt I ſhould prophane their holie names, in placing
them amongſt other men. I am not be alone then
that hath enemies, neither ought this miſhap impaire
my reputation, or make my cauſe the worſe in anie ſort.
Finallie, there is no fault ſo little that cannot be greatlie
aggrauated, if anie man will ſeeke for circumſtances as
this woman doth, who would prooue the Commonwealth
and ſo manie perſons intereſſed, that it ſeemeth
by her ſpeech that her husband was immortall: but I
demand if he ſhould haue died of an appoplexie, or
ſome other ſudden death, whether ſhould not the loſſe
haue ben all one? But it is the manner of women to
make the wrongs which they receiue, ſeem great, eſteeming
thoſe which they commit, verie little: wherefore
it were ſuperfluous to anſwere her tedious accuſations,
which is the cauſe, that referring my ſelfe as well vnto
the mercie as to the equitie of the iudges, I will attend
their iuſt ſentence.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 18.
               
                  Of Sergius, who fought againſt his enemies, without
aduertiſing his fellow Virginius thereof, and
therefore is not aided by him.
               
               
                  
                  
                     SErgius and Virginius, both equall in authoritie,
were captaines in the Romane army,
before the cittie of the Veies. Sergius was
encamped on that ſide where the Tuſcanes
might come to releiue the beſieged cittie, and
Virginius on the other. Now it happened
that Sergius was aſſailed of the Tuſcanes, and fought with
them, without requiring aid of Virginius, ſo that part of the
campe was thereby diſcomfited: he being returned to Rome, accuſed
Virginius for not aiding him, and ſaid thus:
               
                  WHat profiteth wiſdome, courage, and dexteritie
in a commander, when enuie alone is farre
more able to hinder him, then all theſe vertues
together are able to further the aduancement
of his ſeruice, that deſireth to profit the Commonwealth?
Euen ſo is it happened vnto me, for although
Virginius and I did both together imploy all our beſt
means to beſiege and take the citie of Veies for the honor
and profit of the Senat and people of Rome, yet
were we neuer able to doe anie ſeruice of worth, but
on the contrarie we receiued diſhonor and hurt by the
onlie enuie and ambition of Virginius. Neuertheleſſe
what haue not I done to allure him vnto kindneſſe? and
to perſuade him to be carefull of the ſafetie and honor
of the Commonwealth? I haue alwaies giuen him the
chiefeſt honour, and held him not as my companion;
but as the only Generall commander of the enterpriſe;
yea and leauing vnto him the place of moſt aduantage,
I did encampe my ſelfe both where the greateſt danger,
and moſt concourſe of the enemies was; thinking by
that meanes not only to induce him, but alſo to bind
him more ſtraightlie, (not vnto my aid) but vnto the

common good of the whole armie, and his owne honor,
yet what haue I gained with all this dutie, and true
humilitie? nothing at al, but only thereby increaſed his
malice, pride, and ambition. I therefore conſidering
with my ſelfe how hardlie two Generals in one armie
doe performe anie enterpriſe fortunatlie, and how on
the contrarie, by the diuerſitie of their opinions & wits
they doe oftentimes not onlie procure one anothers
miſcheife, but alſo ſometimes, put the Commonwealth
in great danger (as Terentia Varo did at Cannas, when
he gaue battaile againſt the opinion of his Collegue)
did rather deſire yet further to abaſe my authoritie in
reſpect of his, honouring him as my ſuperiour, in all
lawfull things; but all was vaine, for as much as thoſe actions
which doe ſerue to gaine the loue of ſuch as are
modeſt, doe increaſe the pride and inſolencie of thoſe
that are prowd, for they doe attribute that vnto cowardlines,
which is done by modeſtie and wiſdome:
which men Virginius deſired to follow, for he (ſeeing
that I to gaine his fauour, did oppoſe my ſelfe vnto the
greateſt daunger for his ſecuritie and defence) did preſume
that I did not this noble act to induce him vnto
the like aiding of me, but that I did owe him this honour;
wherevpon he did not only forget that I was his
companion, but alſo he would not performe the dutie
of a good Generall: for how can he be a good Generall
that ſeeth anie of the inferiour captaines in daunger to
be ouerthrowne, and will not ſend him aid? Paulus Emilius
ceaſſed not to fight, but did willingly die in the
battaile, although that Varo began the ſame againſt his
aduice, the which I haue not done: for it is well known
that I would not fight againſt your will, ſeeing that I
encamped in that place to no other end, but onlie to

make head againſt the Tuſcanes, if they came to moleſt
the campe, to raiſe the ſiege, or to hinder our enterpriſe:
yet neuertheleſſe you had rather ſuffer the Commonwealth
to be hindered, then to affoord me your
aid in ſo great an extremitie, eſpecially ſeeing that by
that meanes we might happily haue ended our enterpriſe:
for in ſuccouring me, the Tuſcanes had ben diſcomfited,
and no doubt the beſieged could not haue
choſen, but of neceſſitie muſt haue yeelded: but you rather
deſired my loſſe and diſhonour, then to haue your
owne profit and honour ioined together with mine,
which had been but a ſmall matter, if all the Romanes
had not ben therewithall greatly hindered. The gods
forbid that I ſhould ſay, that you had intelligence with
the enemies, but I am very ſorrie that you giue occaſion
vnto many to ſuſpect the ſame, others to preſume as
much, and ſome conſtantly to beleeue it: for you being
verie well knowne to bee both valiant and noble, it
may be ſuppoſed, that without ſome particular reſpect
you would not haue ſuffered, not only the Commonwealth
and your Collegue to be endangered, but alſo
you could hardlie haue indured the ſight of the enemie,
without an extreame deſire to fight with him. Trulie
Marcellus made manie Sallies and Skirmiſhes againſt
the mind of that great Fabius, but for all that, he neuer
left to aid him when need was; ſo that by the wiſedome
of Fabius, together with his zeale vnto the Commonwealth,
they were named, he the buckler, and Marcellus
the ſword of the Romans; whereby it is apparently
ſeene how happie and fruitfull the vnitie and agreement
with Collegues is, wherevnto I haue with all my
power alwaies exhorted you, yet was I neuerable to
obtaine this good at your hands, either for my ſelfe, or

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
his pride, which he would attribute vnto me: but it is
the common cuſtome of the wicked to ſlander others
with thoſe vices which they know to be in themſelues,
and they imagine that of neceſſitie others are more addicted
vnto them: Whereupon they doe falſely affirm,
that they haue borne that reſpect vnto others, which
they themſelues doe maliciouſly look for. As touching
that which Paulus Emilius did, he performed his dutie in
fighting with Varo, being thereunto required, as I would
haue done the like with you, if you had willed me, or at
the leaſt if I had knowne that the enemies were come:
the which you might haue aduertiſed me of by one only
man or twain, without weakening your campe; but
I not knowing thereof, how could I helpe you? But
onely ſuſpitious of your meaning; I will not ſay that
I was in doubt that you had ſome intelligence with the
enemies, ſeeing that I cannot thinke ſo vild a part or ſo
great a Treaſon could euer enter in the heart of a Roman:
but I may well ſay that I had great reaſon to ſuſpect,
leaſt thoſe of the cittie perceiuing me goe vnto
your aid, might haue ſallied foorth, and charging vs behind,
haue diſcomfited our whole armie, ſeeing that I
knew your ouerthrow euen as ſoone as I knew that the
enemies were come; and there was neuer any man of
ſound iudgement that would loſe the whole, when he
might ſaue the halfe, the which was ſo well conſidered
of our Senat, that after the ouerthrow of Cannas, Varo
was more praiſed for returning home, though flying,
then was Paulus Emilius for dying in the place: moreouer
it is a doubt whether he did well to fight againſt his
mind with Varo, ſeeing that it had ben better for him &
for the Commonwealth to haue ben leſſe forward, or
at the leaſt more ſlow, for by that means al had not ben

loſt, and it ſeemeth indeed that he condemned himſelf
to haue erred greatly, when he would rather die, then
accept the horſe which Lentulus did offer vnto him to
ſaue himſelfe: for it is a great raſhneſſe, to bring men
vnto the battaile without ſome great likelihood of victory,
the which I could not hope for, not knowing that
you ſhould fight ſo long vntill you were quite ouerthrowne,
and then was it too late to ſend you my forces,
alreadie amazed with a noueltie being as ſuddain
as it was vnfortunat and vnlooked for: for who would
euer thinke that you would haue ben ſo prowd, or raſh
as to begin the battaile without aduertiſing vs? Vs I
ſay that ſhould at the leaſt haue ben companions of
your danger, I will not ſay of your glorie, ſeeing the
greatneſſe of your courage could not indure it. Furthermore
as I am not ignorant why two Generals in an
armie are choſen, ſo do I in like ſort know very well (to
our great diſaduantage) that you had a deſire to vſurpe
vnto your ſelfe alone the whole authoritie: finally there
is too much ſaid in a matter ſo euident, wherfore I ſubmit
my ſelfe vnto the iudgement of the Senat, whether
I was bound, or whether I ſhould haue done well to
hazard the reſt of the armie, to remedie a miſchiefe,
whereof I had no intelligence vntill it was quite remedileſſe.
            
            
               Declamation. 19.
               
                  Of one that being condemned, appealed to a higher
place, and refuſeth his firſt iudge, being preſident
thereof.
               
               
                  
                  A Certaine inferiour iudge of a Prouince, condemned
a man to death, who appealed from him to
the court of Parl
                     •
                  ment: neuertheleſſe, he deferred
his comming thether ſo long as he could,
ſometimes by faining to bee ſicke, and by ſuch other
meanes; which ſucceeded ſo badly for him, that the ſaid
iudge came to be Preſident at the Parlament wherevnto the
ſaid offender had appealed: Whervpon being brought thether,
he refuſed to be iudged by that new Preſident, ſaying:
               YOu would then that I ſhould appeale from Pilate
to Pilate, I will keepe me from that, if iuſtice haue
anie place; for it cannot be tearmed an appeale, to
haue the ſame iudge from whom one appealeth: Who
knoweth not that he is the ſame man, who to encreaſe
his dignitie, will nothing at all ſurceaſſe his iniuſtice,
but rather with his dignitie and authoritie will alſo increaſe
an ill opinion towards me, becauſe I haue appealed
from his iniuſtice? for if he did me wrong when I
might appeale from him, what will he now doe, if he
may abſolutely iudge me without contradiction? As
for me, I doe firmely beleeue, that with mine enemies
coyne he hath bought this authoritie, to the end that I
might haue no other meanes to eſcape his vniuſt ſentence:
I will not ſay that ſuch places of authoritie ought
not to be ſold, but I dare trulie auouch that there
ought great heed to be taken vpon whom they are beſtowed,
and ſo much the rather, becauſe being to continue
in the ſame during their life, they are the leſſe ſubiect
to correction, and paying money therefore, more
ſubiect to corruption. O happie is the countrie where
the King maketh his abode, as at Paris and the places
thereabout, for there thoſe which deſerue authoritie

obtaine them: for by the proofe of their capacitie, fidelitie,
and good ſeruices done vnto the Kings Maieſtie,
and to the Commonwealth, they are prouided of ſuch
eſtates as they deſerue, or rather thoſe places of authoritie
are prouided for ſuch men as know how to exerciſe
them as they ought: but here where we are farre
from that princely light, all is ſubiect to corruption, and
they doe not beare office which doe beſt deſerue it, but
they which haue the moſt friends, and the greateſt
purſe: ſo this my partiall iudge hath in one day obtained
without any deſert at all the dignitie of a Preſident
by his monie. To auoid this corruption, in Italie, Spain,
Almaine, Flanders and other Prouinces, the iudges are
only but for a yeare: but after that the tearme is ended,
they are ſubiect to the like officers, or vnto the Cenſure
of other iudges: ſuch alſo was the cuſtome of the Romans,
that ſo long time did flouriſh, and yet ſhould
haue flouriſhed, if Marius and Silla, and afterwards
Caeſar and Pompey, had not (with other good cuſtomes)
cauſed this likewiſe to bee neglected: for the Romane
Empire, which ſo many yeares before was famous, did
wholy decline, when offices were more eaſily obtained
by the wealthie then the vertuous; but ſo long as the
rich men did ſuffer themſelues to be gouerned and iudged
by the poore Fabricias, and ſuch others, no kingdome
was more happie and proſperous then the Romans
Commonwealth. The Venetians haue flouriſhed
almoſt a thouſand and two hundred yeares, by the like
meanes, in making more eſtimation of ſuch Senators as
were vertuous, then of thoſe that were rich, who if
they haue not vertue ioined with their riches, do there
neuer obtaine anie dignitie: which is the cauſe that amongſt
them iuſtice is rightly adminiſtred, and that the

condemned doe neuer hope for anie redemption, or
fauour by appeales: but becauſe we are farre from the
preſence of the King, from his Counſell, and from the
moſt worthie chiefe Court, we in this our Prouince do
ſee the iudges ſo corrupt, or ſometimes ſo ignorant, that
of an hundred appealants two doe not returne rightly
iudged. It were reaſon therfore that this our iudge were
allowed ſome certaine time, to learne of the Lords
which haue of long time ben of this Parlement, before
he haue this authority to adiudge thoſe appealants
which haue appealed from himſelfe: truly I ſhould thē
be content to ſay that I haue appealed from him being
vniuſt, vnto himſelfe being become iuſt; but what aſſurance
haue I now thereof? Seeing that in authoritie
(which is indeed the touchſtone to trie men withal) the
moſt part of them doe wax worſe, and euen as the
waight of gold diminiſheth, being oftentimes rubbed
vpon the touchſtone, ſo doth the conſciences of ſuch as
are but ſlenderly indued with vertue decay, by often
changing of their dignities: for if men did know, or at
the leaſt would not diſſemble, how hard a thing it is,
to vſe the office of a iudge; there would be ſo few that
would couet to buy that place, as hardly ſhould there
bee any found that would bee deſirous to take ſuch authoritie
vpon them: Neuertheleſſe, this being not my
iudge, but mine aduerſarie, not content to haue adiudged
me once, would condemne me againe. King Lewis
the twelfth, when one counſailed him to be reuenged
on thoſe, which in times paſt had offended him, anſwered
that it was not the part of the king of France, to reuenge
the wrongs which were done vnto the Duke of
Orleans; which ſurely were both the words of a noble
and mild prince: but I find not any of theſe two

parts in this new preſident: but rather on the contrary,
it ſeemeth that he hath made himſelfe preſident, to
cauſe thoſe to die whom he hath wronged, being but
an inferiour iudge, of whom I am one, and he which is
vnto him moſt odious. The old prouerb ſaith, That the
ignorance of the iudge is oftentimes the cauſe of the
calamititie of them that are accuſed: O happy world
wherein this Prouerbe was inuented! if then the iudges
did only offend through ignorance, although the ſame
be a fault great inough, what ſhall we alaſſe ſay then in
theſe daies? Wherein malice exceedeth ignorance,
and that for the moſt part they harbor both together?
Or that which is worſt of al (if it may be lawfull to ſpeak
the truth) that as the number of the skilfull encreaſeth,
ſo the number of the good decreaſeth, and when
that happeneth, there can no good bee hoped for
in the Common-wealth: for there is nothing more
dangerous in the world, then to haue ſuch a man in authoritie,
that is wiſe and wicked both together: becauſe
that for euery purpoſe, they haue examples very readie
to prooue, and perſuade their wicked intentions to be
lawfull, like vnto this man, who by his monie is made
preſident: Wherefore I doe rather ſubmit my ſelfe vnto
anie other iudge, then vnto him whom I doe vtterly
refuſe.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IT is a common thing that ſuch as are offenders doe
hate and ſlander their iudges, and the more iuſt they
are, the ſooner doe they falſly accuſe them of iniuſtice:
wherein they themſelues doe make their crime
more apparent: for they would haue the iudges ſuch
as they are, that they might pittie thoſe that are like vnto

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
themſelues: or at the leaſt that they might be ſuch
as would be corrupted, the which they cannot hope
for in thoſe that are iuſt, wherefore they are driuen into
deſpaire, knowing that no puniſhment can hurt the deſperate
man, as alſo that there ſhall not ſo much be inflicted
vpon them, as they doe deſerue, and ſo they vomit
out their poiſon againſt the righteous iudge: the which
they doe the more boldlie, becauſe they know wel that
for all their ſpeech he wil be neuer a whit the more cruel
vnto them, but without any ſtearnneſſe or malice wil
iudge them according to the laws, executing them rather
with mercie, then rigor; neither ſhall the wicked
be able to mooue his patience, for he which perceiueth
himſelfe to be blamed truly is angrie, and thinketh to
be reuenged: but on the contrarie, he that knoweth his
conſcience cleare, maketh no account of ſlaunderous
ſpeeches: or if he chance at the firſt brunt to be angrie,
he doth preſently bridle the ſame his anger by reaſon,
rather deſiring to remaine ſuch as he is, then by rage or
paſſion to become ſuch a one as in ttuth he ought not
to be. I am the ſame man which he affirmeth me to be;
ſo alſo is he nothing amended ſince I condemned him.
I did neuer beare him anie ill will, neither did he euer
giue me occaſion ſo to doe: but truly I haue condemned
him, but with leſſe rigor then his deſerts required,
or the lawes commanded: but why ſhould not I bee
odious vnto him whom I haue condemned to die?
Seeing that the Phiſitions and Chirurgions, who doe
employ themſelues to ſaue mens liues, are oftentimes
heartily lothed of them, when either they touch their
ſores, or will not ſuffer them to follow their noiſome
appetites, but do rather appoint them to take good and
and wholſome things: the child and the ſeruant, yea

and the wife, doe for the moſt part hate the father, the
maſter, and the husband which chaſtiſe & rebuke them;
how much more then doth the offender hate the iudge
which condemneth him? Seeing he wrongfully deemeth
him to be the cauſe of the ſhame and puniſhment
which he receiueth, although himſelfe be the occaſion
both of the one and the other euill. Whereas he ſaith,
that I haue bought my office to hurt him: there be
ſome other proofes then his tongue to verifie the contrarie;
It is likewiſe apparently ſeene, how he ſlandereth
the moſt part of iudges. It is a goodly matter indeed for
an offender to cenſure the deeds of iudges, and to diſcourſe
of equitie and iuſtice, as alſo to diſpute whether
offices may be ſold, and whether officers ought to be
yeerely choſen or not; you are brought hether to be
iudged, and you will iudge the iudges: all this ſerueth
you to no end, bethinke you if you can, how you may
cleare your ſelfe, and afterwards you may accuſe vs before
thoſe that haue power to redreſſe it, and then there
will be greater credit giuen to your ſpeech: but now
you being condemned as an offender, no man that
knoweth what iuſtice is, will beleeue but that you ſpeak
of others, as you your ſelfe would doe, if you had their
authoritie: for the maner of thoſe that haue their conſciences
ſeared, is ſuch, that they are perſuaded that the
moſt part of men are like vnto themſelues, wherefore
let vs come vnto the point concerning you and me: ſay
only, haue I proceeded againſt you otherwiſe then by
an ordinarie and vſuall cuſtome; Haue I not giuen ear
aswell vnto your excuſes, or iuſtifications, as vnto your
accuſers? Haue I poſted ouer or raſhlie hudled vp your
proceſſe? Are not you your ſelfe the occaſion of your
bringing hether ſo late? If amongſt ſo many I haue

ben thought worthie of this eſtate, ſhould I haue forſaken
it for you? Or was it I alone, that did iudge your
proceſſe? The counſellors were not they there, as they
are here in like ſort? Was it I that either did condemne
you, or that muſt againe condemne you? Are they not
your owne deeds? Bethinke you then to alleage other
reaſons to more purpoſe for your iuſtification, or to
ſubmit you vnto the diſcretion of the iudges: praieng
vnto God to giue you the grace, patientlie to abide the
ſentence which they ſhall pronounce vpon you, referring
all vnto the will of God, who by that meanes wil
beſtow that vpon you which ſhall be more profitable
for you: for he exalteth thoſe that doe heartily praie
vnto him. And laſtlie determine (if the worſt do happen)
ſith you could not tell how to liue well, to learn to
die well, giuing thanks vnto God for taking you out of
this miſerable world, before you haue further offended
his diuine Maieſtie: by that meanes your puniſhment
together with his mercie, ſhall be a full ſatisfaction for
all your ſinnes.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 20.
               
                  Of the ſouldiors that would needs giue ouer the wars
after the death of their Generall.
               
               
                  THe ancient militarie law is ſuch, that euerie
ſouldior maketh his oath particularly
to follow his Enſigne, the Enſigne
taketh his oath to obey his captaine, the
captains their Colonels, then all of them
generally doe ſwear the ſame oath to the
Generall of the armie, (repreſenting the

perſon of the Prince) to ſerue him truly and faithfully. Wherevpon
the Generall, or Lieutenant Generall chanceth to die in a
difficult and dangerous enterpriſe, and by his death the ſouldiors
hold an opinion that they are acquited of their oath, and
that they may giue ouer the enterpriſe. And thus one amongſt
them pleadeth for all the reſt:
               THe oath of the ſouldior laſteth ſo long as he that
receiueth it, or he to whom it is made liueth, as we
haue done vnto our General, who being dead, we
are no longer bound. We haue ſworne to ſerue the
Prince vnder his conduct: following him in all, and by
all things, into all places, and againſt all men, without anie
exception at all: the which we haue done euen vntill
his death, without anie refuſall, or contradiction,
wherefore hauing performed our dutie, we are no longer
bound: for we cannot follow him any further, except
we ſhould die as he hath done, which would be a
thing as hurtfull vnto the Prince, to the Common-wealth,
and to vs, as it would be profitable vnto our enemies,
and ill willers, vnto whom we ought to doe no
pleaſure nor profit at all. And neuer thinke that we are
to be retained in ſeruice ſtill, ſaying that the Prince will
ſend another Generall, or that his Lieutenant that is
dead, repreſenteth his perſon by order of preſcription,
vntill the Prince haue confirmed him for Generall: or
that he hath ſent another: for ſuch a reaſon is nothing
worth, becauſe there are many that ſuffered themſelues
to bee enroulled vnder the deceaſſed Generall, which
would neither march nor be enrolled vnder him whom
the Prince may ſend vs, for ſuch was the truſt that wee
did repoſe in his valor and wiſdome, that nothing ſeemed
impoſſible vnto vs, ſo long as we folowed his cō
                  mand,

wherefore (conſidering that the Prince may wel
beſtow the dignitie and eſtate, but that the diſcretion,
wiſdome, and valor of the man, commeth from aboue)
we are diſcouraged to ſerue any longer, without knowing
vnder whom: True it is that there is none ſo good
but there may be found another as good: but it is verie
certaine alſo, that an opinion is halfe an effect, and that
for the moſt part, it ordereth matters as it liſteth, without
anie other reſpect, and eſpecially when it is ioined
with ſome proofe, or admirable experience, as was that
of our late noble Generall; which hath ſo manie times
ben redoubled, who by his example did not onelie increaſe
the courages of thoſe that were valiant, but alſo
made the verie cowards bold and ſtout: ſo that it may
verie well be ſaid, that he hath carried our hearts with
him, or rather that he hath beſtowed part of his greatneſſe
vpon vs al. Finally, the ſouldior that marcheth vnder
ſuch a Generall whom he liketh not, differeth nothing
from a ſlaue, who is bound to ſerue his maiſter
whether he be good or bad, which is the cauſe that ſildome
they do anie thing that is good. Wherefore is an
oath made? But onely that the performance thereof
may follow. Why are not we as free from our oath by
his deceaſe, as we were bound by the ſame while he liued?
How manie did march vnder Scipio, that would
not follow Lelius? Although they were both of one,
and the ſame countrie, one as noble as another, and ſo
great friends, as the one might well be ſaid to bee the
other: Neuertheleſſe, for the moſt part both of the Romane
ſouldiours, and ſtrangers, had rather haue died
with the one, then liued with the other. By what means
did Epaminundas and Pelopides reforme the military diſcipline
of the Thebans? But onely by the good opinion

which the men of warre had of them. We do not
ſay, that we would whollie refuſe to ſerue, and beare
armes for our Prince; but we would faine know vnder
whom we ſhould march: moreouer, we would that it
might be lawfull for thoſe that will ſerue no longer to
depart: and that thoſe which would follow the future
commander, might be bound by a new oath.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     WHat noueltie is this? How dare you only think
a treaſon ſo great? Not onelie againſt your
Prince and countrie: but againſt your ſelues,
and the profeſſion of armes? Saieng that you
are acquited of your oath, by the death of your Generall:
Who is then your Generall? Is not the prince? Is
he dead? Or doth he euer die, but ſtrait another ſucceedeth
him? It is not you that were ſworne vnto the Generall
that dead is, but I, that was his Lieutenant, who
alwaies in his abſence repreſented his perſon: If I had
then this authoritie whileſt he liued, what a ieaſt were it
that I ſhould loſe it after his death? For when he was
abſent, your oath bound you to me. Wherefore hath
the Generall a Lieutenant? But onlie becauſe (himſelf
being ſubiect to wounds, ſickneſſe, and laſtly to death)
that he ſhould maintaine and keepe the ſouldiors in obedience?
You cannot denie, but that ſo long as he liued,
it was I to whom you were to yeeld an account of
your actions, but not for you to doubt of my authoritie:
for proofe whereof, durſt you refuſe to follow me
in anie place where I would lead you? Or to denie to
doe whatſoeuer I would command you? Durſt you
once haue demanded whether that which I wold haue

you doe, was the pleaſure of the Generall? Would I
not haue puniſhed him with death, that ſhould haue
diſobeied me? Or had I not the power by martiall law
of my ſelfe to put anie diſobedient ſouldiour to death?
The Colonell, hath not he the like authoritie ouer the
captaines? And the captains ouer the others that commaund
vnder them, euen vnto the corporall, who hath
the ſame power ouer the priuat ſouldiour? What doe
you meane then to doubt of the authoritie of your Generall?
Conſider ſouldiors how you haue ſworne to
ſerue your prince, and follow your Enſigne; which is
meant ſo farre as you may bee allowed by the prince:
what will you then ſay? Seeing your Enſignes are yet
diſplaied, and your captaines willing to ſerue? Do you
not know that you are entred in their muſter-role, and
that you muſt march vnder them: They vnder the
Campmaiſters, the Campmaiſters vnder the Colonels,
the Colonels vnder the Generall or his Lieutenant,
and the Generall vnder the prince if he be there, if he
be not, then he repreſenteth his perſon? where is then
your vnderſtanding? Who hath bewitched or ſeduced
you, that you wil thus peruert order and military diſcipline?
Is not this fellow a trim Orator, being no leſſe
ignorant then ill aduiſed: who thinking that he is the
ableſt and wiſeſt man amongſt the reſt, heapeth vpon
himſelfe alone, all the diſhonor and puniſhment of this
fault? he I ſaie that was worthie to die before hee was
borne, rather then he ſhould haue attempted to corrupt
ſo manie worthie and valiant men. The noble Romans
did ſundrie times commit the like faults, eſpeciallie vnder
that great Scipio in Spaine, who alſo cauſed onelie
Albius Calenus, Atrius Vmbrius, and others the inuenters
of the mutenie to be puniſhed as capital offenders:

and I doe aſſure you that in their deed, they offended
not ſo much as you, for they had beene vnpaied of a
long time, and it was certainlie thought, that Scipio their
Generall was dead, which was the cauſe that made the
ſouldiors not onelie to mutenie, but alſo manie citties
and Prouinces to reuolt, before they did mutenie.
Wherevpon Titus Liuius ſaith, That when the authors
of the deed were puniſhed in the middeſt of their fellows,
there was not heard ſo much as one onlie grone,
ſeeing them beaten ſtarke naked with hollie wands, euen
vntill they were readie to giue vp the ghoſt, and afterwards
their heads to be ſtriken off being halfe dead.
Thoſe men did mutenie becauſe they did ſee that the
Prouinces did rebell, but you, hauing paſſed the worſt
of a dangerous enterpriſe, being vpon the point of a
victorie, the which your Generall (whom you ſo greatlie
bemone) hath prepared for you with the price of his
life, would now giue it ouer. Is it poſſible that the reuerence
which you owe vnto his memorie, and the ſhame
of your ſelues ſhould not be able to withhold you? the
greateſt loue that can be ſhewed vnto anie man that is
deceaſſed, is to immitate his deeds, and to obſerue his
precepts: and you will whollie eſtrange your ſelues
from them, which doth plainlie declare, that being vnworthie
of ſuch a Generall, God hath taken him awaie
from you: or rather he verie well knowing your vnworthines
was not deſirous to liue anie longer. I know
not what els to ſay or thinke: what ſhould be become
of your ancient valor, and martiall reputation, which
was woont to haue more need of a bridle to hold you
backe, then ſpurs to prick you forward. I am aſhamed of
your ſhame, if it be true that you haue charged this loſt
man to make this diſcourſe? But I cannot beleeue it:

for the inſolencie is too great, ſo that it cannot proceed
from anie other but from himſelf, and ſo conſequentlie
none ought to beare the ſhame, and puniſhment thereof
but he: Neuertheleſſe, for the good opinion which
I haue of you, I doe put his life and death into your
hands: hauing ſo great confidence in your nobilitie,
that you will not indure a man ſo pernicious, to remain
anie longer amongſt you, but if you ſhall ſuffer him, it
will be your owne hurt more then ours, beſides the
ſhame and reproch which will continue for euer, yea,
and that after death: for there is no doubt but that the
Hiſtoriographers doe as well record the faults of ſouldiors,
as their valiant acts, which afterwards is oftentimes
the cauſe, that their poſteritie doe fare the worſe
for it. Laſtlie, I haue told ſome part of the reaſons whie
you cannot, much leſſe ought not, to demaund that
which this wicked man hath proponed, without the
conſent of anie of you, except it be of ſome ſuch as are
like vnto himſelfe, which maie well be termed the ſcum
of the armie, for in ſuch aſſemblies there are ſome bad,
like as there is no corne without darnell, no wine without
lees, nor anie fire without ſmoake: or els if your vngraciouſneſſe
be ſuch (as I can hardlie beleeue it is) that
manie are of that mind, but rather that it is the leſſer
number, and conſequentlie the worſer ſort of all the armie:
I am of opinion, that ſuch kind of people are not
fit to be kept; for ſuch a riddance of them, will be profitable
vnto the whole armie, becauſe a few well diſciplined,
are more worth then a great number of thoſe that
are confuſed, diſobedient, and without order. Let them
come forth then which would be diſcharged, whileſt
the captains are here with their muſter roles, to the end
that at the ſame time alſo they maie be commended &

rewarded, which ſhall remaine conſtant in performing
their duties: and by the ſame meanes alſo to determine
vpon that which wee are to write vnto the Prince and
countrie of thoſe, who ſo cowardly doe forſake their
leaders and companions.
                  You muſt note, that when the Generals doe make
theſe orations, there is none ſo hardie that dare bee the
firſt, which will ſay he would bee diſcharged: for they
feare leaſt ſome of them may bee alreadie corrupted or
wonne by the captaines. And by this meanes doe they
puniſh the authors of the mutenie, and vſe ſome liberality
towards the ſouldiors.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 21.
               
                  Of Gamaliel, who hauing ſlain two of his brethren,
becauſe one of them had rauiſhed his wife, is accuſed
by the others.
               
               
                  
                     SAdoc and Gamaliel (amongſt diuerſe others)
were two brethren, the one excelling in
learning, the other in armes: Sadoc by Aſtrologie,
foretold vnto his brother, that if he
maried withont the conſent of al his brethrē,
that there ſhould thereby happen a great miſchiefe
and diſhonor vnto al their linage. Gamaliel neglecting
this aduice, did marie in a ſtrange country, which done, ſhortly
after he brought his wife (who was exceeding faire) home into
his owne countrie, and obtaining of his brethren his part of
the patrimonie left by his father, he liued therevpon peaceably.
He being one day fallen ſicke, Sadoc viſited him ſo long, that

he fell in loue with his faire ſiſter in law, and found ſuch means
as he inioyed her companie in a manner by force; ſhe declared
the deed vnto her husband, he both ſlew his brother Sadoc, &
alſo another of his brethren, who came to defend him: Whervpon
the other brethren and kinsmen being moued therewithall,
did accuſe him to the iuſtice by theſe words:
               THey truelie are in a miſerable caſe, who haue no
freindes that may giue them inſtruction & good
counſell in there youth, becauſe that youth without
the aduiſe of ſuch as are graue and wiſe, are like a
fierce horſe without a bridle, who ouerthroweth both
himſelf and his rider: but far more vnhappie, and worthie
of all miſhap is he, that diſpiſeth good counſell; and
aboue all other they are moſt vnfortunat, who through
ſuch contempt (withour being thēſelues in anie fault)
are partakers of ſuch miſcheife as therby doth happen,
as wee O righteous Iudges are, who not onlie for ſuch
an error haue loſt two of the beſt of our brethren, but
alſo are conſtrained through iuſt diſdaine to demand
the death of the third, as vnworthie both to be accounted
anie of our number, and alſo ſuch a one as deſerueth
to liue no longer in the world, hauing cōmitted ſo execrable
a ſin as to murther his own brethren: not that
the fault inciteth vs to hate him, but becauſe the ſorow
for thoſe whom he hath ſlaine, prouoketh vs to require
iuſtice: as well to bridle by this example other ſuch like
inſolent perſons, as alſo that the reſt of our parentage
may be rid from the fear of this murtherous man, ſpotted
with the blood of his brethren. For it commonlie
falleth out, that ſuch blood thirſtie men as he is, cannot
refraine from ſhedding humane blood: as it appeareth
by Abimilech the Hebrue, who ſlue ſeuentie of his brethren;

and by Abſalon, who hauing cauſed his brother
Amon to be ſlaine, would haue done the like vnto his
father: what ſhall I ſay of Ioab, and others of the Iews?
Theſe are the vertues which a man learneth in following
the warres, who being vſed to murther, finding no
enemies killeth his friends, and afterwards his kindred
and brethren as this hath done: ſo did Romulus cauſe
his brother to be ſlaine, and Alexander killed his foſter
brother Clitus, & others his good friends and ſeruants.
Aſo Epaminundas the Thebane, Manlius Torquatus, and
Aulus Poſthumius Tubero, being Romans, ſlew their ſons
(more worthy to liue then they) vnder the coulor of
obſeruing militarie diſcipline. The like did Brutus being
in exile, and Caſsius the Enſigne of Craſſus, ſaieng that
their ſonnes conſpired againſt them: the like did Artaxerxes
Mnenon King of Perſia. Likewiſe the great Conſtantine
cauſed his ſonne and his brother in law to die,
without ſhewing a reaſon wherefore: The King of Iotara
ſlew all his ſonnes except one, becauſe he ſhould
be his onely heire: Authi Coelio Mithridates, a noble
warrior, ſlew his mother, brother, and many of his children:
Herod put three of his children to death: Finally,
this deſire of murthering proceedeth from the vſe
thereof, by the which Etheocles, Polinices, Tideus, Polites,
Antiochus, Ariſtobulus, and an infinite number of others,
who after they had ben famous warriors, became worſe
then hangmen: but who will ſpare him, that for ſo ſmal
a hire, or for a vaineglory to be accounted warlike, hazardeth,
or rather ſelleth his owne life? Yea, and for
the moſt part his ſoule, which life he ought not to beſtow
but only for the ſafegard and defence of his countrie
and familie: how can they deſerue to inioy life, or
to be accounted off amongſt men, who liue to no other

end but to murther them: and which doe not only delight
in making of widdows, and orphants, but alſo
would willingly make their own wiues and children in
the like caſe, (though with the price of their liues) for
the great pleaſure they haue, to be accounted cruell:
ſuch a one this our brother (but vnworthie that name)
is and euer hath beene: whereby we doe plainely perceiue,
that like as vertues are linked together, ſo doe vices
follow one another: for from his youth he hath deſpiſed
the good counſell both of all his kindred, and alſo
of his brother whom he hath afterwards ſlaine, thorow
the report of a woman: and what woman? Forſooth
a ſtranger: who being enamoured of a ſtranger,
and marrying with him, cared not to forſake her countrie
and kindred to follow him hether, where (it may
be) perceiuing that ſhe was not ſufficiently made of to
her owne liking, and eſpecially of him who foreſaw the
miſchiefe that ſhould happen by her, did accuſe him
vnto her husband, knowing him to be as fooliſh, and
light of beliefe, as prone vnto anger and murther. How
manie are there that doe themſelues prouoke men vnto
adultrie; But when they ſee that they are refuſed by
them, they doe afterwards complaine that they would
haue forced them? The wife of Putiphar, of Theſeus,
and of others, doe verie well witneſſe the ſame: what
aſſurance haue we of the chaſtitie or goodneſſe of this
woman, that ſhe hath not done the like? Hardly may a
woman be forced which maketh anie reſiſtance; and if
at the leaſt ſhe want ſtrength to defend her ſelfe, ſhe
cannot lacke a tongue nor a ſhrill voice to crie out, being
a thing ſo incident vnto their ſex: but although ſhe
had ben forced indeed, was not the law ſufficient to
haue puniſhed the ſame? Should not we then haue ben

as readie as we are now, to accuſe the offender? But foraſmuch
as truth ingendreth hatred, he hauing found
an occaſion (as he thought) to offer violence vnto his
brother, was in ſooth very loth to loſe the ſame: conſider
then, O you iudges, if ſuch faults be not rigorouſly
puniſhed, that womē being naturally giuen to reuenge,
and men ouer eaſie to beleeue them, will commit a
thouſand miſchiefes. Laſtly, it cannot be denied, but
that it is as great an iniuſtice to pardon an offender, as
to condemne an innocent, & that euen as iuſtice without
mercie is crueltie, ſo alſo is clemencie without Iuſtice
iniquitie: wherefore we are certaine that you will
iudge rightly, as the law commandeth, and conſcience
and honor doth bind you.
               
                  The Anſwere of Gamaliel.
                  
                     IN effect theſe my brethren (if ſuch they may
be tearmed, purchaſing my death) doe verie
well ſhew that another mans miſfortune is
light vnto them which feele it not, and euerie
one preacheth patience and temperance in other mens
matters, as theſe doe, who would perſuade me that this
exercrable offence ſhould not once haue prouoked me
to reuenge; the which it hath not done, but rather vnto
a iuſt puniſhment of the malefactor: for that is called
reuenge, which is done wittingly, but that is puniſhment
which is inforced through a moſt iuſt cauſe of
diſdaine or anger. Some may ſay that euery puniſhment
ought to be done with a ſetled mind, without choler,
for feare of being ouer rigorous, I do confeſſe it ought:
but who can alſo denie that the firſt motions of anger
are not in our owne power? Wherefore I would, and

it were alſo reaſonable, that theſe my ouer ſharpe accuſers
had a true feeling of the wrong done vnto me, and
then they would iudge more modeſtly of their brother,
who hath done that which they ought to deſire,
that is; rooted out from amongſt them a ſuperſticious
Diuine, not only hurtfull to his friends, but vnto all the
Commonwealth: Is it not too apparent that ſuch people
are puffed vp with ambition, that they had rather
ſee the death of a million of men, then to ſuffer that by
any it ſhould be knowne, that they haue failed one iot
in their fond diuinations? As he of Milan did, who hauing
foretold that at a certaine time he ſhould periſh by
yron, (not finding any man that would kill him, although
he gaue them diuers occaſions) ſlew himſelfe
to verifie his propheſie: ſo this my dead brother, hauing
foretold that by this my marriage a great miſchance
ſhould happen vnto all our race, had rather be
the cauſe thereof himſelfe, (not ſeeing any likelihood
therein) then to be eſteemed vnskilfull in his art, which
is eſpecially forbidden both by diuine and humane
laws. And then you ſay that you haue loſt the beſt of
your brethren, me thinks that if he were the beſt, then
the reſt ſhould be nothing worth at all; and you ought
not to ſay that a iuſt cauſe of diſdaine conſtraineth you
to require the death of the third, but rather an iniuſt hatred;
for were it not ſo, from whence could ſuch an inuectiue
proceed, to animate the iudges againſt me? Had
it not ben ſufficient for you only to haue ſaid, this man
here hath ſlain our two brethren for this and this cauſe,
wherevpon we demand iuſtice? You ſay that you are
partakers of the miſfortunes of my marriage, why doe
you not rather ſay of the inſolencie, wickedneſſe, and adulterie
of Sadoc? As alſo that I am vnworthie to be reckoned

amongſt your brethren; truely hee neuer deſerued
to be accounted. If offenders ought to be puniſhed
for an example, I haue not done ſo bad as you ſay,
in puniſhing him ſuddainely: For who was a more notorious
offender then he? You ſay that thoſe which
follow armes doe all become wicked men: Abraham,
Moiſes, Ioſua, and a number of others becauſe they
were valiant in armes, were they the leſſe righteous?
Moreouer the multitude of thoſe which you alleage
that haue ſlain their kindred, maketh more for my commendation,
then my condemnation: for you ſhall find
that the moſt part of them had leſſe cauſe to doe the
ſame then I. Furthermore I cannot beleeue, that either
monie, or deſire of vainglory draweth men vnto the
wars, but rather a deſire to maintaine lawfull and iuſt
quarrels, although euery Generall affirmeth it to be his
owne. Finally, the wars hath ben in all ages: Saint Iohn
baptiſed the ſouldiors without forbidding them to vſe
the ſame art: yea God hath many times commanded
his people to vſe it: ſo that it may be iuſtly proued that
wars is rather an occaſion of vertue then vice. Concerning
the report of my wife, this is not the firſt time that
women haue ben beleeued in the like caſe: wherefore
ſeeing neither you nor I haue or can find any reproch
in mine that may blemiſh her honor, ſhe is as well to be
beleeued as othets; and if as you ſay a woman cannot
be forced, then haue diuers heretofore ben wrongfully
condemned for the like offence. Truly the law had
ben ſufficient to haue puniſhed Sadoc, but if I had had
ſuch patience as was requiſite, what aſſurance ſhould I
haue had that hee would either haue come before the
iuſtices, or els if he had chanced into their hands, that
you would not all haue taken his part, as you are now

againſt me? And as you ſay, it is iniuſtice to pardon an
offender, ſo is it iuſtice to puniſh a wicked man, as I
haue done: wherefore I haue not offended, but only in
that being iuſtly ſtirred vp to anger, I haue defrauded
the iudges of their authoritie, of whom humbly beſeeching
pardon for this fault, I do wholly ſubmit my ſelfe
vnto their mercie, beſeeching them alſo to defend me
from your malice.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 22.
               
                  Of him who after he had had his pleaſure of a maid,
would haue forſaken her, to haue married her
ſiſter.
               
               
                  A Yong Gentleman hauing had a quarrell a long
time with a neighbour of his, made an agreement
with him, vpon a condition that the ſaid
neighbour ſhould giue him leaue to chuſe one of
his three daughters in marriage, and allow him
the tearme of one yeare to make his choice: ſo that vnder this
coulor, being familiar with them all, he got the eldeſt of them
with child, afterwards he would haue choſen the ſecond, wherevnto
the neighbour oppoſed himſelfe, ſaying:
               
                  THou vngracious man, how dareſt thou imagin
ſuch a wickedneſſe? Or once behold me in
the face, hauing ben ſo treacherous and miſchieuous
to abuſe that familiaritie, which was
granted vnto thee in ſigne of reconciliation, vnder the
which thou haſt more harmed me in proteſting thy
ſelfe to be my friend, then all thy weake forces had ben

able to hurt me if thou hadſt continued my mortall enemie.
O God is it poſſible that men may be ſo wicked,
That what they cannot doe by force, they accompliſh
vnder the cloake of an honeſt friendſhip? but why ſay I
freindſhip, When that is the greateſt benefit that God
hath giuen for the vſe of man, without the which, this
life ſhould be full of bitterneſſe and ſorrow? But let vs
come vnto the matter: did not you make your choiſe,
when you had carnall copulation with my daughter?
Is not that the conſummation of marriage? Truly yes,
they were all three promiſed vnto you, but in lying
with this you haue had your choiſe, and it is not verie
likely that ſhe would otherwiſe haue conſented therevnto;
but you breaking promiſe with her, would by
that means be reuenged of me for all former enemities:
but if it be ſo, that an ancient hatred preuaileth more
with you then a new friendſhip? I doe beſeech you
moſt worthie iudges, that he may be puniſhed, which
hath ſuborned, ſeduced, and abuſed hir that is his wiues
ſiſter, for by our agreement, he is bound to take one of
the three: moreouer let him be puniſhed, which hath
ſo greeuouſly offended his father in law, his mother in
law, and his ſiſters in law, and finally (contemning laws
and all honeſtie) hath ſlandered the Commonwealth.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     I Haue not yet choſen at all, but in trying which
of your daughters ſhould deſerue to be my
wife, it fell out, that this prooued with child, I
knew not by whom; which was ſufficient to
haue made me ſtand in doubt of all the reſt: Neuertheleſſe,
becauſe I would not ſeeme to breake our league, I

ſuddainly made choice of the ſecond, for feareleaſt as
much might happen vnto her, ſeeing you haue ſo badly
kept the firſt: but why doe I ſpeake of keeping, ſeeing
the female ſex are ſo hardly to be kept. If you will not
giue me your daughter, let vs remaine friends, without
being kinsmen? For a true friendſhip is more woorth,
then a kindred, which is made by force or compulſion:
wherefore I would not in anie ſort violate the vſe therof
as you accuſe me, but would rather be partaker of
your daughters ſhame in marrying with her ſiſter, then
to be once ſuſpected to be the breaker of our friendſhip.
I cannot hinder your daughter to ſay what ſhe
thinks good, both to excuſe her ſhame, and to be made
a wife, but for all that I am not bound to beleeue her againſt
my conſcience, nor to make amends for another
mans fault to my loſſe and diſhonor. You doe ſeeme in
your whole accuſation againſt me, not to be well aduiſed,
and I doe verily beleeue, that choler (which is an enemy
to good counſell) is that which chiefly troubleth
you; whereby you ſpeake verie vnfitly to the purpoſe,
for although it were ſo, that I had gotten your daughter
with child (the which I denie, and ſhe can neuer proue)
doe you thinke that I would buy of her by marriage,
that which ſhe hath alreadie giuen me, becauſe ſhee
would haue her ſhare of the pleaſure? Or do you thinke
me ſo mad, that I would wed her, whom I ſhould euermore
ſuſpect to play the wanton? For ſildome or neuer
doth a woman abandon her honour vnto one man
alone, and ſhe that cannot keepe it befor ſhe hath taſted
the ſweetneſſe of the ſport, will neuer keepe it after ſhe
hath ben pampered therein. But where doe you find,
that the dalliance of louers, is the contracting of mariage?
If it were ſo, then muſt ſome men needs marrie

more then fiftie women, ſo readie are they to yeeld, yea
and ſometimes to require the ſame. Laſtlie, I denie, that
mine intention was euer to offend you; and ſufficient
proofe thereof, is the deſire that I haue to ſatiſfie you,
not refuſing her for my ſiſter, which hath ſo much forgotten
her ſelfe, as not only to loſe her honeſt reputation,
but alſo wrongfullie to accuſe me: and becauſe I
will not be ouer tedious, I put it vnto your diſcretion,
either to let me chuſe or to chuſe your ſelfe, whether
you will haue me to be your ſon in law or no, bethinke
you well then of the matter, for I will not make the firſt
motion therein.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 23.
               
                  Of the part of a houſe which was to be pulled down,
for the offence of one that dwelled therein, whervpon
another dwelling in the ſame houſe, was
oppoſite.
               
               
                  TWo men were owners together of one houſe, one
of them dwelled in the lower part, and the other
in the higher part thereof: he which dwelt beneath
committed an offence, for the which the
law commanded that his dwelling ſhould bee
pulled down: but he which dwelled aboue, withſtood it, ſaying:
               TRue it is that this houſe is ours in common, and
for his part he dwelt in the lower part thereof, but
what haue I to doe with his fault, that for the
ſame my dwelling ought to be harmed, ſeeing that I
haue not offended the law in anie ſort? What is he

that doth not very well vnderſtand, that in pulling
downe the nether part of an houſe, the vpper part therof
falleth of it ſelfe, as being without foundation, or
an vnprofitable manſion? I will not diſobey the law,
the which although it be to be obſerued, yet is it not for
all that to be vſed with the extreameſt rigor, for the text
of the moſt part of the law is briefe, but it may be well
enlarged by the gloſes, and thoſe which tend more vnto
pittie then rigor, ought to be allowed, and eſpeciallie
in fauour of them which are not faultie, in hurting of
whom it is meere iniuſtice; which is a thing more iniurious,
then not to puniſh the offender at all: for if it be
lawfull to preferre mercie before iuſtice, how much
more then ought we to vſe clemencie rather then crueltie;
As this would bee, to take away the dwelling
place from a poore innocent familie ſuch as mine is? It
muſt be conſidered that this law was made for ſtrong
houſes, wherein the malefactors might make reſiſtance,
but throwing downe ſuch an houſe as is onely fit for
dwelling, you not onlie wrong me & mine, but alſo the
neighbors of the whole ſtreet, yea and the whole cittie
beſides, in leauing a void place in a chief ſtreet, amongſt
ſo manie houſes, the which will ſerue but for a lurking
place for theeues, and other wicked people that walke
by night: wherefore if the extreameſt rigour muſt bee
ſhowne, that a part of the houſe muſt be pulled downe,
let it be the vppermoſt part, and leaue the lower roome
for a recompence vnto me; although it be ſomewhat to
my preiudice, to change the wholſomeſt part for that
which is cold and moiſt: moreouer to ſpeake the truth,
it cannot be well ſaid, which part was iuſtly his, ſeeing
the houſe fel in partition, or in common vnto vs both alike.
It is true alſo that the ſame part which you will pull

downe, fell vnto him by lot, and ſo did mine likewiſe
vnto me, ſeeing then that the offender cannot be harmed,
except he that is innocent be hurt, it were better
either to ſpare the one for the others ſake, rather then to
hurt him that neuer offended; or at the leaſt to doe as I
haue ſaid, and make a change, that the faultleſſe be not
altogether vndone.
               
                  The Attorney Generall contradicteth him, thus.
                  IT ſeemeth in a manner that your ſpeech hath ſome
likelihood of reaſon, but being thorowly well conſidered,
it hath none at all: for it is neceſſarie, that iuſtice
(which is a benefit for the Commonwealth) ſhold
take place, all particular profit or dommage ſet apart, for
euen as you ſay, that this houſe fell vnto you both by
lot, ſo the ſame lot willed that his part ſhould bee the
lower roome, and not the vpper: the law commandeth
not his part alone, but that his dwelling place ſhould be
raced downe, the which ought to take place, yea although
his dwelling had ben hired, to warne thoſe that
bee landlords not to let their houſes but vnto thoſe
that they know to be honeſt men: & it was not in vain,
when a Citizen of Rome cauſing the ſale of his houſe
to be cried thorow the cittie, he made it to bee publiſhed,
that amongſt other good properties which was
belonging vnto it, there was good neighbors round about
it; which doth manifeſtly prooue, that a man may
often receiue hurt by his neighbors, how much more
then by him that dwelleth in the ſame houſe with him.
In thinking to ſaue part of your abilitie, you would blemiſh
your whole honor, for in pulling downe your habitation,
and letting the offenders ſtand whole, it will

be thought that you haue committed the crime, & that
he is innocent, becauſe the ſame is done as much for a
perpetuall memorie and reproch of the offence, as for
an example to others: and the law was ordained for the
ſtrong houſes no more then it was for thoſe that were
weake, whoſe loſſe will be a leſſe hurt vnto the Commonwealth.
Moreouer, where the greater number is,
there do ſuch faults happen the oftener, as alſo becauſe
the common people are leſſe afraid then the Noble, to
be conuinced of crime; for as much as the fall of the
great, cannot chuſe but be great, and therefore the
more to be feared, and eſpecially when it concerneth
the loſſe of honor, which is ſo hardlie to be gotten, but
being once loſt, ſildome or neuer may it be recouered.
The augmenting of the gloſes of the law cannot redound
vnto the preiudice of iuſtice, which is to correct
or puniſh the wicked without anie reſpect at all: if you
haue nothing to doe with the fault of the offender, no
more alſo hath iuſtice to doe with the loſſe which you
ſuſtaine for dwelling ſo neere vnto him, and you muſt
not ſay that this void place ſhall ſerue for a lurking hole
for theeues and ſuch wicked people as walke by night,
for ſo long as iuſtice ſhal be trulie adminiſtred, the number
of ſuch kind of people will be but ſmall. But why
doe you not as well ſay that this place will ſerue for a
terror vnto thoſe which would commit the like offences,
ſeeing the token that iuſtice hath here left for the
ſame: and this muſt be eſpecially remembred, that there
is no other bridle to reſtraine the wicked, then the inuiolable
execution of the laws, yea, it is the chiefeſt work
of mercie to puniſh the wicked with rigor, becauſe that
by the puniſhment of one, an hundred are terrified:
wherefore we muſt not for ſome little particular loſſe,

neglect the common good, and the rather, becauſe that
for your loſſe you may ſeeke your remedy vpon the reſt
of his goods: but ſhould it be otherwiſe, yet ought you
to preferre iuſtice, which is immortall (as being the
daughter of God) before a little temporall goods.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 24.
               
                  Of him who hauing lien with his bondwoman, would
neither manumiſe her, nor conſent that her ſonne
ſhould be ſold.
               
               
                  THe law in times paſt was ſuch, that if any
man did lie with his bondwoman, he
was inioined to manumiſe or make her
free. Wherevpon it happened that a certaine
man begot his bondwoman with
child, he being called before the Iuſtice,
did ſweare that hee did not lie with her;
ſhe being in trauell with her child, ſwore he did: the iudge the
better to ſift out the truth and to be aſſured whether the child
were his, commanded that he ſhould be ſold for a ſlaue, (the
man lying in priſon for debt) vnto the which he would in no
ſort agree. Wherevpon the iudge preſumed that he was the father
of the child, and cōdemned him to manumiſe the mother.
The man appealeth ſaying:
               IT is manifeſtly to be ſeene, that the iudge is more caried
away with paſſion, then guided by iuſtice, for firſt
he would haue me to make my bondwoman free,
and yet ſhe neuer requeſted me to doe it, and next he
hath conſtrained me to ſweare, thereby to exempt me

from doing it, but not content therewith, hauing bethought
himſelfe vpon the ſpeech of her being in trauaile
of childbirth (and it may be, incited by himſelfe)
would that there ſhould be more credit giuen vnto the
oath of a bondwoman, then vnto his, that is a Citizen
free born, and owner of the bondwoman: who doubteth
that ſhe (ſeeing her ſelfe fauoured of the iudge)
will not take an occaſion to ſweare an vntroth, to gaine
her freedome? But muſt he beleeue her for all that?
When a ſlaue is taken for an offence, if he ſaith his maiſter
is partaker with him therin, is he to be beleeued? Do
we not know that euery ſlaue hateth his maiſter? But
the paſſion of the iudge is verie manifeſt in this, that amongſt
al the moueable goods which I haue, he would
needs cauſe this poore child to be ſold, who as yet cannot
ſpeake: I gainſaying ſo great a crueltie, he would
inferre that I declare by the ſame that he is my ſonne;
the which is not true: but I am not ſo hard hearted, neither
do I hate the ſillie creature (born within my houſe)
ſo extreamely, as I can without compaſſion ſee him ſeperated
from his mother ſo yoong, which is almoſt enough
to kill him; but what a iudge are you, That in
ſteed of exerciſing mercie, wil hinder others from vſing
it? Whereby a man may eaſily know how vnwoorthie
you are to execute the office of a iudge, ſeeing that iuſtice
and pittie ought to be ioined together as the body
and ſoul, which being ſeparated one from another, the
bodie dieth: euen ſo without mercie, iuſtice dieth: and
as the dead bodie by corruption is turned vnto earth, ſo
is iuſtice without mercie changed into crueltie. How
long did the cittie of Rome flouriſh, being grounded
vpon pittie? When in her beginning ſhe receiued al nations,
which had elswhere no place of aboad? And yet

you would condemne me, becauſe I imbrace pittie in
my heart, which will neuer enter into yours; otherwiſe
you would comfort me being ſo miſerable a priſoner as
I am: but to encreaſe the afliction of the afflicted, you
would not onlie cauſe that to be ſold which he loueth,
but alſo would haue him manumiſe his onlie bondwoman,
from whom he might reape ſome profit by her
ſeruice. Yet if at the leaſt you had willed the mother
and the child to be ſold both together, your crueltie
then ſhould not ſeeme ſo manifeſt; but like vnto Herod,
you haue a deſire onlie to hurt the innocent and the
priſoner: notwithſtanding, I haue ſo great confidence
in the equity of thoſe who are more righteous thē you,
that (they hauing iuſt pittie of the afflicted, and innocent)
will condemne your crueltie.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  VVEre you ſo honeſt a man as you ſhould bee,
you might both be free from this puniſhmēt,
and I eaſed of that trauel which you haue put
me vnto: but how would you be eſteemed iuſt and pitifull,
ſeeing that you your ſelfe doe giue men occaſion
not to thinke you ſo? ſhewing your ſelfe to be either
more ſlanderous then anie other, or els trulie
verie miſerable? Doe you not know that it is the greateſt
vertue that can be in the world, for a man to bridle
his tongue, and that it oftentimes hurteth his own maiſter
more then doth his enemies ſword? Wherefore I
ſtand in doubt whether your malice or ignorance is
greater, but the one being neuer without the other, I
will onely ſay that you ſhew them both at once, attributing
that in me to paſſion, which can be no leſſe thē prudence:

truly hee were vnworthie to bee a iudge, that
knew not how to diſcouer the malice of offenders, for
as much is that iudge to be eſteemed which is without
wiſdome, as a Commonwealth without laws, a Prince
without faith, a phiſition without experience, a ſouldior
without valor, and a Marchant without credit; who
being ſuch, they doe not fall themſelues alone, but they
are the cauſe of the ouerthrow of a great number. But
tell vs what was the cauſe that Salomon iudged ſo rightlie,
but onlie wiſedome? Euen ſo I without the ſame
ſhould neuer haue knowne your iniquitie, and ſo conſequentlie
I ſhould neuer haue found out a iuſt cauſe
to condemne you: for it is verie manifeſt, that couetouſneſſe
neuer iudgeth anie thing to be vnlawfull, becauſe
it hath no place but amongſt ſuch as are wicked,
which is it that cauſed you to thinke it lawfull to commit
whoredome with your bondwoman, then to denie
the fact, and to forſweare your ſelfe, becauſe you would
not make her free, deſiring rather to preiudice the law,
then to hinder your profit; and afterwards being caſt in
priſon for yout faults, you would yet further defraud
your creditors, in not conſenting to the ſale of him,
who (if he be not your ſonne) ſtandeth you in no ſtead,
but to burthen you with a further charge: and eſpeciallie
hindering his mother, he is the cauſe that ſhe cannot
applie her buſineſſe to get your liuing and her owne, ſo
that they doe both helpe to conſume and waſt that little
which remaineth to paie the creditors, or that which
you haue hidden to deceiue them. If he be not your
ſonne, whie would you keepe him? To ſerue for a witneſſe
of your ſeruants ſhame? Doe you not know that
he which cleaueth vnto vices, maketh them his owne?
It is no charitie to keepe a child to be your ſlaue, and

leſſe charitie is it, not to conſent to haue him ſold to
paie your debts. Touching your demand, why I doe
not ſell your other goods? I anſwere, there is time enough,
but I would firſt begin with that which was
leaſt profitable vnto you, and yet of great charge; and if
you allow not this reaſon, I did it to make the truth
knowne vnto others as wel as to me it is, that he is your
child; wherein I doe ſufficientlie declare, that I do not
onlie ioine mercie with iuſtice, but alſo that I doe further
therevnto ad wiſedome, to make vp the number
more perfect; for without it iuſtice ſeemeth to be rigor,
and mercie no better then follie: for what greater fooliſhneſſe
can there be, then to pittie ſuch a one as hurteth
others? as this infant hurteth you and your creditors;
therefore if he be not your ſonne let him be ſold,
and if you haue begotten him, make his mother free.
Wherevpon doe you appeale? Becauſe I haue not likewiſe
condemned you for periurie? The ſame may yet
be done all in good time, the deed being prooued. You
do alſo ſaie, that it were better to ſel the mother and the
child together, it would be more indeed the childs profit:
but it muſt bee conſidered that manie would willinglie
haue a child in their houſe to make them ſome
ſport, and afterwards to doe them ſome ſeruice, which
would not be troubled with a whoore, that can be nothing
but a ſlander, and an ill example for all their houſhold.
For all theſe foreſaid reaſons, it may be gathered
that I haue no deſire either to harme the innocent, or
to hurt the afflicted, but mine intention is to haue the
father acknowledge his child, and that the mother
ſhould be recompenced as reaſon requireth.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 25.
               
                  Of a Generall who after he had loſt the battaile, ſent
to the Prince to know if he ſhould giue the battaile.
               
               
                  A King ſent his Lieutenant Generall to
the warres, with an expreſſe charge not
to giue any Generall battaile without he
did firſt aduertiſe his Maieſtie thereof.
It happened that occaſion offered ſuch
an aduantage, that the ſaid Lieutenant
(notwithſtanding the Kings commandement)
did fight a battaile: but as the
wars are caſuall, and that oftentimes fortune croſseth the vertuous,
ſo he loſt the ſaid battaile, and preſently afterwards hee
ſent a poſt vnto the king to tell him that ſuch an occaſion was
offered vnto him to giue the battaile, as was greatly vnto his
aduantage, and declared ſuch apparent reaſons, as the Prince
appointed that the battaile ſhould be giuen, then the meſsenger
ſaid: If it like your Maieſtie the battaile hath ben giuen with
all ſuch order and policie as was requiſit, notwithſtanding wee
haue loſt the field: The King being exceeding angrie, cauſed
the meſſenger to be hanged, and the Lieutenant Generall to bee
taken and condemned him to death, who appealed, defending
his cauſe thus:
               IN vaine doe Princes ſend thoſe vnto the wars, whoſe
hands they keepe tied, and trulie it may be ſaid that I
was ſent in ſuch ſort: Neuertheleſſe, ſeeing the likelihood
of a profitable victorie, to finiſh the wars to the

great honor and commoditie of my Prince and countrie,
the band of his commaundement vnloſed of it
ſelfe, and leauing me at my libertie, I did my beſt, although
fortune enemy to vertue ſo wrought againſt vs,
as the effect prooued not according to the likelihood
of the deed, and the deſire of the doer, but what ſhall I
ſay? That I can do what men may doe onlie, fight a battaile,
but God alone muſt giue the victorie: The which
oftentimes either he delaieth or ſuffereth it whollie to
be loſt for the ſinnes of the people, when God ſeeth
that their pride and other vices are not yet left: moreouer,
it happeneth manie times that God will puniſh the
inſolencie of the ſouldiors, vſing the enemies as inſtruments
of his iuſtice; Was not the battaile loſt by the
children of Iſraell before Hai, onlie for the theft of Achan?
Was not alſo the whole hoſt troubled, and Ionathas
in danger of death becauſe he had taſted a little honie?
With a number of other examples which I ouerpaſſe
becauſe I will not be tedious. Alas how hard are
mens actions to be effected, without his great danger
that imploieth himſelf therein? And principallie when
the iudgement of the performance thereof dependeth
vpon one mans voice onely? Wherefore O Prince I
ſay, that you alone cannot iudge me, much leſſe condemne
me, except you doe it of your owne abſolute
authoritie, which vndoubtedly were manifeſt tirannie,
the which I thinke you doe verie much abhorre: conſidering
that you alone cannot be a head without members,
and that in this deed of mine the members are alſo
interreſſed, that is to ſay, if I haue offended, they are
to puniſh me, and not hauing offended, they ought to
preſerue me, to performe ſome good ſeruice: for it is a
matter of no ſmall importance for them to ſaue or loſe

ſuch a man, whom you haue thought worthie to be the
onlie Generall of your wars: and I doubt whether you
alone may make a decree that I ſhall not fight, except
alſo you your ſelfe may command me to doe it: for ſeeing
the loſſe is more hurtfull vnto the people, then to
the Prince, wherefore ought he to be the onlie iudge
of a deed, wherein the Generall profit, or loſſe of the
comminaltie conſiſteth? For bee it loſſe or gaine, the
people muſt maintaine the Princes eſtate, and eſpecially
when they loſe moſt, then are they moſt of all burthened
with impoſts and lendings, to reſiſt the enemie, and
to ſatiſfie the Princes pleaſure: wherevpon it may be inferred
that if I haue offended, it is more to the preiudice
of the people then the Prince: notwithſtanding I
am content to ſubmit my ſelfe vnto their iudgement,
truſting that they will haue no leſſe reſpect to the ſeruices
which heretofore I haue done, and to thoſe which
hereafter I may yet doe, then vnto the good meaning
that I had to performe this laſt ſeruice well, although
God (it may be for a greater good) would not ſuffer me
to haue the victorie, being as likely as it was deſired.
               
                  The Princes Anſwere.
                  YOur excuſe aggrauateth your crime, ſaieng that you
did your dutie, and yet deſpiſed his commandement,
whoſe mind therin you knew not. Did you know
the reaſon why he forbad you to fight? Thinke you
that he was altogether ignorant what the enemies were
able to doe; and that they might be ouercome rather
by temporiſing then by anie ſtroke ſtriking? Doe you
thinke your ſelfe wiſer then that great Fabius, who rather
deſired to be counted a coward, then to loſe the

Romane Citizens, who in that ſort temporiſing with
great patience, was in the end the conqueror of that furious
Hanniball. Doe you not know, that before a man
can command, he muſt know how to obey? the which
you had no deſire to do; You would willingly haue the
ſouldiors obey you in doing badlie, and you would
not obey the Pirince in doing well, what would they
ſaie of you, if they were liuing? M. Manlius Torquatus,
Aulus Poſthumus Tubero, and Epaminundas, they cauſed
their owne ſonnes to die for tranſgreſſing, nay, rather
for fighting againſt their commandement, yet had
they the victorie; O how happie was that world then,
when nothing was impoſſible vnto thoſe warriors ſo
well diſciplined! It is alwaies the cuſtome of the raſh
and braineſicke men, to attribute their faults to the will
of God, to fortune, to the ſinne of the people, Prince, or
ſouldiors, as you doe; forgetting your owne, together
with your diſobedience, which being diſpleaſing both
to God and men, can bring forth nothing that good is:
then you mocking the Prince after the battaile is loſt,
doe demand whether you ſhall fight it, alleaging ſo manie
reaſons (it may be forged) that it were impoſſible to
loſe it: and that which is worſt, heaping ſinne vpon ſin,
you bring the princes authoritie in queſtion, and ſtirre
vp the people againſt him, but your owne reaſons doe
confound you, for doe not all the members obey the
head? The head being greeued, are not all the members
pained? Yea, when manie members are loſt, the
head ſtill remaineth, and taketh care to preſerue the reſt,
as hitherto I both haue, and will ſtill preſerue my people
(God willing) who are not ſo impudent as to deſire
to take an account of your faults, knowing well, that as
that which concerneth the ſoule is referred vnto the diuine,

the diſeaſes of the bodie to the phiſition, and controuerſies
for goods to the iuſtice, ſo are matters of
warres and the gouernement thereof referred to the
prince: but how can you doe them anie good ſeruice,
ſeeing that you haue done your beſt to ouerthrow thē,
for your owne pleaſure? Trulie I ſhould haue thought
you alone worthie to be my Lieutenant Generall, if
you had knowne how to obey me: but not eſteeming
me for your Prince you cannot be my Lieutenant. Doe
you not know that in al affairs faults are not tollerable?
But eſpecially in the warres, where there needeth but
one to ouerthrow all, they are moſt hurtfull: where
haue you euer ſeene that it is lawfull for an offender to
change, or alter the lawes, much more then is it for him
to diminiſh or bring in queſtion the authoritie of your
Prince? But what would not you haue ben bold to attempt
if you had ben victor? Surely nothing, but euen
to haue attempted to make your ſelfe King. Finallie,
the people may remember both the good and bad
ſeruices that you haue done, and thoſe which you may
yet performe: but as for me I doe award him to be puniſhed,
who in ſtead of demanding mercie and pardon
for his offence, will procure a ſecond deſtruction, in
changing of auncient cuſtomes, whereby the people
haue ben all hether happilie gouerned, and preſerued:
for there was neuer anie alteration of laws or cuſtomes
without bringing a calamitie vpon that land wherein
they were begun.
               
            
            
               Declamation 26.
               
                  Of thoſe who were executed, becauſe they confeſſed
that they had murthered a man, afterward it was
found that they were guiltles.
               
               
                  
                  A Iudge (vpon ſome likelihood) cauſed two men
ſuſpected of murther to be racked: they confeſſe
the fact, and are put to death. Some certaine
time after their execution, he which was
ſuppoſed to be murthered returned home: whervpon
the kinsmen of thoſe that were executed accuſed the
iudge, ſaying:
               
                  ALaſſe how miſerable is that Commonwealth,
where thoſe that ought to adminiſter iuſtice,
and defend the innocents, doe (in ſteed of
protecting them frō danger) put them to a moſt ſhamefull
death: which trulie proceedeth by the admitting
of cruell and bloodie men to the ſeat of iuſtice: who
beſides their wicked nature, being accuſtomed to this
vice, would make vs to beleeue that iuſtice (which
ought to be the twinne ſiſter vnto mercie) conſiſteth in
nothing but in barbarous crueltie: ſuch a man is this
our worthie iudge, who vnder the coulor of I know
not what likelihood, becauſe he would not ſeeme to be
idle, hath tortured and tormēted two poore innocents
in ſuch ſort, that to eſcape from his hands, they haue
thought it a leſſe hurt, to die by the hands of the hangman,
then to remaine anie more at the diſcretion of
ſuch a iudge. Surelie it were better to pardon two malefactors,
then to put to death one innocent; but this
man hath rather cauſe two innocents to die, then he
himſelfe would not be an offender. The ioints of euery
righteous iudge ought to tremble, the hairs of his head
to ſtand vpright for feare, yea, & the heart to faint when
he thinketh, that by the authoritie of his voice (although
neuer ſo iuſt) one like vnto himſelf, (nay more)

reſembling the image of God, ſhould be put to death?
Seeing the fault for which he dieth cannot be recompenced;
wherefore Nero (who was accounted a monſter
for crueltie) had yet a kind of horror, when he ſigned
anie ſentence of death. You will ſaie that they are
put to death to terrifie others that are wickedlie minded.
I confeſſe it, but the ſame ought to bee done vnto
offenders. Alaſſe, if this iudge had beene as carefull to
haue ſifted out the truth (which at the laſt by time is
now brought to light) as he hath ben cruel to torment,
and readie to execute theſe poore innocents, neither
had they died ſo ſhamefullie, nor he liued to haue been
charged for the crime of their death: but who may
henceforth beleeue that the verie wicked ones can be
rightlie iudged, when the good haue beene ſo wilfullie
caſt away? Doe ſo much then O you rightful iudges,
that this vniuſt iudge may be no more neither of your
number, nor of the number of men, vnleſſe you will
all be partakers both of his crime and of his diſhonor.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  OF a truth that Commonwealth is miſerable, where
the iudges are ſuch as you ſay: and moſt happie
where they doe in no ſort ſwarue from the laws and cuſtomes
long ſince allowed of, which I haue wholly obſerued
and kept: For the law commandeth, and the cuſtome
is, that euerie man ſuſpected of crime, whereof
there is a verie apparent & ſufficient likelihood, ſhould
be put vnto the racke, although the iudge were neuar
ſo well perſuaded of his innocencie: and confeſſing
the ſame both vpon the racke, and when he is taken off,
that then he ſhould be puniſhed: ſurelie if I haue otherwiſe

proceeded, I am faultie; but hauing not done
amiſſe, I accuſe you for wronging me, and require that
you make me amends for diſhonouring me: conſider
that it is in a manner an offence for anie man to liue ſo
loſelie as that he may be ſuſpected to be a malefactor;
ſuch haue your kinsmen ben, for they were not onlie
ſuſpected of me, but generallie of all men, and it may
be of your ſelues, for you neuer offered to approue
their innocencie, vntill after their death: They ſhould
haue taken heed that they might not haue been ſuſpected.
In Athens and Rome, although Ariſtides and Cato
had ben accuſed of murther, yet neither the iudges nor
the people would euer haue beleeued it, ſo much is the
opinion of a man his ſinceritie able to do; which good
opinion was neuer had of your kinsmen: moreouer,
they ſhould not haue confeſſed the fact with their own
mouths, know you not that the iudge muſt not be partiall
on neither ſide? But he muſt iudge according to
the witneſſe of others, and the priſoners owne confeſſion▪
complaine then vpon thoſe who haue brought in
ſuch ſufficient proofe as cauſed them to be racked,
complaine alſo vpon their impatience and cowardlineſſe,
in that they would not indure the torture of the
racke, rather then die vpon the gallowes. I know well
inough what regard is to be had before we pronounce
the ſentence of death againſt anie man: As concerning
Nero it is well knowne that it was but hipocriſie in him,
although he ſeemed to haue a certaine horror when he
ſigned the ſentence of anie condemned man, for afterwards
it was apparently ſeene, that he cauſed manie innocents
and men of worth to die, and I verilie beleeue
that he would haue made no difficultie at al, vnleſſe the
partie condemned had beene a notable wicked fellow,

for euerie one do loue ſuch as are like vnto themſelues.
I did not prolong the execution, becauſe I would not
increaſe the affliction of the miſerable by long impriſonment,
as all iudges doe who are not ſubiect to corruption,
for the prolonging of a malefactors life is
both irkſome and hurtfull vnto him. To conclude, let
their proceſſe be throughlie examined, and if I haue
done anie iniuſtice I do ſubmit my ſelfe to be puniſhed,
if not, then I appoint theſe my accuſers to be ſo ſerued.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 27.
               
                  Of him that falling downe from the top of his houſe
ſlew another man, againſt whom the ſonne of the
ſlaine man demandeth iuſtice.
               
               
                  IT happened that in the countrie of the
Switzers a certaine countrieman being
got vpon the top of his houſe to ſee what
reparation was wanting, fell downe by
miſchance vpon another man who happened
to walke vnder the ſame houſe, &
with his fall he ſlew him, but himſelfe eſcaped.
The ſon of the dead man cauſed the other to be impriſoned,
and required that he might be put to death according to
the law, which ſaith, that euerie mankiller ought to die, and he
would not take anie other amends or ſatiſfaction: the iudge of
that place ſeeing his moſt cruell obſtinacie gaue ſentence, that
the ſaid plaintife ſhould aſcend vp to the top of the ſame houſe,
and throwing himſelfe downe vpon the defendant, ſhould kill
him if he could. The plaintife appealing before the Seignorie of
Berne ſaith.
               
                  
                  MY lords I beſeech you to conſider what men
our iudges are, who in ſteed of doing iuſtice
for the death of one of your ſubiects, will further
ad therevnto the death of another, or at
the leaſt compell him with the danger of his life to be
the executioner of himſelfe, or of another, or it may be
of both twaine together, which is a thing moſt abhominable,
and againſt all reaſon. Who hath euer heard
that the puniſhment of a murtherer hath ben executed
in this ſort? And that there was euer anie honeſt man
that on a ſuddaine was commanded to play the hangman
and to performe an execution ſo ſtrange? They
ſay that he fell downe by miſchance: as for me I thinke
that he did willinglie throw himſelfe downe vpon malice,
for els hee would at the leaſt haue giuen warning
vnto all men (as his dutie was) that he meant to goe vp
to the top of his houſe, that they might haue taken heed
of anie inconuenience that might chance as wel by the
falling of the tiles, as of the like of this that now is happened:
but if it were true that hee fell by miſchance,
why ſhould not he haue beene ſlaine as well as my father?
Conſider my lords that the malice of men was
neuer ſo great as at this day it is, and that they deui
                     •
                  e
manie means how they may hurt one another: and eſpeciallie
thoſe in whom malice is rooted, which is neuer
ſhowne but when it maie doe moſt hurt.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     COnſider my Lords the malice together with
the ignorance of this man, who heaping miſchiefe
vpon miſchief, would make of one miſchance
twaine. Is it not inough that one honeſt

man be dead, But that another muſt againſt reaſon
die alſo? Muſt the Commonwealth be in ſuch ſort
maintained? Were it not better that this man ſhould
be preſerued to helpe to defend the countrie if need
were? Do we not know that ſomtimes one man is more
woorth then an hundred? Is not he of the ſame lumpe
as they were, who in times paſt, by their valiant deeds
in armes, were able to winne that libertie which we do
now inioy? (Thanks be to God, and to the inuiolable
iuſtice of this moſt noble Senat) Suffer not then my
lords the will of this fooliſh malicious man to be fulfilled,
vnto whom the defendant hath offered ſuch a ſatiſfaction
as is more then reaſonable: but he being void
of all reaſon, hath by his moſt greeuous obſtinacie conſtrained
vs to giue this ſentence, which was no leſſe abſurd
then his requeſt vnreaſonable, being very ſure that
he would neuer effect it: and for anſwere vnto his friuolous
aſſertions, we will only ſay that the defendant
had occaſion to be vpon his houſe top, and the father
of the plantife had nothing to doe beneath, or before
the ſame: not that the other neuertheleſſe had anie deſire
to hurt him, but is extreamelie ſorrie for it, neither
is it likelie (although he had borne him neuer ſo ill wil)
that he durſt haue hazarded his owne life in that ſort,
but he would rather haue thrown a tile at al aduentures
and afterwards haue come downe on the other ſide
ſaying that he did it not. Laſtlie, the malice and enuie
wherewith he would ſlander another, is too apparent
in himſelfe; Wherefore it may pleaſe you (moſt mercifull
lords) to giue ſuch iudgement as this your ſubiect
being innocent, may be preſerued to doe his countrie
ſome ſeruice.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 28.
               
                  Of him that cauſed his wiues chaſtity to be tempted,
that thereby he might haue ſome cauſe to put her
away.
               
               
                  A Certaine man cauſed his wiues chaſtitie to bee
tempted by his ſeruant, that was hoth faire and
yoong, who was many times ſo importunate with
her, that at the length her husband (being hidden
in the garden) did heare how ſhe promiſed
vnto her fained louer, that ſhe would yeeld vnto his deſire, the
firſt time that her ſaid husband ſhould ride into the countrie.
Wherevpon he accuſed her to be an adultereſse, and would haue
put her away, ſaying:
               NOt in vaine doth Salomon ſay, that a vertuous woman
is a crowne vnto her husband, but ſhe that behaueth
her ſelf diſhoneſtly is a corruption in his bones:
Alaſſe I did ſuppoſe that I had had a vertuous wife, but
ſhe proueth quite contrarie, wherfore I am conſtrained
to forſake her, although the wife ought to be no other,
then the better part of the husband ſo long as ſhe is
knowne to be honeſt, but if ſhe be otherwiſe, reaſon
willeth him to make no longer account of her, for marriage
being a figure of God and his church, it ought to
be altogether pure and immaculat: moreouer the man
and the woman by this means ought to be as the ſoule
and bodie, which cannot be ſeperated but by death:
but finallie I know to my great diſcredit, that he which
taketh a wife is aſſured of a great danger, ſeeing that

mine without anie occaſion (hauing whatſoeuer a woman
of her degree might deſire) hath giuen her ſelfe
ouer vnto ſuch a one as was euen but my ſeruant: what
ſhould not then ſome noble or worthie man haue obtained
at her hands if he had likewiſe tried her: but ſhe
not being courted by anie other, yeelded vnto the firſt,
as alſo becauſe all laſciuious women do very well know
that ſuch men as liue without care are beſt able to ſatiſfie
their luſt, which is the onlie cauſe that they doe rather
frequent the companie of Lackies and Monkes
who are fed without anie care or coſt of their own: but
what a foole am I to complaine, and ſay that this is the
firſt offence, ſeeing that this perchance is not the hundreth
man that hath obtained whatſoeuer he required
of her, for commonlie manie faults are committed before
that one be eſpied: but when one is diſcloſed, it
conſtraineth a man to be ſuſpitious of many more: and
that woman may well be tearmed ſhameleſſe, which
ſuffereth her tongue to promiſe the performance of
ſuch a villanie: eſpeciallie ſeeing thoſe that are moſt impudent,
deſire that men ſhould thinke that they are not
lightlie to be wone, but that with much courting, large
offers, and round rewards, they are rather inforced to
yeeld, then vpon no conſideration at all to promiſe a
victorie. I maruaile much why anie woman can for
ſhame liue to ſhew her face, when ſhe her ſelfe by her
owne tongue condemneth her reputation: O an hundredfold
miſerable are they, that for ſo fraile a ſolace
doe buy a perpetuall ſorrow: but what goodneſſe can
there be in that woman which hath loſt her chaſtetie?
The which was well knowne of Suſanna, Lucrece, and
the Grecian Hippo who did leape into the ſea, chuſing
there to die rather then ſhe would loſe her chaſtitie, beſides

manie others, who ought to ſerue for an example
vnto our matrons, but they had rather imitate Flora,
Thais, and Lamia, wherefore as they doe deſerue to be
heires of their vice, ſo likewiſe ought they to inherite
the ſame renoune: as for me I am ſure if I doe remaine
anie longer with this woman, that not onlie my goods
and credit, but alſo my bodie and ſoule ſhall be in danger
of loſing, for ſuch as are harlots do ſteale from their
husbands to giue their companions, and ſometimes
they make them their husbands murtherers, at ſuch a
time when as ſoule and bodie do both periſh together:
to preuent ſo great a miſchiefe (I ſpeake to you my maiſters
that are her kinsmen) I know not what your kinswoman
was when you gaue her to me, but I am verie
ſure that I redeliuer her vnto you a moſt diſhoneſt woman,
wherefore I do but my dutie in putting her away,
ſeeing that Caeſar did put away his wife, becauſe hee
found Claudius in his houſe apparelled like a woman at
ſuch time as the women were about their ſacrifice, and
not knowing whether hee meant to haue defiled his
wife, he only alleaged this for all his reaſon: It behooueth
(ſaith he) the wife of Caeſar to be as free from ſuſpition,
as ſhe ought to be from fault: receiue then your
kinswoman charged with an euident crime.
               
                  The Anſwere of the kinsmen, beginning at the
end of the accuſation.
                  O What a prowd fellow is this, that would compare
himſelfe vnto Caeſar, O what a great credit he doth
himſelfe in thinking to diſcredit vs, when he ſaith, That
he knoweth not what our kinswoman was when ſhee
came vnto him: but that he knoweth well how he reſtoreth

her vnto vs worſe then diſhoneſt, trulie he hath
made a faire peece of worke, in cauſing her to be tempted,
to make her ſeeme ſuch a one: in ſooth that man
which wil be a baud vnto his wife, doth deſerue (as you
doe) to loſe his goods, life, reputation, and ſoule alſo.
We know well inough, that the beſt part in a woman is
her chaſtitie, and how much they are to preferre it before
all other graces: ſo alſo you cannot denie but that
the diſhoneſty conſiſteth in the deed, and not in a word
ſpoken without knowing to what intent: what can you
tell whether ſhe promiſed him for feare leaſt he would
haue forced her, ſeeing her alone? Or becauſe ſhe wold
cauſe you to know the vnfaithfulneſſe of your ſeruant,
and by that means conſerue both your credite and her
owne? Neither doe wee likewiſe denie that ſhe hath
made a promiſe vnto the firſt that courted her, for being
vertuous, and ſo knowne, there was neuer anie man
that durſt be ſo bold to aske her anie ſuch matter, as alſo
your ſeruant durſt not haue preſumed, if you your
ſelfe had not incouraged him: he then which ſeeketh
for that which he would not find, ought not to complaine,
if he find that which he would not haue ſought:
but it is verie likely that your ſelfe was verie certain that
ſhe would neuer haue performed her promiſe, ſeeing
you had no will to ſee the triall thereof, for what could
you haue loſt thereby, if ſhee bee ſuch a one as you ſay
ſhe is? But you know verie well that ſhe is better then
you deſerue: therefore becauſe you hated her vertue,
you would be rid of her: ſurely you alleage Salomon verie
well for your aduantage, as you thinke; and you ſay
not amiſſe when you affirme, that the wife ought to be
the better halfe of her husband, for certainlie the ſame
is ſeene in our kinswoman, ſeeing that you are of no account

at all, wherefore you doe not deſerue that ſhee
ſhould be your crowne. Laſtly were ſhe leſſe honeſt, ſhe
might denie that which you cannot proue, but ſeeing
that ſhe hath made no promiſe, but to quite her ſelfe
and to ſaue your reputation and her owne: we require
that you may firſt make amends for ſlandering her, and
afterwards we will not refuſe to take her away from
ſuch a wicked man as you are.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 29.
               
                  Of a baſtard who demanded the performance of his
fathers will, although the houſe and the goods
were burned.
               
               
                  A Man making his laſt Will and teſtament,
left all his goods vnto two of his
ſonnes lawfully begotten, vpon condition
that they ſhould giue a thouſand crowns
vnto his baſtard. Now it chanced that
during the funerals, the houſe, and the
moſt of the beſt ſtuffe therein was burned,
ſo that the remainder of all the
goods and mooueables that were left, amounted not to three
thouſand crowns: Neuertheleſse the baſtard demandeth a thouſand
thereof, the eldeſt ſonne conſented, the yoonger reſiſted
it, ſaying:
               VVHat reaſon is there to giue a greater portion
vnto a baſtard, then is left for the lawfull
children? Seeing the miſchance that is happened,
moreouer it is to be doubted whether our father
might or ought to make a will in ſuch ſort, ſeeing

that reaſon bindeth the fathers ſo ſoone as they haue
children, to beleeue that they (being no other then true
adminiſtrators of their goods) ought to leaue them vnto
their children, at the leaſt in ſuch quantitie as they
haue receiued them from their fathers: but let vs inquire
of this claiming baſtard, (that with ſo great inſtance
demandeth the accompliſhment of our fathers
laſt Will) that if he had bequeathed him an hundred
blowes with a ſtaffe, whether he would willinglie receiue
them? I beleeue he would not: or if he had impoſed
him to doe ſome great pennance for him, or to
accompliſh ſome great vow or pilgrimage, a man ſhold
then haue ſeene how readie he would be to performe
it: but for the moſt part it is a cuſtome that thoſe which
haue ſtood the dead in no ſtead, except it be to diſcredit
them, will neuertheleſſe deſire the beſt part of their
goods, before thoſe that haue better deſerued them:
but what is he? Vnleſſe he bee ſuch a one as he ſaith;
That is, a manifeſt witneſſe of our fathers ſhame: and
if he be not ſuch a one, what is that which he requireth,
and wherfore doth he claime it? Eſpeciallie ſeeing that
ſuch a miſchance is happened, as the beſt part of our
goods is loſt before that anie part of the Teſtament
could be performed. As for my brother, if he will giue
away his goods, I will not hinder him, but I will keepe
mine if I can: and the rather, becauſe that if the worſt
doe happen, yet cannot he claime anie further part in
our goods but onlie ſuch a reaſonable portion, according
to the value of it now (conſidering our loſſe) as
may proportionablie anſwere the value of that which
it was worth at the ſame time when the Wil was made;
and yet if I doe beſtow this liberalitie vpon him, it is
for the loue of our late deceaſſed father, and not for his
owne ſake.
               
                  
                  The Anſwere.
                  THe iudges are too iuſt to allow your ſaying, and
yet more righteous ſhould they be if they cauſed
him to be chaſtiſed, that maketh a doubt whether
his father may diſpoſe his goods at his owne pleaſure,
hauing as he had a good vnderſtanding, and a perfect
memorie, ſo that he remembring me, how obedient
and ſeruiceable I was alwaies vnto him, was deſirous to
ſhew that he knew thereby that I was vndoubtedly his
ſonne, and for ſuch a one was he willing to acknowledge
me, giuing me a certaine portion of thoſe goods
which were his, and none of yours: wherefore it muſt
no more be demanded who I am, what I require, or
why? For I tell you that I am ſon to the teſtator, which
you ſay was your father, I doe demand a thouſand
crowns, becauſe that his Will declareth that you ſhould
giue them vnto me: but as for the blowes with a ſtaffe
whereof you ſpeake, I thinke they are rather due vnto
you, in that you deſire to abuſe your fathers ſoule: what
doe you know if by this meanes, he was deſirous to
vnburthen his ſoule of the ſinne that he hath committed
in begetting me, leſſe in reputation then you? concerning
the vows and pilgrimages, if they had ben enioined
me, I would haue acquited my ſelfe therein
more willingly then you doe in that wherevnto you
were inioined: but you would iudge my heart by the
malice of your owne, wherefore not I, but your ſelfe
ſerue for a diſcredit vnto our father; for ſome may think
that for want of good education and chaſtiſement you
are become ſo miſcheeuous▪ moreouer, I neither can
in anie thing, nor for anie thing be partaker of your

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
loſſe, ſeeing that ſince the deceaſſe of our father, you
haue had the goods in your poſſeſſion: if you had giuen
them me to keepe, I ſhould haue ben bound to anſwere
it, but not being ſo, I will not forgiue you anie
thing: and like as you ſay that you will keep your own,
euen ſo will I get mine owne if I can, and if I ought to
forgiue any part thereof, it ſhal be rather vnto your brother
then to you, becauſe he will not deceiue me; but as
the worſt wheele in the cart maketh the greateſt noiſe,
and vildeſt beaſt in the Heard is moſt ſtubborn and vntoward
to rule, euen ſo the example of your brother
manifeſteth your iniquitie, and ſheweth that you are
contrarie to his iuſt meaning, the which neuertheleſſe
by the helpe of God, and the righteous fauour of the
iudge, ſhal but redound to your ſhame and hinderance.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 30.
               
                  Of a knight of Rhodes, that would enter into Religion
again, after that he had giuen ouer his Order,
to take a wife.
               
               
                  WHileſt the Knights were yet remaining in
Rhodes, a certaine knight amongſt them gaue
ouer his charge vnto the great maiſter of that
order, and by vertue of a diſpenſation did betroth
himſelfe vnto a yong gentlewoman: but
vpon the marriage day he vnderſtood that ſhe was his couſ
                     •••
                  
Germaine, whereupon he leauing her, requireth to be receaued
againe into the order of the knights, and that his charge
might be reſtored vnto him, but the great maiſter hauing alreadie
beſtowed the ſame, denied him both the one and the other,
ſaying:
               
                  
                  IT is verie vnſeemely for a wiſeman to ſay, I
thought not vpon anie ſuch, or the like matter:
for a diſcreet man ſhould diligently foreſee
all things before he determine anie thing,
and trulie he that is not wiſe and very diſcreet, deſerueth
not to be a knight, much les a knight of this order,
and a commander, ſeeing no knights are more worthy
then they; becauſe they keepe euen the very key of
Chriſtendome. Wherefore you muſt not thinke (gentleman)
that the forſaking, and receiuing againe into
this holie order of our knighthood, is ſo eaſie to bee
done as it is in the courts of ſome Prince, where for
the moſt part, it is ſufficient if they be but only knights
in name, or as it is commonly ſaid, dubbed but with a
Virgin ſword: for in our order aboue all thinges, conſtancie
ioined with prudence and diſcretion is requiſit,
ſo that finding none of theſe three to remain in you,
I cannot deeme you worthy to enter into this order, &
much leſſe to repoſſeſſe a place of command: but it may
be that this preſumption of yours proceedeth becauſe
you were ouer eaſily admitted at the firſt; know then
that it was vpon the hope, that being yoong, and frequenting
the companie of ancient knights, you might
eaſily imitate their valor, wherein you ſhewing ſome
likelihood there was a commanders place beſtowed
vpon you to incourage you therein altogether, but you
haue greatly deceiued our hope, when without anie
conſideration at all you haue giuen ouer ſo great a credit
and honor, to wed ſuch a one with whome you had
no acquaintaince at all: is there anie follie more great
then to leaue a certaintie for an incertaintie? If you
committed this fault becauſe you were in loue with

the gentlewoman, you condemne your ſelfe to be voluptuous,
and ſo conſequently vnworthie of our Order,
where you haue made a vow of chaſtitie, which is
maintained by the exerciſe of the bodie, and by 
                     •
                  aſting:
wherefore S. Barnard ſaid well vnto his Monks;
Eat you ſo ſparingly, that the remembrance of bread
may be rather in your mind, then the deſire of luſt: by
this meanes the good knights doe harden themſelues
and learne to ſuffer conſtantly the extremitie of a ſiege
or of a long ſea voiage. If you haue done it through
ambition, you are as little excuſable, Becauſe that ambition
is like vnto a fire which burneth all before it, and
neuer dieth ſo long as anie thing remaineth to maintain
it: and alſo becauſe it iudgeth all things to be lawfull;
our order can neuer put anie truſt in you; or if
you haue forſaken the order becauſe you make no great
account of it, You will neuer doe anie good for it:
You may anſwere that the good is ſildome knowne before
it be loſt, I replie vnto you that they which neither
doe know, nor haue knowne what is good, and
therefore haue ſuffered it to be loſt, deſerue in no ſort
to haue it againe: therefore it is your beſt way to purchaſe
it by ſome other means. Doe you ſay that your
felicitie depended only vpon this marriage? Then afterwards
ſeeing you could not accompliſh it, you wold
require againe that which you haue forſaken, without
anie other reaſon: you know that our profeſſion is to
war againſt the Turke, wherefore the onely meanes to
reobtaine that which you demand of vs, is to imploy
your ſelfe in ſuch ſort againſt our enemie, as we may
know the ſame valor, diſcretion, prudence, & conſtancie
to be remaining in you, which hetherto you haue
not ſhowne: then forgetting all former faults, we ſhall

imagine how we may honor and reward you again, as
already we haue done, vpon hope that you ſhould haue
ben ſuch a one as you ought, and yet may if you endeuour
your ſelfe ſo to be.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  TRulie that man is moſt wiſe who premeditateth
and foreſeeth whatſoeuer may afterwards happen,
but I would faine know where ſuch men are
to be found, that I might dwell amongſt them as their
ſlaue if otherwiſe I could not? For ſo yet ſhould I eſteeme
my ſelfe happie; but I beleeue that ſuch men are
more rare then the Phoenix: for that point which you
require to be in me, paſſeth all humane power, becauſe
that either ſecretlie or openlie the moſt part of men do
know wel that manie matters doe fall out far otherwiſe
then they would euer haue thought they ſhould, and
diuers chances may happen vnto them whereof they
neuer imagined. Moreouer, I am not ignorant that all
theſe perfections which you alleage, are required in
him which will be a knight: I do likewiſe conſider the
worthineſſe of our order, and doe know that the obtaining,
giuing ouer, and reobtaining of the ſame is difficult:
and ſo will it bee as hardlie prooued that I am
leſſe worthie then the moſt part of thoſe that are of
the ſame order, the which I will prooue bodie to bodie
againſt thoſe which will or dare maintaine the contrarie;
and it is a ſpeciall point to bee doubted whether I
haue left the ſame or no, ſeeing that the effect for
which I deſired leaue to depart is not accompliſhed. I
departed to bee maried, but am I ſo for all that? No
ſurely; for it is impoſſible that ſo I ſhould be, becauſe it

was not lawfull: doe you not know that marriages are
made in heauen, and effected here on earth? What can
you tel whether it was Gods pleaſur that by this means
onlie I ſhould come to the knowledge of my kinswoman?
Whom eſpeciallie, before I knew her, I loued
with a ſincere and chaſt loue, prouoked thereunto by
an honeſt inſtinct of nature, and now by the will of
God made manifeſt, to make you know that neither
voluptuouſneſſe nor ambition induced me to loue her,
but onlie the neereneſſe of blood, which yet being vnknowne,
might notwithſtanding moue the hearts of
men: being then not departed for anie ſuch cauſe
wherewith you wrongfullie accuſe me; I ſay and doe
maintain that not only I may, but I alſo ought to re-enter
againe into mine order: yea and you might and
ought to conſtraine me thereunto, ſeeing that the effect
for the which I gaue it ouer hath not accordinglie ſucceeded:
but ſince I ſee, chieflie by your ſlanderous reproches,
that you are wholie bent againſt me, I appeale
from your will to the cenſure of al the members of this
order, without whom you cannot be Generall, were
you a thouſand times greater then you are.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 31.
               
                  Of a Iudge who paied three thouſand crowns to
cauſe a murtherer to be hanged.
               
               
                  A Certaine nation receaued one to be their prince,
who maketh an oath, that he will maintaine
them in all their priuiledges, rights, and cuſtomes:
It happened that the iudge appointed by
the ſame Prince would haue cauſed a murtherer

to be hanged: the kinsmen of the malefactor doe proue by
their priuiledges, that he might redeeme his life for three thouſand
crownes: the iudge cauſed him to be hanged, and paied
himſelfe three thouſand crownes for hauing put him to death;
his kindred appeale vnto the Prince, and ſay:
               
                  MOſt mightie and iuſt Prince, the renowne of
your equitie hath incited vs to become your
moſt loiall, moſt louing, moſt humble, & moſt
faithfull ſubiects, and to chuſe you for our ſoueraigne
Prince, and moſt redoubted lord: whereby
this good is happened vnto vs, that we haue alwaies
found in you ſuch iuſtice and bountie as is requiſite; as
alſo your Maieſtie ſhall euer find in vs all dutifull obedience:
but what ſhall we ſaie? Seeing that this happineſſe
of your good meaning, is abuſed by the malice of
your miniſters, and eſpeciallie by the chiefeſt, which is
hee that ought to adminiſter vnto vs iuſtice in your
behalfe, and to haue a reſpect that wee maie bee maintained
in our rights, priuiledges, and cuſtomes, according
as it hath pleaſed your Maieſtie to take your oath:
but he which is our iudge hath had iuſtice in deriſion,
and vnder the ſhaddow thereof hath committed crueltie,
for hauing condemned one of our Citizens to die
for a manſlaughter, wee ſhewed him that which he
ought not to be ignorant of, that is to ſaie, how our priuiledges
doe permit that ſuch a treſpaſſe maie be ſatiſfied
with the paiment of three thouſand crowns, appliable
according to the ordināces in ſuch caſes prouided,
whervpon he hath therby taken an occaſion to put one
of our Citizens to an ignominious death, to the great
diſhonor of all his linage, ſaieng that he ſhall be acquited
in paieng the ſaid forfeit; as if there were no difference

betweene the killing of a man in cold blood,
through a certaine malice or contempt (eſpeciallie in
deriſion of iuſtice of the Commonwealth, and of the
lawes and priuiledges therof, to cauſe one die ſhamefullie▪
and cruelly by the hands of an hangman) and the
flaying of ones enemie, by whom a man is prouoked
therevnto through ſome wrong, or other iuſt cauſe of
malice. But wherein you vniuſt iudge had this our Citizen
offended you? Seeing that you haue no part in the
Commonwealth, but like an hired ſeruant in a houſe,
you are to abide therein onelie the appointed time of
your office, which is giuen vnto you not to aboliſh our
priuiledges, but to maintaine them: all the other Citizens
were more intereſſed in this fact then you, and neuetheleſſe
you alone haue beene deſirous of reuenge;
trulie crueltie becommeth no man, but it is moſt odious
in Princes and Iudges, more then in anie others:
ſeeing that our Prince is altogether free from this vice,
ought not you to follow his example? Or at the leaſt
you ought not to haue erred from the ſame ſo reprochfullie.
If too ſharpe and rigorous laws are made more
to terrifie men then to deſtroie them, wherefore haue
you rather deſired to aggrauate our lawes then to performe
them? Who hath made you more wiſe then our
Anceſtors, who haue inuented this priuiledge for the
conſeruation of the Citizens? Doe you not know that
iuſtice without mercie is iniuſtice? How great crueltie
is it then, to turne mercie into rigor? Moſt vniuſt is the
ſentence which preuenteth iudgement, and ſuch hath
yours ben, for crueltie depriued you of all iudgement
when you pronounced the ſame. Doe you not know
that whileſt you iudge other men, God iudgeth you?
How would you doe then if hee ſhould iudge you according

to your your deſerts? But who hath mooued
you to commit this new crueltie? Doe you not know
that all innouation of laws & cuſtomes is no leſſe dangerous
then ſcandalous? To conclude, you haue offended
the Prince in reſiſting of his oath, and wronged
his ſubiects in breaking their pruiledges: both the one
and the other offence deſerueth death: wherevpon we
beſeech you (moſt righteous Prince) that he which
hath contemned your authoritie, iuſtice, and our priuiledges,
may bee puniſhed, that all the Iudges hereafter
may thereby take an example; Seeing that if our enemies
had not giuen him the monie, he would neuer
haue purchaſed at ſo great a charge, an vnlawful means
to exerciſe his crueltie againſt your ſubiect, and our
priuiledges.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IF anie law be vniuſt or pernicious, it is that which is
not equall to all men; but how can that be equall
which cauſeth the greateſt malefactors to eſcape for
monie? As this priuiledge doth allow, which imboldeneth
the rich that ought to ſuccour the poore, not only
to wrong them, but alſo to murther them, becauſe hee
knoweth verie well that he ſhall be acquited for monie,
the which being paied, he afterwards committeth a
thouſand miſchiefs to get that which he hath ſpent, into
his purſe againe: for what wickedneſſe will not ſuch
a one be bold to commit, that maketh no conſcience to
kill his equall? Or it may be ſuch a one as is better then
himſelfe? But if the law or your priuiledge bee vniuſt,
then haue not I offended: Or if I haue miſdone, in paieng
the forfeiture I am acquited. Why ſhould he be

puniſhed which procureth the death of a malefactor;
Seeing that hee which murthereth an innocent is quit
for monie? Concerning the difference of cold blood,
and to cauſe one to die by the hands of the hangman,
that doth in no ſort aggrauate the offence: for being an
offender, he hath thereby had the better means to acknowledge
his fault, and to craue pardon of God, eſpeciallie
to diſpoſe of his worldlie cares and familie, the
which he gaue no leiſure vnto the other to doe: and for
the reproch, it conſiſteth not in the maner of the death,
but in the cauſe of the death; For if anie man ſhould
be hanged for hauing done ſome good vnto his countrie,
his death ſhould neuertheleſſe be accounted honourable,
but he which is hurtfull vnto the Commonwealth
(although hee die in his bed amongſt his kindred)
yet ſhould his death be accounted odious. It is
not I then that am cauſe of his ſhame, but the murther
which he hath committed. I confeſſe indeed that he
neuer offended me, but rather iuſtice; ſo likewiſe I cauſed
him not to die, but to maintain equitie: and not being
able to doe it without disburſing of monie, I did
rather chuſe to pay it, then to leaue iuſtice vndone. I
haue not infringed or broken your priuiledge, but onelie
ſhewed that it is vnlawfull, and that it ought to be amended.
I cannot tell whether your anceſtors were
more wiſe then I, but I dare well ſay that they were
rich men, who without the conſent of the poore men,
inuented this priuiledge: for there was neuer anie tyrannie
more manifeſt, which your ſelues ought to aboliſh,
you being ſubiect to a moſt iuſt Prince: therefore I
deſired to admoniſh you thereof at mine owne proper
coſts and charges. Likewiſe I know that I am not the
firſt which hath beene ſlandered for mine honeſt meaning,

in deſiring to change wicked cuſtomes into good;
for Solon and Licurgus were not free from the like, and
before them Moiſes, then Socrates who was put to
death for no other cauſe. But conſidering that Iuſtice alone
is the ſoueraigne of al other vertues, and ruleth all
mortall wights, becauſe that without her none can liue
in ſafetie, eſpeciallie ſeeing that without it the Commō
                     wealth
is like vnto a body which being corrupted with
euill humors doth with lanquiſhing pine away, I haue
neglected all other things, eſpeciallie to maintaine the
ſame; and you haue no cauſe to complaine on mee for
ſetting as little by my life as by my goods. Wherefore
without anſwering anie further to your ſlanderous reproches,
truſting vnto the equitie of the Prince, I doe
freelie ſubmit my goods, honour, and life vnto his moſt
iuſt iudgement.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 32.
               
                  Of thoſe that would depoſe the King becauſe he had
loſt the battaile.
               
               
                  IT is the cuſtome of a certaine people that
the men of warre doe chuſe the King. It
happeneth that the ſaid King doth lead
his men vnto the warres, where all his
ſouldiors are ouerthrowne, onely he with
a verie ſmall number eſcaped, ſo that the
Citizens and people are conſtrained to
take arms to defend them from the conquerors, and the better
to performe the ſame, they would chuſe another king: but the
foreſaid king reſiſteth them, ſaying:
               
                  
                  AS there is but one onelie God in heauen, and
one ſunne to lighten the world, ſo likewiſe
cannot you haue two kings ouer you, neither
yet can you depoſe or change your king at your pleaſure:
for the power of kings commeth of God, which
holdeth their hearts in his hand: how dare you then
but onlie thinke ſuch a wickedneſſe as to be deſirous to
change or depoſe him who is annointed and choſen of
God to raigne ouer you? Did not Dauid put him to
death which made his boaſt that he had ſlaine Saule?
And although that Dauid were already annointed king
of Iſraell, yet was king Saule not depoſed vntill his
death. You ſaie that I haue gouerned the warres ill, I
denie it: for I went thether my ſelfe, and neither wanting
valor nor skil, I did valiantlie fight to the great endangering
of mine owne perſon. I haue not neglected
my dutie in fighting, but God hath giuen the victorie
to the enemies: wherefore would God haue preſerued
me from ſo great a danger, vnleſſe it were to manifeſt
the eſpeciall care that he hath ouer kings, and that it
were his pleaſure that I ſhould yet raigne ouer you?
And not another? How dare you then imagine to
change him whom he hath firſt giuen vnto you, and
then afterwards ſo miraculouſlie preſerued? If you
ſtand in doubt whether I deſerue the dignitie or not,
the electiue voices of ſo manie valiant men, which
haue onlie iudged me aboue all the reſt of this realme
for the worthieſt to be your king, ought to aſſure you
thereof: but as hope dooth torment mens hearts no
leſſe then feare and other paſſions, ſo ſome of you hoping
to attaine vnto the kinglie dignitie, haue not the
patience to ſtay vntill it be void by my death whereby

it plainlie appeareth, that couetouſneſſe neuer iudgeth
anie thing to be vnlawfull: the people haue nothing
to doe to depoſe their king, but God by depriuing him
of life, who by his grace, and for your good, hath been
pleaſed to ſaue me: will you then contradict his will?
But although I had for want of skill beene the cauſe of
our loſſe, will you ſaie that you muſt needs chuſe another,
that maie doe as much or worſe? He which hath
once done amiſſe, may when he beginneth again make
amends, but thankes be to God as I want not experience,
ſo haue I not failed to doe that which was requiſit,
but it may be it was our ſinnes that haue prouoked
Gods wrath againſt vs, who by our contrition and amendment
of life is firſt to be appeaſed, then he being
mercifull vnto vs, we ſhall not onlie be reuenged of our
enemies, but he will alſo giue vs power to ſubdue thoſe
that would oppreſſe vs: yet that this ſhall be done vnder
any other thē I, whilſt I liue, I hope that good God
will neuer ſuffer it, ſeeing that to determine but ſuch a
matter were to heape ſin vpon ſin.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  WE doe neither require two kings, neither doe
we deſire to change our king, for we haue
none: who made you king ouer vs? are not
they dead that choſe you for their king? You are then
king ouer the dead: Wherfore reaſon would that you
ſhould be ſent vnto them. When you were choſen we
were Citizens, now through your fault we are conſtrained
to be ſouldiors. It is the ancient cuſtome that the
men of war doe chuſe the king, we wil then chuſe one;
Seeing that your ſelfe are the cauſe that we haue chaunged

our qualitie, what reaſon is there that you ſhould
remaine in yours? Concerning the example of Dauid
and Saule, it nothing concerneth our matter: for the
greateſt parte of euerie action conſiſteth in the time
and place; therefore it muſt be conſidered, that as our
time now▪ is not the like vnto the time then, ſo alſo that
we are here, and not in Paleſtine. Moreouer, we haue
nomore Prophets to annoint the kings, becauſe God
for our ſinnes dooth no more elect kings by miracle:
wherefore it commonlie happeneth, that the moſt wicked
man attaineth to that dignitie, and chieflie when
the election remaineth in the power of the ſouldiours:
for ſildome is there found anie equitie amongſt thoſe
that follow the wars, ſo that our miſerie is lamentable,
ſeeing that your ambitious raſhneſſe compelleth vs of
Citizens to become ſouldiours. We know well (to our
great preiudice) that you your ſelfe did goe vnto the
wars; but of your induſtrie, valor, and dutie, no man
beareth witneſſe except your ſelfe: but the widdowes
and orphants of thoſe whom you haue led vnto the
ſlaughter, with a far greater number, can witneſſe the
contrarie: and they doe affirme, that you had great
wrong to eſcape, becauſe ſo manie valiant men are loſt
through your default, the which is more puniſhable
then excuſable. To ſaie likewiſe that God hath preſerued
you by ſome his eſpeciall prouidence, it may verie
well be: becauſe he would ſend you back hether to receiue
puniſhment for your raſhneſſe, by that ſpectacle
ſomewhat to comfort the multitude of thoſe whom
you haue made miſerable: neither did the electiue voice
of the ſouldiors chuſe you as the beſt man of the land,
but as he that was moſt conformable to their deſire, and
that would giue them the moſt libertie to doe ill; for ſo

were Otho, Galba, Vitelius, and other harebrain men choſen
by the ſouldiors for Emperors. As for ambition and
couetouſneſſe, wherewith you accuſe vs by preſumption,
you doe euidentlie ſhew, that it remaineth in you.
In ſaieng alſo that he which hath once done amiſſe becommeth
afterwards more expert: the ſame is doubtfull,
for euen in his firſt fault he ſheweth that he wanteth
iudgement, and no man ought to preſume to make
himſelfe cunning by the preiudice of ſo manie others,
and with no leſſe then the hazard of a whole realme. In
euerie action it is odious to erre, but in the warres it is
moſt hurtfull, ſo that to doe amiſſe therein but one time
onlie, is far too much. We doe not depoſe you at all,
for henceforth you are king no more, neither yet ought
you to bee anie thing if wee ſhould iuſtlie proceed againſt
you, but we refer that vnto the diſcretion of the
king which ſhall be choſen. As concerning contrition
and good works to make ſatisfaction for our ſinnes, it
cannot chuſe but be a good deed to root out him from
amongſt vs which is the cauſe of our miſchiefe. To affirme
that God will neuer ſuffer vs to obtain the victorie
vnder anie other but you: You onlie ſaie it, and the
opinion of all the wiſeſt is quite contrarie, wherefore it
is beſt to follow the opinion of manie which haue not
as yet erred, then the iudgement of one onlie man,
which hath brought vs into this miſerie wherein wee
now remaine through his fault.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 33.
               
                  Of the Athenians who denied to pay vnto the Thebans
that which they ought.
               
               
                  
                  THe Athenians did owe ſixe hundred
thouſand talents of pure ſiluer vnto the
Thebans. It chanced that Alexander
did by force of Armes take the cittie of
Thebes, and amongſt other riches hee
found the Athenians obligation, (wherwith
to gratifie the ſaid debtors, he reſtored
it vnto them: but after the death of Alexander, the Thebans
demanded the ſaid ſumme of the Athenians, who aunſwered,
That ſeeing they had recouered their obligation, they
were not in anie ſort indebted vnto them; with theſe reaſons
hereafter enſuing.
               YOu ſaie worthie Thebans that wee doe owe you
ſixe hundred thouſand talents, the proofe thereof
is verie hard, ſeeing that it is well knowne of old,
that you neuer lent anie ſuch ſummes without good
aſſurance, and taking ſufficient bands of the debtors:
ſhew vs then if you haue anie bond of ours, and then
we ſhall thinke vpon the meanes to ſatisfie it. You ſaie
we had one, but Alexander tooke it from vs, and reſtored
it to you: if it be ſo, conſider what he was that took
it from you, and redeliuered it vnto vs, was it not Alexander
ſent from the gods, not onlie to ſubdue you and
vs, but almoſt al the world? At that time, were not your
goods onlie in his power, but alſo your liues? Do you
greeue that a part is lacking, ſeeing that the whole
might as well haue ben loſt? Doe you not know that
he came to leaue you what he thought good, and to
take from you that which he knew to bee ſuperfluous?
Seeing that ſuperfluitie is not onelie troubleſome and
painefull, but alſo hurtfull: for inciting the hearts of

ſuch as poſſeſſe it vnto pride and inſolencie, it is oftentimes
the cauſe of their miſerie: in like ſort ſuch is the
iudgement of the gods, that they which haue flocked
together to afflict manie, ſhould afterwards be afflicted
themſelues by one alone, and all that which they haue
in manie yeares purloined from others, ſhould afterwards
in one daie be takē away from them by the ſame
man: in like manner hath it befallen you noble Thebans
euen as you ſaie: Alexander hath taken away our
obligation from you, to reſtore it to vs, it is the will of
the gods, who in proceſſe of time haue wrought ſuch
alterations, wherfore it may ſo fall out in time to come,
that you (owing vnto vs ſo much ſiluer) or more, you
may likewiſe paie vs after the ſame ſort. That wee are
quit from you it cannot be denied, ſeeing that you haue
no bond of ours: for to what end are bonds made but
to compell ſuch as will not paie? Conſtraine vs then
by our obligation to paie you, or ceaſſe from demanding
anie thing of vs: but although it were ſo as you
ſaie, that Alexander had yeelded vp our obligation,
what doe you know whether wee haue paied it vnto
him; Who then was Lord not onlie of your gooods,
but alſo of your liues? If we haue paied it him, why
ſhould we paie it againe? And if he haue liberallie beſtowed
it vpon vs, We haue both thanked him, and
are alſo yet beholding vnto his poſteritie, yea, vnto his
aſhes for the ſame, why would you, or how can you thē
bind vs twice for one onlie debt? That cannot be don
Thebans, wherefore it ſhall bee but well that you ſurceaſſe
to importune vs anie further: conſidering that
thoſe which wearie others, take ſmall reſt themſelues,
and eſpeciallie, that labour is loſt which profiteth nothing
at all; as yours hath been and alwaies wil be concerning

this matter, and although you take herein what
courſe you ſhall thinke moſt expedient, yet you muſt
beleeue that wee are able to yeeld you a reaſon for anie
thing that you ſhall demand at our hand: but ſee that
you remember this; that he which de ſireth to moleſt another,
doth oftentimes worke his owne ouerthrow.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     THere is nothing more true (you ingratefull Athenians)
then our ſpeech, when we ſaie that
you doe owe vs ſixe hundred thouſand talents;
and that it is ſo, the proſperitie wherein
we haue placed you, and the miſerie wherein you were,
are two witneſſes verie ſufficient to prooue our reaſon
and your ingratitude: which truelie is a pernicious
vice, but in the end more hurtfull vnto thoſe that vſe it
then vnto anie other, wherefore it is a follie in you to
looke for anie aduancement thereby: but although it
were not ſo, what proofe would you haue more plaine
then your owne conſcience, if you would beleeue that
which is able to teſtifie vnto you? And thinke not but
that the ſame obligation which Alexander hath reſtored
vnto you will bee a witneſſe againſt you; Yea and
to bring a greater miſchiefe vpon you being in your
hands then when it was in ours: for ſeeing that it was
poſſible for vs to loſe that which we had gained iuſtlie,
what thinke you will become of that which you doe
detaine and poſſeſſe wrongfullie? Aſſure you that this
iniquitie will bring you vnto an extreame neceſſitie,
more great then that from which wee haue freed you
by our courteſie: lending you that which you now
doe wickedlie denie vs. As for Alexander, hee had no

power ouer vs when we lent you the ſiluer, therefore
he could in no ſort acquite you thereof. If then the fire
by miſchance had burned your bond, or if a theefe hauing
ſtolen it, ſhould haue reſtored it vnto you, ſhould
you for all that bee freed of the debt? It ſeemeth no;
Make account that there is no other difference betwixt
a theefe and Alexander, but onelie that the one ſtealeth
by ſubtiltie, and the other by force: as that Pirate whom
hee had taken ſaid vnto the ſame Alexander, Becauſe
(ſaith hee) that I haue but one ſhip, I am called a theefe,
but becauſe thou art able to ſteale more then I, thou
art called a king. But whie are you not aſhamed to bee
beholding for a ſhrewd turne vnto one, whoſe father
and he haue been alwaies mortall enemies to the libertie
of Greece? take example by the gaine which he hath
made, after ſo manie extortions. Is not he miſerablie
dead, by the means of his moſt familiar friends? And
thoſe were his heires which were not ſo much as anie
thing a kinne vnto him; who did ſpend his treaſure and
goods in deſtroieng one another: the which ſhould
make you wiſe, O you Athenians, and cauſe you to ſurceaſſe
this follie, to ſaie that you are quit, hauing receiued
your bond from one, who hath taken it from vs by
force; and who for this deed and other ſuch like, did
ſhamefullie die as he deſerued: moreouer, it is not likelie
that he was ſent from the gods to ſubdue vs, but true
it is that by their permiſſion wee were by him vniuſtlie
tiranniſed ouer, and for our ſinnes hee was as a ſcourge
of the Gods, but their anger ceaſing, hee periſhed alſo.
But who did euer, ſee that a debtor ought to bee the
iudge of his creditors actions, as you would bee of
ours? Seeing that you are vtterlie blinded with paſſion:
for whilſt you accuſe vs of pride, and couetouſnes, you

doe not conſider that your ſelues are guiltie of treaſon
and theft: becauſe you haue cleaued vnto the capitall
enemie of Greece, and for the ſame cauſe you will detaine
from vs that which we did lend vnto you in your
greateſt need: concerning that which you ſpeake of
Time, as being the miniſter of the gods, it maie bee the
ſame gods of whom you ſpeake in mockerie, will ſo
bring it to paſſe, as time ſhall compell you ſhortlie, not
onlie to ſatisfie vs, but alſo to become more miſerable
then euer you were, when you ſhall intreat for our aid,
the which now you doe ingratefullie forget. In like ſort
you muſt not alleage that you haue paied your obligation
vnto Alexander, for wee know verie well that you
neuer had leſſe means to doe it then at that time, and although
you ſhould trulie haue paid it, yet were it of no
import, nor anie ſatisfaction vnto vs: for you neither
ought it vnto him, nor had hee anie letter of attorney
from vs to receiue it; hee might then verie well deliuer
you your obligation, but yet he could not forgiue you
the debt whereunto he had no right at all: determine
then you Athenians to ſatisfie vs by faire means, if you
will not haue vs to imploie both our owne and our
friends forces, together with the helpe of the gods the
iuſt iudges of your iniquities.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 34.
               
                  Of him that is in trouble for accuſing a man of
crime, for which he is committed to priſon, and
there dieth.
               
               
                  
                  A Man accuſeth another for an offence, the partie
accuſed dieth in priſon whileſt the informations
are in making, the accuſer cannot ſufficiently
prooue his accuſation. Wherevpon the kindred
of the accuſed doe require to haue the accuſer
puniſhed with ſuch puniſhment as the crime deſerued, wherwith
he accuſed the other. And they ſay:
               TRulie the weakeneſſe of man is ſuch, as euerie
one eſteemeth his owne miſerie more great, and
lamentable then he doth another mans: but what
is he which can ſaie that we paſſe the bounds of reaſon,
when we ſaie that this our kinsman deceaſſed, is worthie
to be greatlie lamented; And that he which is the
cauſe of his death deſerueth moſt ſeuere puniſhment?
ſeeing that he hath not onlie abridged his daies, but
that which is worſe, hath endeuoured to cauſe him to
die moſt ſhamefullie; eſpeciallie to the great preiudice
of his poore familie, and all his linage: and his purpoſe
hath not failed in anie ſort, ſeeing that the poore man is
dead in priſon, although he neuer once deſerued to
come into the ſame. And it is not to be thought a ſmal
matter to impriſon a man, ſeeing that in Athens thoſe
which died in priſon could neuer be buried in the ſepulchre
of their anceſtors: as if they would thereby
inferre, that they which died in ſuch a place, might ſtain
the tombes of thoſe that died with honor and reputation
of vertue: and the ſame cuſtome is yet vſed in ſundrie
moſt famous citties, as amongſt others at Paris, the
chiefe cittie of France, where they doe obſerue this
law, that he which but for debt onlie paſſeth the wicket
of a priſon, ſhall neuer after be capable of anie office or

other publicke promotion: how much more then for
ſuſpition of crime? There is nothing more apparent,
then that this poore man ſeeing himſelfe in ſuch diſgrace,
died euen for verie greefe; & the wicked wretch
that hath accuſed him is yet liuing in health: but let vs
ſee what likelihood there is in his accuſation, ſeeing
that yet after the death of the accuſed he cannot proue
his ſaieng? I maie therefore now ſaie, that he could not
be ſuffered to alleage anie reaſons for his own defence
neither might take anie acceptions againſt the witneſſes,
nor yet be allowed openlie to prooue his innocencie,
but with the leaſt ſuſpition that might be he ſhould
haue ben conſtrained to abide the ſentence of condemnation.
Be you aſſured, O you righteous Iudges, That
this accuſation proceedeth by the inſtigation of diuers
malicious perſons, who if need had ben would likewiſe
haue ſerued for witneſſes againſt him: but their malice
or ill will ending by the death of this miſerable man,
they doe alſo forſake this vngracious fellow in his greateſt
need. Such is the iuſt iudgement of God that the
wicked doe oftentimes periſh euen by their owne wickedneſſe:
but for all that, their offence is not anie whit
diminiſhed, neither is this poore dead man alone, but
his diſtreſſed widdow, children, and all his kindred (vnto
whom he was a true friend) anie lot the leſſe harmed:
wherfore it maie well be ſaid that this lewd forger
of vntroths, hath murthered both this man here,
and ouerthrowne the others: yea and ſome are yet likelie
to die for want of his life that now is dead: I meane
the poore children, and the miſerable widdow. Then
what gibet, what ſword, what halter, what wheele, or
what torments are ſufficient to puniſh thorowlie this
execrable wretch, which is the cauſe of ſo manie miſchiefes?

For firſt he hath gone about to proſecute his
death, and next he hath indeuoured to defame him: alas
he is dead, and reputed for infamous by thoſe which
haue heard his accuſation, and not afterwards knowne
his innocencie: but manie ſeeing him no more, will
yet thinke that there was fauour ſhewed him in cauſing
him to die in priſon as a malefactor, vnleſſe this abhominable
fellow as a publicke ſpectacle, doe not poſſeſſe
the ſame place whereunto he pretended by his falſe accuſation
to bring the innocent: conſider then you iuſt
Iudges as well the miſerie of the dead and his allies, as
the execrable iniquitie of the falſe accuſer, and doe you
gaine as much fauor at the hands of God, and praiſe in
the world by your iuſt iudgement, as he hath gotten ſin
and infamie by his wickedneſſe.
               
                  The Anſwere of the accuſer.
                  
                     THere is nothing more true then that I haue
iuſtlie accuſed him, whom I know not by what
death he is depriued of that due puniſhment
which he deſerued, wherfore the Prouerb may
be trulie verified by him, which ſaith, That the gallows
is not ſo much made for the theeues as for the vnfortunate;
for if he had not ben dead, the witneſſes of his
iniquitie would haue proceeded as they ought, who as
mine aduerſaries ſaie, doe forſake me in my need: yet
not for thoſe reaſons which they alleage, but becauſe
they are corrupted as well by the bribes of the widdow
and kindred of the malefactor, as alſo by the importunate
requeſts and threats of others more mightie then
they: for ſuch is the miſerie of our age, that men are
now more eaſie to bee corrupted then euer they were:

moreouer, I cannot but ſuſpect that his kindred fearing
leaſt the truth ſhould come to light, haue poiſoned
him in priſon, yea and it maie be by his owne conſent;
doubting that although all the witneſſes might be verie
well corrupted, yet if I my ſelfe would haue ben bound
vnto the racke againſt him, to haue prooued to his face
that my accuſation was moſt true. I was not then the
cauſe either of his impriſonment, his diſcredit, nor yet
of his death; but his offence was the occaſion of all: yea
and by his death he hath depriued me of the means to
prooue the ſame, thereby to bring my reputation in
queſtion: and that it is ſo, if anie of theſe ſtout fellowes
my aduerſaries (who now thinke to face me out at their
pleaſure) will maintaine the innocencie of their dead
kinsman againſt me vpon the racke, I will not onelie
there aduenture my credite, but alſo my life: the like
will I alſo doe againſt the prowdeſt of thoſe witneſſes,
who being corrupted with bribes are become dumbe.
But let a nie one ſhew me ſome reaſon whie I ſhould accuſe
him wrongfullie; ſeeing that twixt him and mee
there was neuer anie malice, quarrel, or other occaſion:
whereby it may clearelie appeare, that the true and onelie
zeale of iuſtice inforced me to accuſe him, for otherwiſe
I had no reaſon to procure ſo manie, and ſo mightie
enemies againſt me. To conclude, by the foreſaid
reaſons it maie appeare, whether he himſelfe hath not
ben the cauſe of his owne miſchiefe: therfore none but
himſelfe deſerueth to be blamed or harmed for it.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 35.
               
                  Of the ſonne of abondwoman which would diſinherit
his brother.
               
               
                  
                  THe law of bondmen or ſlaues is yet in Spain, that
thoſe which haue bought them (be they Chriſtians
or no, they may kill them) or make them doe
what they will. Wherevpon it chanced that a
man bought a maiden ſlaue, and hauing lien
with her, ſhee bare him a ſonne: ſome few daies after ſhee died;
wherefore the foreſaid man bought another bondwoman to
nurſe vp his ſonne, and he did ſo much alſo with her, that ſhee
likewiſe brought him forth another ſonne; ſhee liued with him
and ruled his houſe, till that the children were great, and that
the father happened to die, who by his Will appointed that the
eldeſt brother ſhould part the goods, and the yoongeſt ſhould
chuſe. He made no mention at all of the woman, ſo that ſhe ſtill
remained a ſlaue: and the eldeſt ſonne tooke occaſion thereby to
defraud his brother of his inheritance or pretended patrimony:
for to make his partition, he placed the mother of his brother
on the one ſide, and the goods on the other, ſaying, chuſe
take thy mother and leaue me the reſt of the goods, or take the
goods and leaue me thy mother: the other ſeeing this extremitie
would not chuſe, but accuſed his brother of deceit or puniſhable
couſenage, ſaying:
               THe law commandeth, and the Will appointeth,
that thou oughteſt to part, and I ought to chuſe;
but thou neither haſt parted, nor yet can I chuſe,
for the dutie and loue which I beare vnto my mother,
compelleth me not to leaue her, and eſpeciallie at the
diſcretion of ſo wicked a man as thou art, ſeeing that
thou inforceſt me to three extreames, the one is to forſake
my mother, or to diſherit my brother, or laſtlie to
compell mee and my mother to liue continuallie in
pouertie. Great is thy malice to inforce mee to become

as wicked as thou art; calleſt thou this a partition, to
place all the care on the one ſide, and all the goods on
the other? My mother is growne old in the keeping
and increaſing thoſe goods which thou wouldſt vſurpe,
and now being weake and vnprofitable, thou wouldeſt
haue her to die for hunger with me, or els that ſhe ſhold
abide in extreame miſerie at thy diſcretion: doeſt not
thou know that thou art the ſonne of a bondwoman as
well as I? Yea, and that thy mother neuer got thee anie
good toward houſhold? but my mother gaue thee ſuck,
and nurſed thee, what ingratitude can then bee more
great then thine? Make ſuch a partition at the leaſt as I
maie remaine without blame in the chuſing, and yet
not quite without liuing. If deceit or puniſhable couſenage
is diſtinguiſhed by taking from any mā that which
is his, then thou doeſt worſe, for thou not onlie leaueſt
me nothing▪ but thou increaſeſt my miſerie: this is not
the firſt time wherein the deceiuers doe ſeeke to cloake
or coulor their deceits with ſome law or ſtatute, vnhappilie
wreſted, but I hope that the Iudges will haue a reſpect
vnto my integritie, and reprooue thy deteſtable
iniquitie.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     I Haue parted better then thou canſt chuſe,
wherfore there is no abuſe in the partition, but
in the election; For on the one ſide, I doe ſet
thee riches, and on the other ſide immortal honor,
for louing thy mother beſt, which ſhall ſerue for an
eternall memorie and glory. How manie are there that
would buy ſuch a felicitie with the price of their liues?
As Curtius; who for the good of the Commonwealth

leaped headlong into a burning gulfe: Sceuola burned
his hand becauſe he miſſed the killing of Porcen
                           •
                        a. Horatius
fought alone againſt the whole armie of the Tuſcanes,
and defended the bridge which he cauſed to bee
broken downe behind his backe, Hercules and Alexander
fought for glorie, not onlie againſt men, but alſo with
lions and other beaſts, why wilt not thou then gain this
glorie, when thou maiſt obtaine it without anie danger
of thy perſon. Laſtlie, ſeeing that profit and honor cannot
goe together, and that thou ſhunneſt honor, leaue
it to me, and take thou the profit. I had rather haue the
renoune to loue my ſtepmother better then thou doſt
thine owne mother; then to haue all the goods in the
world: moreouer, he carrieth away no ſmall portion of
the patrimonie, which ſhall haue her who hath long
time gouerned the whole as thou confeſſeſt: I am of
the mind that our father left her ſtill a bondwoman, to
the end that thou ſhouldſt haue no other thing but her,
or at the leaſt that by the ſame it might bee knowne
which of vs is moſt worthie. I doe not ſay that I will not
giue any other thing vnto thee, but I would firſt ſee if
thou deſerueſt it, and that thou mighteſt alſo acknowledge
my liberalitie: but as for the Iudges they are too
righteous to force the laws, and to alter the laſt Will of
our father.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 36.
               
                  Of Simon who put himſelfe into priſon to redeem his
father thence being dead, afterwards how he ſlew
his wife being daughter vnto him that had made
him his heire, and paied his debt.
               
               
                  
                  THe law ſaith, that if anie man take his
wife in adulterie, hee may kill them both
and not offend the law. Wherevpon it
chanced that a noble Senator named
Milciades a man of honeſt reputation,
was through malice accuſed for ſome offence,
and condemned to a great fine of
monie, ſo as not hauing wherewith to pay the ſame, hee was impriſoned
and there dieth: and becauſe the law commanded that
thoſe which died in priſon ſhould not be buried els where but in
the ſame priſon, vnleſse anie man paied his debts: Simon the
ſonne of the deceaſsed Milciades, yeelded himſelfe a priſoner in
his fathers place, to the end that hee might bee buried with his
anceſtors. Hee remaining in that ſort a priſoner without anie
means or hope euer to come foorth, one named Callies a man
verie rich, but of bad reputation, offered to pay his debt, and to
make him his heire if he would take his only daughter in marriage;
Simon conſented thervnto, he was deliuered, and married
with the daughter of Callias: within a while after hee
tooke her in adulterie, he therefore cauſeth Callias to be called,
who intreateth for his daughter that could not denie her fault.
Simon ſlew her in the preſence of Callias, who afterwards acuſed
him of ingratitude, which amongſt the Athenians was a
puniſhable vice.
               
                  The accuſation of Callias.
                  I Had made thee double bounden vnto me, therefore
is thy ingratitude the more manifeſt; I did redeeme
thee from priſon, where thou ſhouldeſt haue rotted;
and being poore, I made thee both my ſonne in law,
and mine heire: I do affirme, that thou haſt induced thy

thy wife to commit adulterie, that therby thou mightſt
haue an occaſion to kill her, wherefore thou haſt not
kept her as thou oughteſt, and thou haſt not onlie ſuffered
her to fall from her former manners vnto vice, but
thou haſt likewiſe furthered her therein, and when occaſion
ſerued, thou haſt not failed to rid thy ſelfe from
her to our great preiudice and diſhonor: and thou haſt
further ſhowne thy crueltie in calling to the father to
behold the ſlaughter of his daughter, to the end that he
might alwaies carrie this greefe, that he had been both
an eie witneſſe of her miſerie, and that he was reiected
or refuſed of his requeſt by him whom he had ſuccored
and redeemed from extreame miſerie, before he was
therevnto intreated: and neuertheleſſe being aſhamed
to bee ſonne in law vnto the man that had ſo greatlie
bounden thee vnto him, haſt cauſed the bodie, & ſoule,
and renoune of his daughter to be loſt; if then one alone
ingratitude is puniſhable, what puniſhment ſhall
be worthie for thy infinit vnthankfulneſſe ioined with
an extreame crueltie.
               
               
                  Simons Anſwere.
                  THe ſhame of thy daughters adulterie was more
irckſome vnto me then anie priſon, wherefore I
haue likewiſe vſed that inſtrument which hath by
the law beene giuen vnto me, not for anie deſire that I
had to diſpleaſe thee, to rid me from thy kindred, or to
kill thy daughter, but to reuenge her ſhameleſſe immodeſtie,
& to diminiſh my diſcredit. If thou haſt releaſed
me from priſon to the end that I ſhould be baſe minded,
thou haſt loſt thy monie, becauſe thou diddeſt not
aduiſe me thereof before hand, for I ſhould ſurely haue

told thee that as a noble heart could neuer be changed,
ſo alſo could it neuer endure a reproch: alaſſe the difference
betwixt my fathers diſgrace and mine is, that his
ended in comming dead out of priſon, and mine but
began in comming aliue forth of the ſame. Milciades
hath had the onlie honour in the Common-wealth to
haue beene redeemed being dead by his ſonne liuing,
who afterwards being redeemed aliue by another, to
his great misfortune, was conſtrained to diſpleaſe his
redeemer, becauſe he required an vnlawfull matter. I
will neuer be vnthankfull when thou ſhalt requeſt a
good turne as honeſt as that which I haue receiued of
thee, but thou intreateſt me to let the adulterers eſcape;
what could I do more if I had had my hands yet bound
faſt in priſon, where at the leaſt the diſhonour ſhould
neuer haue ben imputed vnto me. Wouldſt thou then
thinke to keepe me ſo bound, as I ſhould be therby hindered
from doing but my dutie? Both of vs in doing
a good turne, haue receiued a farre greater; I in taking
my father foorth of priſon dead, and thou in fetching
me forth aliue, for the ſame hath beene vnto vs a great
honour, and it would not bee lawfull for vs to ſuffer adulters,
without the loſſe of that honor which we haue
gotten: moreouer, it behoueth him that hath ben a true
and a faithfull ſonne vnto his father, to haue the like
children; my father was trulie worthie to haue ſuch a
ſonne as I was, ſo alſo was I not vnworthie to haue the
like, which I could neuer haue had by thy daughter for
whom thou haſt bought me. Thou ſaiſt I haue brought
thee forth of priſon, I anſwere that I willinglie put my
ſelfe therein, and I will neuer beleeue that euer I got ſo
great credit by being redeemed from thence by thee, as
I haue gained honour by entring therein for my father,

of mine owne accord: I dare ſay that thou diddeſt neuer
redeeme me thence for mine owne ſake, but onely
to honour thee and thy daughter, double vnworthy of
ſo great honor, which was the cauſe alſo that ſhe could
not long continue in the ſame, wherein I deſired not
to imitate her: likewiſe I can neither be reprooued, condemned,
nor puniſhed, hauing done nothing againſt
the law. That is a good turne or a fauour which tendeth
onlie to the profit of him that receiueth it; but
when he that doth it, looketh alſo for ſome commoditie
thereby, the fauour loſeth both his force and name:
euen ſo is thine, ſo that I am in no ſort beholding vnto
thee, and ſo conſequentlie thou canſt not twit me with
ingratitude. If Virginius ſlew his daughter becauſe hee
would not ſee her forced to bee vnchaſt, what oughteſt
thou to do vnto thine, who had neuer anie deſire to be
chaſt at all.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 37.
               
                  Of him who is forſaken of his father for relieuing
his ouncle, who alſo doth afterwards forſake him
for ſuccouring his father.
               
               
                  TWo brethren are enemies; the one hath a ſonne,
the other hath no children, neuerthe leſſe by miſfortune
he becommeth poore, his nephew taketh
his fathers goods ſecretly, and releiueth his ouncle
therewith, the father perceiueth it, and forbiddeth
him to doe ſo any more, yet he ceaſſing not from releeuing
him, his father diſheriteth him, and driues him out of his
houſe, he goeth vnto his poore ouncle, who adopteth him for his

ſon, and at the laſt chanſing by ſucceſſion to be wealthie, he maketh
him his heire. In the mean ſeaſon the other brother falleth
likewiſe into pouertie, whervpon his ſonne doth ſecretly ſuſtaine
him with his ouncles or his adopted fathers goods, who likewiſe
forbiddeth him, and laſtly driueth him away and diſheriteth
him for the ſame cauſe, wherevnto the nephew oppoſeth
him, ſaying:
               YOu cannot diſherit me for the ſame reaſon which
hath induced you to adopt me, for if it were well
done to ſuſtaine you, it is yet a better deed to ſuccour
my father. Charitie is commendable towards all
men, wherefore then would you alone vſurpe it? the
more miſerable that a man is, the more requiſite it is to
be charitable vnto him, how much more then vnto him
that is inforced to hope, and expect for releefe at his enemies
houſe, by the meanes of ſuch a one whom he
hath driuen from him. You ſay that heretofore he forſooke
me. I anſwere that the example of another man
his vice, is no excuſe but a great error: do you not know
that euerie proſperitie is vncertaine? What is he that
hauing ſeene Marius lying by the ſea ſide vpon the
reeds, would euer haue beleeued that he had ben Conſull
of Rome, or that euer he ſhould ſo be again? What?
doe you thinke that he which is moſt happie, need not
to ſtand in doubt, and that he neuer may hope to be vnfortunate?
Your ſelfe ſerues for an example of the contrarie:
conſider then that he which beggeth reliefe of
you is your brother, which hath craued of his brother,
receiueth it by the hands of his ſonne, which is he that
taketh naught of yours, but of the inheritance which
you haue alreadie giuen vnto him; it is your nephew or
adopted ſonne which giueth, becauſe he will not ſuffer

his owne father to periſh with hunger, and by that
means be adiudged vnworthie of your adoption. I doe
not ouerthrow you, but I feed one onlie old man, and I
am vnto you in ſteed of manie ſeruants. All the world
ſhould periſh if wrath were not by mercie appeaſed. I
am the onelie ſonne which is alwaies toſſed betweene
two fathers, and ſtill forſaken of the richeſt, but I take
God to witneſſe, that leauing you rich, I will depart vnto
the dores of another, ſhewing vnto euery one him,
for whom you diſherit me; although I cannot be diſherited,
for hauing done that whereunto the law both
bound me and alſo conſtrained me, what a matter were
it if you ſhould forbid me to weepe when I ſee a man
in miſerie? Our affections are not in our owne power.
Manie lawes and cuſtomes vnwritten, are farre more
certaine then thoſe which are, of which the law of nature
is moſt infallible.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  ALl that which thou haſt alleaged is rather a boaſting,
then anie acquitall or excuſe. Touching my
feare it is iuſt, for I ought not to take ſuch a one
for mine heire which is vnthankful, or rather mine enemie,
wherefore I doe forſake thee, for although thou
beareſt no mallice vnto him that hath done me wrong,
yet doe I hate him that hath done thee iniurie; ſo great
was my affection towards thee: thou wert no more his
ſonne being not onlie forſaken of him, but alſo adopted
by me, it was of me that he ſhould haue craued, not
of thee. What art thou that wilt appoint a law vnto
thine ouncle, thy ſuppoſed father, and thy benefactor?
we haue not remitted our controuerſie vnto thy iudgement,

for we haue God, the lawes, and the Magiſtrates
for iudges.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 38.
               
                  Of the Elians who did cut off the hands of Phidias,
after he had made the Image of Iupiter Olimpus.
               
               
                  THe law amongſt the Grecians was, that
whoſoeuer committed any ſacriledge,
ſhould haue his hands cut off: Whervpon
it happened that the Elians required
and intreated the Athenians to lend
vnto them Phidias their grauer or caruer
of Images, a man moſt excellent in
that art: whom they did lend vnto the ſaid Elians to make an
image of Iupiter Olimpus, vpon a condition that they ſhould
reſtore Phidias againe vnto them, or one hundred talents
(which are threeſcore thouſand crownes) for him: the image
being made, the Elians doe pay Phidias his wages, and afterwards
affirming that he hath ſtolen gold forth of the temple,
they cut off both his hands, it may be through malice, becauſe
he ſhould neuer make anie image ſo faire againe, and ſo they
ſend him ſo maimed home againe vnto Athens, ſaying that
they are quit of their promiſe; but the Athenians demand the
hundred talents, and ſay:
               WE can no more bee ſerued by Phidias in anie
ſort, for he was onlie able to manifeſt his worthineſſe,
ſo long as one might ſee his workes:
when he went vnto you he had hands, whereby hee
made the Image of Iupiter, it is you that haue committed

ſacriledge in cutting off his holie hands, your god
was the firſt that did behold the innocent blood of this
workman, wherefore he ſhall be a witneſſe againſt you
all: alaſſe poore Phidias ſome men are releeued by their
cunning and skill in their miſeries, but they haue beene
the cauſers of thy miſerie. Doe you thinke that we doe
account him to bee receiued being without hands,
whom you did require of vs becauſe of his hands? We
hauing lent you ſuch a one as could make gods, you do
reſtore vs ſuch a one as is not able onlie to worſhip thē;
Are you not aſhamed to offend Iupiter with ſuch ſacriledge?
It is the man indeed: but the workman is loſt,
you doe not reſtore Phidias at all, but a continual griefe,
and a deſire to haue him, a greefe to haue him as hee is,
and a deſire to haue him as he was; his hands which
were woont to make the gods, cannot now bee held vp
to intreat men. Alacke Iupiter was ſo rare a peece of
worke, as the Elians were deſirous it ſhould be the laſt,
to the end that they might gaine that glorie to haue
the laſt and chiefeſt worke that euer Phidias made: wee
lent you the hands, we require the hands againe. You
make your ſelues accuſers, witneſſes, and iudges, wherby
your falſhood is knowne, for it is not like to be true
that he (who neither was couetous nor tooke pleaſure
in anie thing but in his art, wherewith hee gained more
then he would) ſhould be a theefe: moreouer, he which
made the gods would haue diſdained to ſteale that
which was hallowed vnto them, wherefore we do call
thoſe gods which Phidias hath made, and thoſe whome
he might yet haue made, againſt you; vnleſſe you ſatisfie
the contract: for we will confeſſe that we haue receiued
Phidias, if anie do ſweare that we may be ſerued by him,
and you cannot denie but that you haue deceiued vs,

but aſſure you, that we will be reuenged of you therefore.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  VVE had gold, iuorie, and other holie things
wherwith we determined that Phidias ſhould
haue made vs diuers other Images, for the
which cauſe we did well reward him for the firſt: we
did requeſt him of you, to the end that the gods might
be ſerued by him, and not to be robbed by him; but ſeeing
the contrarie, wee haue iudged that it is no leſſe fit
to reuenge the wrongs done vnto the gods, then it is to
pay their ſeruices. Wee are not the cauſe that Phidias
hath loſt his hands, but it is his offence, and the law: require
of them then your amends, or els complaine of
them and not of vs, who haue in all thinges done what
we ought, or if you will vexe vs wrongfullie for Phidias,
we will call vpon thoſe gods whom hee hath offended
to helpe vs, hoping by their aid to deſtroy thoſe
which would hurt vs.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 39.
               
                  Of the ſon that defended his mothers cauſe, who being
diſtraught, did wrongfully accuſe her ſelfe to
be guilty of ſacrilodge.
               
               
                  THe law ſaith, that whoſoeuer doth voluntarilie
confeſse to haue offended the law, without anie
other witneſse is worthie of puniſhment. Whervpon
it chanced that a certaine woman (hauing
in one day loſt her husband and two of her

ſonnes by ſome violent death) did fall into ſuch diſpaire therefore,
that ſhe hanged her ſelfe, but her third ſonne happened to
come before ſhe was throughly ſtrangled, who cut the rope aſunder,
and after he had gotten her to life againe, hee carried
her vnto the Temple, to the end that the reſpect of a place ſo holy,
might keepe her from doing her ſelfe anie hurt, then he went
forth to buy ſome ſuſtenance to comfort her. In the meane ſeaſon
it happened that the officer came in there to ſearch for church
robbers, this woman being deſperate, confeſſed that ſhe had robbed
the Temple, wherevpon the Magiſtrate according to the
law would haue her puniſhed, but the ſonne in the meane time
happened to come, who gaiinſaied it thus.
               THat which is fallen out in our houſe, ought to
protect my mother being cōdemned here; wherefore
I knowing the matter, it is lawfull for me to
examine her my ſelfe of the offence in your preſence,
which ſhe wrongfullie taketh vpon her: moreouer, it
ought to bee conſidered, that the law ſaith, that thoſe
which confeſſe a crime, ſhall be condemned. Now to
confeſſe, is to aduouch the accuſation for feare of the
racke or other tortures, but to accuſe her ſelfe, is not onlie
a doubtfull confeſſion, but a ſure, euident, and moſt
manifeſt deſperation: and that it is ſo, it muſt be known
of her how, and when ſhee commited this ſacriledge?
Or where ſhe hath beſtowed that which ſhe ſtole? Trulie
ſhe cannot prooue her ſaying, but ſhe thinketh that
ſhe committeth ſacriledge in ſuruiuing after the violent
death of her husband and children, and no other crime
can be found in her; wherefore in her own opinion her
ſaying is true, but by the law ſhe is not puniſhable, ſeeing
that if I had not ben, ſhe had been dead alreadie by
her owne hands. It behooueth me to beſeech the iudges

to be mercifull to the offenders, but I had need not
onlie to intreat, but alſo to compell my mother to take
pittie vpon her ſelfe; what need you to doubt if a woman
ouercome with ſorrow deſireth death, when a
number with ouer exceeding ioy haue died ſuddainly?
Whereby it plainelie appeareth, what weakeneſſe remaineth
in the female ſex, who therefore are not to be
beleeued, nor receiued for witneſſes. But tell me good
mother? Why doe you not beare your loſſe patiently,
ſeeing that you ſee the gods themſelues doe loſe that
which is conſecrated vnto them in their Temple: Alas
worthie iudges, you doe well know that the afflicted
doe more feare, honour, and reuerence the gods, then
thoſe that are in proſperitie. How then ſhould this woman,
more wofull then any other, preſume to offend
them with ſacriledge? What need hath ſhe of riches,
that deſireth to liue no longer? Neither hath anie children
to leaue them vnto, but me, who would redeeme
my father and brethren from death with thoſe which I
haue yet of mine own, me I ſay, who haue and do loue
my mothers life better then her wealth. Alaſſe no want
of riches, but want of heires to poſſeſſe them is cauſe
of her miſerie. You may ſay that ſhe being angry againſt
the gods for her loſſe, & deſirous to be reuenged, hath
committed this ſacriledge, there is nothing more vnlikelie,
for her courage is abated with griefe, and ſhe attributeth
her miſhap vnto her ſelfe, and not vnto the
gods, neither is it the leaſt miſchiefe that fortune doth
vnto vs, when being our greateſt enemie, ſhe doth not
onlie make vs miſerable, but alſo ſuperſticious, in ſuch
ſort then we beare the greateſt reuerence not vnto the
gods alone, but chieflie vnto inconſtant fortune; all this
is prooued by her, becauſe ſhe had rather hurt her ſelfe,

then offend the gods, but if otherwiſe it were, far more
eaſie had it ben for her to haue burned the Temple, thē
to haue ſtollen the treaſure locked vp vnder ſo manie
keies, wherefore you ought to waigh al the circumſtances
together, and to be verie carefull that the law and
the penaltie thereof, which ſerueth for a terror vnto the
wicked and malefactors, bee not inflicted vpon the innocent.
For he committeth a greater offence which puniſheth
the innocent, then he doth that pardoneth the
malefactor.
               
                  The Iudge anſwereth.
                  THere was neuer anie ſacriledge that could be hidden,
for euerie tongue, and eſpeciallie the malefactors
owne toung is readie to reueale it, as by this
woman it appeareth that accuſeth her ſelfe, prouoked
thervnto by the wrath of the gods, who for her offence
doe purſue her: wherefore it is reaſon that I appoint her
to be puniſhed, vpon whom the gods diſdaine to ſhew
their miracle in conſuming her with lightening, as if
ſhe were vnworthie to die by the hands of any god, but
they all together doe purſue, and driue her to worke
her owne confuſion by a moſt ſhamefull death, the
which by her being perceiued, ſhe rather deſired to die
by her owne hands, but they haue not ſuffered her, to
the end that the wrong done vnto their Deitie, might
be publickly reuenged, and that ſhe might ſerue for an
example vnto all the world, ſo that thou wert ſent by
them to cut the cord aſunder: but doeſt thou thinke
that a church robber may die anie other way then by
iuſtice? She hath done as much as in her lay, to conceal
and not to confeſſe her offence, yea, and that by the

making of her ſelfe away, yet ſhe could not, but in
ſpight of her, ſhe was conſtrained to be her owne accuſer,
and to require her deſerued puniſhment, which is
no ſmall miracle. Therefore if thou deſireſt to know her
offence? It may onlie be anſwered that ſhe hath committed
ſacriledge, the which ſhe confeſſeth and aduoucheth.
If thou demandeſt why ſhe did it, I ſay that if ſhe
committed it before the death of her children, it was
to enrich them, if it were after their death, it was becauſe
ſhe would be reuenged of the gods. Where thou
ſaieſt that it had ben more eaſie for her to haue burned
the Temple; in that thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe to be her ſon,
but farre more wicked then ſhe, if it were not rage, and
ouergreat deſire of reuenge, that ſtaied her from making
her choiſe, according to her wicked intention?
Thou wouldeſt know where ſhe hath beſtowed that
which ſhe ſtole? I beleeue that ſhee hath giuen it thee,
and that thou wouldſt ſaue her life, to haue ſome more
by the like means. Neuertheleſſe, we will puniſh her alone
that confeſſeth the fact, vntill that thy ſinnes doe
induce thee vnto the like confeſſion, or that thou bee
conuinced by more apparent teſtimonie, and in ſo doing
we ſhall appeaſe the gods, fulfill the laws, performe
our duties, and cleare our conſciences, which commandeth
vs to root out the wicked forth of the Commonwealth
by publike puniſhmēt, becauſe there is nothing
that doth better maintaine the world in equitie, then
rewarding the good, and puniſhing the bad.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 40.
               
                  Of the wife that would not forſake her husband, although
he went about to procure her death.
               
               
                  
                  IT happened that a man and his wife
made an oath vnto each other, that if
one of them chanced to die, the other
ſhould not ſuruiue aboue three daies after.
Vpon a certaine time the man went
vpon a long iourney, and being on his
way, he ſent a falſe meſſage vnto his wife
which certified her that her husband was dead, ſhe to keepe her
promiſe, threw her ſelfe downe from the top of her houſe, neuertheleſſe
ſhe died not with the fall, wherefore her father cauſed
her hurts to be healed, and kept her vntill certaine newes came
how her husband was not dead, but had ſent her word of his
death, only becauſe he was deſirous of his wiues death. Whereupon
her father would haue cōpelled her to forſake her husband,
ſhe would not, he renounceth her for his child, and diſheriteth
her, for which ſhe complaineth, ſaying:
               O Immortall God, which by thy prouidence gouerneſt
all mankind, thou haſt not permitted that this
fact ſhould be for our hurt or deſtruction, but onelie for
a triall and proofe of the loue which I beare vnto my
husband, & yet my father would ſeperate thoſe whom
death could not put aſunder: neither is that which I
haue done to be thought ſtrange, ſeeing that I had both
cauſe to doe it, & the example of diuers women which
haue done the like, to allow it; for ſome haue burned
themſelues with the dead bodies of their husbands, others
haue by their death redeemed their husbands
life. I am therefore happie to bee accounted one of the
ſame number being yet liuing, and my husband ſafe
and ſound, who it may be would trie whether I were
worthy to be beloued of him, and now knowing it, he

will loue me better then euer he did. The loue which
is ouergreat is cauſe of ſuſpitions and iealouſies, and
therefore my husband was deſirous not onelie to trie
whether I did not loue ſome other, but alſo whether
he was beloued of me, and I am verie glad that with
the danger of my life hee hath found me ſuch a one as
he deſired. What wrong ſhall I then both doe vnto my
ſelfe, and vnto him, if when I ſhould reape the fruit of
my loialtie and moſt conſtant loue, I ſhould depart
from him, God forbid I ſhould ſo doe. Moreouer, I
ſhould neuer bee well able to liue without him, for it
was partlie the cauſe that I threw my ſelfe headlong
down, becauſe I would not languiſh without the hope
and comfort of his preſence, which I ſhall now poſſeſſe
with more pleaſure then euer I did. To conclude, I cannot
leaue him, and if I could I would not, wherefore it
is loſt labour to ſpeake any more thereof.
               
                  The fathers Anſwere.
                  IT cannot be denied but that he which went about to
procure my daughters death is mine enemie, wherefore
there is no reaſon that ſhe which loueth mine enemie
better then her owne father, ſhould be my heire:
thou ſaieſt I cannot, nor I ought not to forſake him.
Why cannot, or may not ſhe ſo doe, that cannot onely
determine to die, but to be her owne butcher? Hauing
no ſooner heard a fained report of the death of thine
enemie, thou ſoughteſt thine owne death in good earneſt,
if thou couldeſt endure his abſcence being gone
on a long voiage, when thou haddeſt occaſion to loue
him, why canſt thou not now doe the like hauing iuſt
cauſe to hate him? Thou art quite freed from all former

oath or promiſe which thou haſt made him, in ſhewing
the deſire which thou hadſt to accompliſh that which
he cauſed thee to ſweare, thereby not onely to abuſe
thee, but to make thee die. Thou ſaieſt that all is fallen
out for the beſt, I know not how that ſhould bee, for as
no bad act can be tearmed the author of any good, ſo
ought we not to iudge things by the euent, but by the
intent; hardlie can hee euer loue thee, who as oft as hee
ſeeth thee, ſhall be either aſhamed of his fact, or aggreeued
that it tooke not ſuch ſucceſſe as he wiſhed: likewiſe
the triall of loue is not made by a danger ſo euident.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 41.
               
                  Of the prodigall ſonne who being forſaken of his father,
redeemeth his brother whom his father
had neglected.
               
               
                  THe law was ſuch, that when the children were
thirtie yeares of age, they might require their
father to giue them their portion. Wherevpon
it chanced that a man had two ſonnes, the one of
them was prodigall, and the other a good husband.
He gaue the prodigall ſonne his portion (who demanded
the ſame by vertue of the law) and did wholy diſherit him from
anie of the reſt of his lands or goods: the other, who was the
good husband, made a voiage by ſea, and fell into the hands of
Pyrats, he writ vnto his father for his ranſome, his father was
deafe and could not heare on that ſide: Wherevpon his prodigall
brother redeemed him, who when hee was returned home
made his ſaid brother his heire, in recompence of his releaſe by
him, wherewith the father being diſpleaſed, diſinheriteth the

thirſtie ſon of his patrimonie, who withſtandeth him thus:
               
                  ALl thoſe which doe know what I haue done,
doe praiſe me for it, except you. How true an
example of pittie and brotherly loue hath my
brother ſhewed, when ſailing to ſeeke me, hee hath aduentured
great dangers, trauailing ouer many lands,
and ſeas, neuer giuing ouer his enterpriſe, vntill he had
brought mee home againe vnto my fathers houſe:
wherefore if you did loue me as both my obedience,
and ſeruices deſerue, and as nature doth bind you, you
could not denie but to haue receiued at his hands ſeruice
moſt acceptable; And in recompence thereof to
haue acknowledged him for your heir, as I haue done:
for if for his prodigalitie you did diſherit him, he hath
ſhewed himſelfe both towards you and me not to bee
prodigall, but indeed verie liberall. If you did diſher it
him becauſe he was vnprofitable, hee cannot now bee
tearmed ſo, Seeing he could make ſo long a voiage, and
when all fatherly loue was in you forgottē, he yet could
performe the dutie both of a good ſonne, and a better
brother. You ſay that age hindered you from comming
to redeeme me at the beginning of my captiuitie, what
man is ſo old that could not ſaile ſo ſmall a way as I was
from you? wherefore ſeeing you did it not, you ought
to thinke well both of him and me, for he hath reſtored
me vnto you, and I would alſo make him yours. If you
diſherited him becauſe hee was wicked, hee is no ſuch
man, ſeeing that he hath ben ſo charitable towards his
father, brother, and vnto all thoſe that loue vs. Laſtly, as
I cannot compell you to giue me more then the law appointeth,
ſo cannot you take that from me which you
giue me not, but it appertaineth vnto me preſently after

your death, euen as you receiued it from our grandfathers,
ſeeing that I neuer offended you in anie ſort, vnleſſe
you will account, the dutie which I vſe towards
your ſonne and my brother for an offence.
               
                  The fathers Anſwere.
                  I Am conſtrained againſt my will to diſherit you both
twaine, ſeeing that you both take pleaſure in diſpleaſing
me, wherefore I muſt imitate the phiſitions, who
in extreameſt diſeaſes vſe moſt dangerous remedies:
and as the Chirurgions do oftentimes cut off the members
to preſerue the reſt of the bodie, ſo muſt I ſeperate
my ſonnes from me, who are agreed together to anger
me: thou wouldeſt haue mee take him for my heire,
who hath tried the law againſt his father, for his patrimonie;
what will not hee attempt then to abridge my
life, for the reſt of my goods? But thou muſt conſider
that the law doth allow thee only for a miniſter or adminiſtrator
of the patrimonie, but not for lord thereof,
and therefore thou canſt not adopt thy brother. For the
ſame law which condemned me to giue him his part,
reſtraineth thee to adopt him, ſeeing that hee is aboue
the age of thirtie yeares: for children alſo and ſuch as
are in their minoritie ought to be adopted; moreouer
he is thy brother no more, ſeeing he hath let to bee my
ſonne. But how canſt thou adopt anie one for thine
heire, ſeeing thou art yet belonging to me? Or if thou
art not mine, how canſt thou inherit my goods? How
wouldeſt thou haue power ouer thy brother, ſeeing
thou wilt not ſuffer mee to haue the like ouer thee? If
he haue deſerued anie good at thy hands, thou oughtſt
to intreat me for him, and not to vſe your owne authoritie.

Want of means and oportunitie hath hindred me
from redeeming thee, and thou wouldeſt againſt my
will giue that vnto mine enemie, which in ſpight of his
teeth he was inforced to leaue me. O worthie Iudges, I
beſeech you ſee vnto what extremity I am brought, ſeeing
that one hath taken away part of my patrimonie,
and the other would that hee ſhould haue the whole.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 42.
               
                  Of the husband who gaue two children vnto his
wife without telling her which of them was her
owne.
               
               
                  A Certaine woman died in childbirth of a
ſonne, whom the father ſent to nurſe into
the countrie, and within a few daies
after hee married a yoong wench which
he had alreadie got with child, ſhee about
a month after did alſo beare him
a ſon: whome he in like ſort did ſend abroad
to be nurſed, handling the matter
ſo well, that not any beſides himſelfe did know which was
the firſt or the laſt child. About three yeares after he made the
children to be brought home to his houſe, and would not tell his
wife which of them was hers. Moreouer, they were both of them
ſo like the father, and ſo little like the mothers, that ſhee could
not that way diſcerne them, whereupon ſhe accuſed her husband
of bad vſage, who denied it thus, ſaying:
               WHerefore doeſt thou weepe for thy child, ſeeing
thou art ſure to kiſſe him and ſee him euery day, if

thou wilt, I would long ſince haue tould thee which of
them is thine, if I had not knowne that thou art as deſirous
to ſhew thy ſelfe a ſtepdame to the one, as a mother
to the other. Conſider only that the one is thy ſon,
and the other is his brother, and thy husbands ſon; loue
them then for their owne ſakes, or els neither loue nor
hate them: but I perceiue that whileſt thou deſireſt to
be a mother to the one, thou art a ſtepdame to them
both. If thou doeſt conſtraine me to tell thee, neuer
imagine that I will tell thee the troth, wherefore I will
not deceiue thee as a mother, but as a ſtepdame. Nature
her ſelf determined that they ſhould be like each other,
to the end that they ſhould be both thy children. Thou
mighteſt very well know which of them is thine, if the
deſire which thou haſt to hate the one did not hinder
thee, wherefore behold the one or the other with the
eie of a mother in law, and it may bee the ſame will bee
thine owne. Long ſince ſhould I haue told thee the
troth, if thou hadſt ben leſſe importunate to enquire it.
I will that thou alone ſhouldſt inioy this benefit, either
to haue one ſonne in law without being a mother in
law, or els to haue two children without hauing ſuffered
for the birth of more then one of them. When they
are of more age, marke which of them will be more obedient
vnto thee, and the ſame ſhall bee thy ſonne, or
at the leaſt ſhall deſerue that thou ſhouldeſt ſo account
him: and giue ouer henceforth to bewaile thy ſonne,
ſeeng thou art not onely certaine that thou haſt him,
but alſo that thou canſt not loſe him, vnleſſe they doe
both die.
               
                  The wiues anſwere.
                  YOu doe me great wrong, for how can my ſon loue,
honor, and obey me aright, if hee be not ſure that I

am his mother, ſo that deſiring to make me a mother of
two, you make both the one & the other to be my ſons
in law. You doe well know both your children, & haue
the ioy thereof, but you depriue me of mine, or rather,
make me partaker of nothing but greefe and ſorrow:
and being willing to giue a mother to your owne, you
depriue me of mine. You ſay well that I am a ſtepdame
to them both, but you are the cauſe thereof, and are
worſe then a ſtepfather vnto mine, ſeeing that you take
his mother from him, or at the leaſt will not ſuffer him
to know her.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 43.
               
                  Of him who drunke poyſon with his wife, wherwith
ſhe died, and he made claime vnto hir heritage by
her Teſtament.
               
               
                  WHen Octauius, Marc Anthonie, and Lepidas
did part the Romane Empire betweene
them, many of the Nobles were ſlaine, & others
fled and were baniſhed, or els fined in a great
ſumme of money paiable vnto thoſe which were
appointed to kill them. Amongſt whom there was a Roman exile
who was followed by his wife that was verie rich, whoſe
chance was that vpon a certaine time ſhe found her husband in
a ſecret place, holding a cup in his hand, ſhe asked him what he
had in the cup, he anſwered that it was poiſon, and that he wold
poyſon himſelfe becauſe he deſired to liue no longer in this miſerie;
the wife anſwered that ſhe would not liue without him, and
therefore praied him that ſhee might drinke ſome part with
him: wherevnto he agreed, and hauing drunken part, he gaue

her the reſt, the which ſhe did drinke vp, and died ſuddainly
after. The husband died not: but within a ſhort while after
by the means of his friends he was called to Rome again, where
being arriued, he ſhewed a very plain Will of his wiues, wherin
ſhe left him heire of all hir lands and goods; her kinsfolke who
did verie wel know how ſhe came by her death, accuſed him for
poyſoning his wife, complaining and ſaying in this ſort.
               HE hid himſelfe with poyſon, becauſe he would
be ſought and found by his wife, he fained that
he would drinke it to make her drinke thereof, he
ſaid he would die, becauſe ſhe ſhould deſire to liue no
longer, He did drinke in ſuch ſort of the poyſon that he
is yet liuing, and his wife dead: I would faine know
then what man did euer murther his wife more manifeſtly?
Or what poiſon is that which could not once
kill ſo great an heire, who affirming that he would die,
after he had cauſed his wife to die, did himſelfe eſcape:
it is a great matter that all the reſt of the fugitiues are become
poore by the late edict, and this man is made rich
thereby, the others haue loſt their owne goods, and he
would vſurpe the goods of another, as a reward for
procuring the death of her, that loued him more then
her ſelfe, and ſo much did he know that ſhe had witneſſed
in his fauour: ſhe followed him when he was purſued
by his enemies ſword, and vnder a fained coulor of
loue he hath murthered her with poyſon. A goodly exchange,
ſhe tooke his poiſon, and he her Teſtament, ſo
ſoone as ſhee had drunken ſhee died: but is there anie
doubt to be made of the force of the venome? Seeing
it was compounded and made by the heire, who might
verie well drinke part of the vppermoſt, as being leſſe
violent, either hauing an Antidot verie readie, or els hauing

taken it before hand, thereby inciting his poore
wife by deceit to drinke the bottome, where all the poiſon
did lie, ſo as it might verie well be ſaid, that hee had
the drinke, and ſhe the venome, which long before hee
had prepared to hurt her alone. He did verie well know
that ſhee would not liue without him, ſeeing that ſhee
was deſirous to thruſt her ſelfe into moſt great dangers
for his ſake. If they are puniſhed which kill their enemies
in open fight, what puniſhment is he worthie to
haue, which hath treacherouſlie murthered his wife
that loued him aboue all things; as hee ought to haue
loued her.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     MY wife did loue me in time of peace, ſhee followed
me to the wars, and in exile in my greateſt
extremitie ſhe neuer left me, ſaying that it
was a righteous deed not to forſake him that
was innocent: I had a iuſt occaſion and was deſirous
to die, becauſe I wold not be put to death by the hands
of a hangman, or liue continuallie in fear of mine enemies;
They which are deceitfull doe hide the truth, but
I told her plainlie, that it was poyſon which I would
drinke, and as I neuer refuſed her anie 
                        ••
                     ing, ſo alſo had
I not the heart to refuſe her this laſt requeſt, and the rather,
becauſe I was ſorrie to leaue her in miſerie, as well
for the griefe which I knew ſhe would take for me, as alſo,
for the anguiſh and trouble ſhe ſhould ſuffer to liue
at the diſcretion of ſuch kindred as you are, who would
neuer haue cauilled for her death, if the Will had bene
made in your fauour; and if ſhe had died inteſtate, you
would haue quarrelled amongſt your ſelues for her inheritance.

And where you ſay that I dranke the firſt
draught, it is true; becauſe I did not only alwaies vſe to
drink before her, but alſo becauſe I hoped by this means
dying firſt, to ſhun the greefe I ſhould ſuſtaine to ſee her
die before me. Moreouer, the poyſon was not of ſuch
qualitie as you ſay, no worſe in the bottome then it was
aboue, for that which could not infect all the drinke
would be leſſe able to infect or kill anie bodie: likewiſe I
am ſure that I did drinke a ſound draught, more then
the halfe. But I doe now know to my great greefe that
my wife was more tender then I, wherefore ſhe is dead
with that poyſon, which was not of force inough to kil
a man more ſtrong. Alſo you need not demand (that
ſeeing I was deſirous to die) why I would not make an
end of my ſelfe when I ſaw my wife dead, for touching
this point, they cannot iudge thereof, which haue not
ben ſo neare their death as I was, for they know not
how horrible it is in ſuch an extremitie, and eſpeciallie
euery violent death, but more chieflie that which is
ſlow, and draweth on by leiſure: wherefore before you
can iudge rightly thereof, you ought either to haue
tried this extreame point, or at the leaſt, to be as neere
your death as I, who ſhall neuer be ſound againe, nor of
anie long life. Wherefore it is not for couetouſneſſe
that I require my wiues inheritance, but thereby to
haue meanes as well to eterniſe her good renowne, as
alſo becauſe I wold not ſuffer her laſt Wil to be abuſed.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 44.
               
                  Of him who hauing giuen ouer and forſaken two of
his children, would not leaue the one of them with
him that had foſtered them vp.
               
               
                  
                  IT muſt here be conſidered, that in times
paſt amongſt the Grecians it was lawfull
for ſuch as would, either to ſlay their
children, or to forſake them and leaue
them at all aduentures; and the law was
ſuch, that if anie did find them and
bring them vp, it was at the fathers diſcretion
to redemand and take againe his child, paying for his
nurſing. Wherevpon it happened that a father through pouerty
was inforced to leaue two of his children, being twinnes, to the
mercie of the world, which children another man chanced to
find, and cauſed them to bee nurſed, thinking to keepe them as
his owne, for he had none. It likewiſe chanced that within a certaine
time after, the father who had forſaken them became
rich; ſo that he deſired to haue his children again, and cauſing
them to be ſought out, he which had foſtered them, came vnto
him, ſaying that if he would let him haue one of them, he wold
giue him the other, and he ſhould chuſe which of them both he
would haue, the father agreed therevnto, but ſeeing the children
he tooke them both againe. The foſter father ſummoned
the father to the law for one of them, the father defended himſelfe
ſaying:
               HOw wouldeſt thou haue me make partition of
my children with thee, ſeeing that I made a refuſall
thereof, eſpeciallie to the mother which hath
conceiued and born them? I haue begottē them both,
I haue deſired them both I tooke paine for them both,
they were both borne together, they were both left, or
loſt together, becauſe I knew that being twinnes the
one could not liue without the other, thou foundeſt
them together, thou haſt foſtered them vp together,

and I haue found them together againe, wherfore then
in the reſtoring ſhould they be ſundred; eſpecially ſeeing
fortune which once ſeperated them from their Parents,
would neuer ſunder them one from another, how
could I chuſe the one, and leaue the other, ſeeing that
becauſe I could not chuſe, I did leaue them both? if the
martiall law, which is the cruelleſt, doth not ſuffer that
two brethren being taken in the warre ſhould bee ſundred,
how doth the Ciuil law allow it in theſe here, who
are not onelie brethren, but may well bee tearmed the
halfe of one another, each of them loſeth his grace and
worth if he be abſent from the other. I ſhould doe a
wrong in deſiring thy children, but not in retaining
mine: why wouldeſt thou haue acquaintance to ſunder
that, which abandoning to the world could not ſeperate?
I would giue al for my child except my child onely,
I made the bargain weeping and trembling as much
as when I departed from them, for I was conſtrained
by force and neceſſitie, becauſe I could not find the one
without promiſing the other. It is inough of the firſt
wrong that I did vnto my children, in expulſing and
leauing them through neceſſitie, without adding thereunto
a ſecond iniurie, which would bee in ſeperating
them willinglie, ſeeing the law, my dutie, and the equitie
of the iudges may be my warrantiſe; for euery agreement
made by feare or force is nothing worth, but only
thoſe which are willingly made, or according to the
lawes.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IF thou wilt not ſeperate them, reaſon commandeth
thee to leaue me both twain, ſeeing thou haddeſt not
onely the heart to leaue them at all aduentures, but further
alſo thou haſt beene accuſtomed to liue without

them, but I leauing the one ſhall neuer be but in perpetuall
greefe and anguiſh for the other, ſeeing I haue ben
accuſtomed to haue them both, doeſt thou thinke that
he vſeth force or conſtraint that maketh thee a father
when thou neuer hopedſt to be one, I haue freed them
from the danger to be deuoured of brute beaſts, or to
die with hunger, I haue nurſed and foſtered them, I doe
reſtore one vnto thee, yea and giue thee thy choice,
wherefore no man is a loſer but I, although the iudges
ſhould be neuer ſo righteous and fauorable to my moſt
iuſt demand.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 45.
               
                  Of him which ſtroke his father by the compulſion of
a Tyrant, whom he afterwards did ſlay, and requireth
a reward therefore.
               
               
                  THe law appointed, that whoſoeuer did
ſtrike his father, ſhould haue his hands
cut off. Wherevpon it chanced that the
King being a Tyrant, cauſed a man and
his two ſonnes to be ſent for vnto his pallace,
and hauing brought them vp vnto
the top of a high tower, hee commanded
the ſonnes vpon paine to be throwne headlong downe, to ſtrike
their father, and he would defend them from the puniſhment
which by the law was appointed; one of them becauſe he would
not ſtrike his father, threw himſelfe downe, the other did giue
his father a blow with his fiſt, wherevpon the Tyrant who did
greatly fancie, and daily ſought ſuch men as were wicked, entertained
him into his ſerui
                     •
                  e, and loued him ſo deerely as he wholy

put his truſt in him: but as Treaſon doth oftentimes ſpring of
too much truſt, ſo this man took an occaſion to ſlay the Tyrant,
as well to reuenge his brothers death, and the iniurie done vnto
his father and him, as alſo to winne honour, and gaine the reward
promiſed ſecretly by the Citizens to him that ſhould kill
the Tyrant: who hauing ſlaine him, demanded the ſaid reward;
but the ingratefull people accuſed him for ſtriking his father,
for the which they wold haue his hands chopt of. Whervnto the
poore father would in no ſort conſent, but gainſaied him thus:
               
                  I Should be more happie if I did rather defend
many malefactors, then one onely innocent:
will you cut off thoſe hands which hath ſlaine
the Tyrant, & reſtored you your libertie? what
doe you meane, why did you not cut off the Tyrants
hands, that conſtrained my ſon to tranſgreſſe our laws,
ſo that it was as neceſſarie for him to ſtrike his father, as
it was lawfull for others to rob Temples, and to rauiſh
the Virgins and wiues. O how much doe we owe vnto
thoſe hands, by the which ſuch crueltie is brought
vnto an end, the tyrant did truſt that by the ſame hands
he might ſhame ſome, and ſlay others; but they haue
depriued him of the means to performe either the one
or the other: but how much more am I indebted vnto
this my ſonne, then vnto the other that brake his owne
necke? For he did not that to ſpare his father, but himſelfe,
becauſe hee cared not though I had died with ſorrow,
which no doubt I ſhould haue done, if this here
had done as much, and in ſmiting me hath he not onlie
ſaued my life ſo much, as hee hath afterwards likewiſe
preſerued the Commonwealth. Alaſſe my poore children
what great extremitie haue you both endured, by
the crueltie of a Tyrant? The one hath broken his

necke, and the other to his moſt great griefe too was inforced
to beat his father: but farre greater praiſes doth
he deſerue that hath ſlaine the Tyrant, then the other
doth which did murther himſelfe. What offence hath
this my ſon and your protector committed? Saue only
that in lifting vp his fiſt, and gently letting it fall againe,
he fained to ſtrike his father, who in like ſort ſeemed as
though he were aggreeued therewith, but both the
one and the other did it to eſcape a worſer miſchiefe,
and to performe a greater good: neceſſitie in all doth
greatly excuſe humane weakeneſſe, and therefore the
Saguntines were not only excuſed, but exalted for ſlaying
their fathers; which is more then a light ſtroke. His
brother in leauing me at the Tyrants mercie did worſe
then he, who without hurting me, hath ſaued me. You
ſay that hee had no reſpect vnto the law, I know well
that the law is ſtrict, but the interpretation is large: if
one being mad chance to ſtrike another, he is not puniſhed:
Neither yet is the little child which ſtriketh his
father condemned: For the mad man hath more need
of pittie then puniſhment, and is rather to bee holpen
then hurt; and the child hath neither ſtrength nor vnderſtanding
to offend: theſe two points in ſuch an extremitie
are found in my ſonne, for in ſtriking me, hee
endured a greater paine then I; if thoſe women who
were defloured by the Tyrant, are not eſteemed vnchaſt,
Nor thoſe Prieſts, which through force or feare
haue brought the treaſures of the Temple vnto the tyrant,
are not deemed culpable, Wherfore then ſhould
my ſonne bee blamed who fained to ſtrike his father?
Thereby not only to ſaue his life, but to kill the Tyrant,
reuenge the rauiſhed women, and to reſtore both
the treaſure vnto the Temples, and alſo to purchaſe

freedome vnto all; I did commaund him to ſtrike
me, wherefore he ſhould haue ſinned more in diſobeying
me, then in obeying the Tyrant therein; ſo that he
hath not offended me, but ſpared me. Moreouer, the reuenge
or puniſhment of a ſonnes offence againſt the
father, lieth in the will and diſcretion of the father: if
anie other had ſtroken me, and I had no deſire to complaine,
no man could compell me therevnto, or purſue
him for me, what doe you meane then by this? Seeing
that he which hath giuen the blow, hath endured the
greateſt griefe and hurt thereby, and that hee which receiued
the ſame, commanded the other to giue it him.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THe more you defend your ſons cauſe, the more
you make him culpable, for you ſhewing your
ſelfe louing and pittifull vnto him, doe likewiſe
ſhew, that hee ought rather to haue died a thouſand
times, then to haue ſtrooken ſo good and louing a father:
what doth hee then deſerue that hath ſmitten ſuch
a one to pleaſe a Tyrant, Whoſe ſeruant he afterwards
became? You ſay hee did it to profit the Commonwealth,
and wee doubt it, for wee cannot begin to doe
good, by performing a miſchiefe; and he hath offended
the Commonwealth more by his wicked example, thē
can well bee expreſſed: for neuer was it found before,
that anie was ſo bold to ſtrike his father. If hee would
not preuent his brother, yet ſhould he at the leaſt haue
followed him? Who chuſed to die rather then to ſee
his father ſtroken, ſo ſhould they both haue beene an
example of pittie, where now one of them loſeth part
of his glorie by being brother vnto a man ſo wicked,

for the one cannot bee mentioned without the other.
You ſay that you pardon the wrong which hee hath
done you? But the law pardoneth him not for tranſgreſſing
it. You ſay I would needs be ſtroken? but wee
ſay that his brother would not that you ſhould. It ſeemeth
by your ſpeech, that euen as the Tyrant iudged
him a fit man to commit a vilanous act, ſo you likewiſe
had the ſame opinion, and ſeeing that you could not eſcape,
you fained that you were willing to bee ſtroken,
for feare of being ſlaine altogether: Laſtlie, hee hath
ſmitten his father, knowing that it was againſt his brothers
will, and againſt the decree of the law, ſo that hee
being guiltie, is likewiſe worthy of puniſhment.
               
            
            
               Declamation 46.
               
                  Of the bondman who hauing ſaued his Maiſter, his
ſonne, and goods, together with his daughters honor,
pretendeth to marry her.
               
               
                  A Tyrant ſtanding in doubt that his Citizens
would attempt ſome conſpiracie againſt
him, tooke the bondmen of all the
cittie into his fauour, giuing them freedome,
and inciting them to murther
their maiſters, they fearing the effect
thereof, did ſuddainly flie forth of the
cittie, leauing their houſes, wiues, and
children in danger at the mercie of the Tyrant, who to take away
al means and hope from the Citizens; and from the ſlaues
all poſſibilitie euer to be reconciled vnto their maſters, ſuffered
and commanded the ſaid ſlaues to rauiſh their wiues & daughters:
Shortly after the Tyrant died ſuddainly by miſchance,

wherevpon the Citizens returned by force into the cittie, and
cauſed all the ſlaues to be executed or hanged, except one, who
hauing fained that he had rauiſhed his maſters daughter, did
faithfully preſerue and keepe her with all his goods, and reſtored
her a virgin vnto his Maiſter, moreouer, he did forewarne
the Citizens of the dangers which would follow, wherwith his
Maiſter receiued ſuch contentment, that he gaue him his
daughter in marriage. But the ſaid Citizen had a ſonne, who
oppoſed himſelfe therevnto, accuſing his father to bee void of
vnderstanding, and ſaid thus:
               OVr griefe would be the leſſe, if the Tyrant and not
the father had made ſuch marriages. Can anie man
ſay that he hath not loſt his wits, which ſeeketh rather
to immitate the Tyrant his enemie, then his bondman?
Who hath at the leaſt ſhown more loue vnto him, then
he doth either to ſonne or daughter, ſeeing that he maketh
himſelfe like vnto the Tyrant. If the bondman
had lien with my ſiſter, I had cauſed him to be hanged
as well as the reſt, and now you your ſelfe would haue
him to lie with her: you ſay that it is by marriage, I denie
that, for marriage is meant betwixt thoſe which are
worthie one of another, either in deed, or opinion:
Then ſeeing none beſides you, who are mad, of that opinion
that a ſlaue may be worthie to be your ſonne in
law, and my brother in law, it can bee no marriage: and
were it otherwiſe, I ſay that this mariage bringeth more
ſhame, then if ſhe were rauiſhed or abuſed by a Noble
man, for then at the leaſt the child which ſhould ſo bee
borne, ſhould be more worthie and be better reſpected
then the child of a bondman. Who would euer haue
thought that the Lord or Maiſter would haue ſuffered
his ſlaue further then the Tyrant would his friend? It

may therefore verie well bee ſaid that whoſoeuer maketh
ſuch marriages, is either a foole or a Tyrant, of
whom the one deſerueth death, and the other to loſe al
authoritie. O what a faire ſonne in law hath he choſen,
who hath nothing of anie worth in him, but that he
hath kept himſelfe from being hanged with the reſt of
his fellowes? Alaſſe my ſiſter ſhall then being vnder
the power of her father, loſe hir virginitie, which was
ſo carefully preſerued when ſhee was vnder the power
of the Tyrant, and he ſhall be thought worthie of ſuch
a marriage, which was not deemed worthie of the gibbet.
Farre more happie are thoſe which were defloured,
for they neuertheleſſe doe now take ſuch other husbands
as are worthy of them. It is a goodly matter whē
the father maketh ſuch a match for his owne daughter
as the Tyrant did for thoſe of his enemies. Ah vnfortunate
ſiſter, who being vnder the tyrants power diddeſt
deſire thy father, and vnder thy fathers power, thou
deſireſt the Tyrant, who would yet defend thee from
this iniurie. Is this a ſmall reward for a bondman to ſee
all his fellowes on the gallows, yet himſelfe to bee free
from the like? you ſay that he hath not rauiſhed his miſtris,
ſay likewiſe that he hath not ſlaine his maiſter, nor
vſed poyſon nor ſorcerie: doe you ſay that hee dooth a
good act that keepeth himſelf from crime for fear of puniſhment?
Our miſerie is as great now as the ſhame
which the other maids and wiues haue ſuffered during
the Tyrannie, for this is done during our freedome: the
others ſhame was in the abſence of their Parents, but
this is in the preſence of hers; the others ſhame was called
deflouring, but this here cannot be called conſtraint
but a voluntary conſent. It was not vertue that kept him
from doing as much as the others, but the feare to be

hanged with the others, hee knew very well that God
would not ſuffer ſo cruel a tyranny to indure, and when
the Citizens returned, the ſlaues ſhould bee puniſhed:
But why will you marrie your daughter to one ſo vild
and baſe, who hauing her in his power, both eſteemed,
and knew himſelfe to bee vnworthy of her? Wherein
onely he deſerueth ſome recompence, which may bee
done in giuing him freedome and meanes to liue, but
you muſt not giue him her, for whoſe ſake chiefly you
would reward him.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     I Doe now know very well that thou art ignorant
how true nobilitie proceedeth from vertue,
or els you would not iudge this man to be
ignoble, who is truly vertuous; ſeeing neither
the greedy deſire of welth was able to win him, nor the
prouoking of luſt could entice him, nor yet the feare of
puniſhment and cruel death might once terrifie him to
ſwarue from his dutie. Who dooth not know, if the tyrant
ſhould haue had but the leaſt inckling of his fidelitie
towards me, that he alone ſhould haue ſuffered the
ſame death which hath been inflicted vpon all the reſt.
Wherefore I cannot beſtow too much vpon him, who
hath not ſpared his owne life for my honour alone, but
for the honour of all our linage, from the which hee
ought not to be excluded. But where doe you find that
marriage conſiſteth in the equalitie of perſons, doe you
not know that M. Cato married a pore Plebeians daughter;
as alſo a number of other like examples might be rehearſed.
And if you ſtand vppon worthineſſe, you
ſhall find that your ſiſter deſerueth to haue but an honeſt

man, and ſuch a one you cannot denie him to be,
vnleſſe you ſpeake vntrulie: Nature hath not made any
bond or free, but it is fortune that impoſeth ſuch names
both on the one and the other, wherefore Plato hath
not ſaid in vaine, that Kings are born of bondmen, and
bondmen of Kings. Finally, if my daughter will not
take him for her husband, ſhe will as well cauſe me to
ſuſpect that ſhe is aggreeued or diſpleaſed with him in
that he tooke not his pleaſure with her ſo ſoone as hee
might, as I doe alreadie beleeue, that you would haue
her to die without children, becauſe you might be the
ſole heire of all my liuing.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 47.
               
                  Of him that would not deliuer his brother, that had
accuſed him falſly to haue ſlaine his father.
               
               
                  IT was an ancient law, that whoſoeuer did beare
falſe witneſse being conuinced thereof, he ſhould
remaine his bondman againſt whom hee was a
witneſse. Wherevpon it chanced that a certaine
man which had two ſonnes, carried one of them
abroad into the countrie with him, within a ſmall time after
the ſonne came home againe alone, the other ſonne accuſed his
brother that he had ſlaine his father, and added ſuch apparent
likelihood vnto his ſayings, that the other being vpon the rack,
confeſſed the offence which he had not committed; ſo that he is
condemned to a cruell death: but a certaine ſolemne feaſt
drawing neere at hand, ſome of his friends found the means to
reprieue him vntill the ſaid feaſt ſhould be ended: in the mean
time the father returned home to his houſe ſafe and ſound,

wherevpon he which was condemned, accuſed his brother of
falſe witneſse, and hauing conuinced him thereof, put him in
priſon: but the father intreated his ſon to deliuer his brother,
the which the other refuſed to doc, ſo that his father threatened
to diſherit him ſaying:
               VVHat canſt thou ſay ſaue only thy brother hath
produced or born falſe witneſſe againſt thee?
I ſay that he thought he had ſaid the truth, for
the loue which he did beare vnto me, and the fear that
he had of my death did make him beſide himſelfe: but
if thou deſireſt to prooue him more faultie, then I ſay
be thou mercifull, and euery one will ſay, that hee did
much amiſſe to offend ſo kind a brother. Art thou abaſhed
that thou foundeſt thy brother ſo cruell againſt
thee, ſeeing that hee beleeued or thought that thou
haddeſt ſlaine thy father and his? Why wilt not thou
ſuffer me to haue two children? wilt thou torment thy
brother to procure my death thereby? If it bee ſo, hee
hath not altogether accuſed thee wrongfullie. Alaſſe
one of my ſonnes was in priſon becauſe I did not returne,
and the other is in priſon becauſe I am returned.
If thou doſt not ſet him at libertie, I wil liue no longer:
whereby it ſhall be knowne that thou wantedſt not the
will, but the meanes or occaſion to murther me, and it
will be ſaid that thy brothers meaning was not ſo bad
againſt thee, as it was good towards me, ſeeing that hee
inwardly perceiued thine iniquitie, and in forſaking me
or returning without me, thou thy ſelfe wert the cauſe
that he accuſed thee. Doeſt thou not perceiue that I
am faſtened euen amidſt the ſelfe ſame chaines wherewith
my ſon is fettered, and that the ſame bond which
bindeth his hands, doth burthen my heart? Churliſh

and vngratious as thou art, wherefore doeſt thou keepe
thy brother in priſon and thy father in thraldome, who
by his returne hath ſaued thy life? The which (if otherwiſe
he ſhould haue done) thou couldeſt (next vnto
God) neuer hold of any other then of him.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  WHerefore ſhould I pardon him, who not onelie
ſought my death, but indeuoured to procure my
perpetuall defamation; It was to my great danger that
I was impriſoned, condemned, & deliuered, wherefore
no man but my ſelfe can rightlie iudge of my paſſion;
He falſlie alleadged that I had ſlaine my father, thereby
to cauſe me to die forwith, me I ſay who was euer a
moſt kind brother vnto him; who knoweth not that
the greater the loue is, the more vehement is the hate
when it is once iuſtlie conceiued. The hangman being
more pittifull then hee, was the firſt that brought me
news of my fathers returne. If I had euer ben wickedly
minded, I ſhould not haue had ſo iuſt a cauſe to be angry?
Is it to be wondered at, if I detaine him priſoner
that ſought to bring me to a ſhamefull end, it may be to
murther you afterwards ſecretlie? It is not only a hate,
but a feare which I haue, leaſt he ſhould complot ſome
other Treaſon againſt me, that hindereth me from deliuering
him. What is hee that did not verie plainly perceiue,
that the only prolonging of my puniſhment procured
his paine, although the daily expecting thereof
did more diſpleaſe me, then the preſent ſuffering the
ſame could haue daunted me, ſeeing the hangman alwaies
before me, who was himſelfe affrighted at thoſe
torments which were prepared for me. If my father do

loue me as well as he doth my brother, I would know
why he died not at his returne for ſorrow, ſeeing mee at
the gibbet? It is hee then for whoſe ſake hee would diſherit
me, that by one onely treaſon did thinke to murther
both his father and his brother, that he might as
well be ſole heire, as alſo poſſeſſe the whole inheritance
the ſooner.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 48.
               
                  Of a father that would renounce his ſon for marrying
a maid that had freed him from her fathers
priſon.
               
               
                  A Certaine man being taken by Pyrats or rouers on
the ſea, writ vnto his father for his ranſome, the
father excuſed himſelfe, ſo as the other remaining
without hope of releaſement, is releeued by
his daughter who was captain of the Pyrats: and
ſhee was not onely fauourable vnto him during his impriſonment,
but alſo promiſed to ſet him at libertie, and to flie away
with him, if he would ſweare to marrie her, either when hee
came home, or by the way: He did ſweare, and married her ſolemnly
before he came where his father remained; who was diſcontented
therewithall, and would haue had him to forſake her
for to marrie with a rich inheritrix, but he would not: wherevpon
his father would diſherit him, ſaying:
               O What a great ioy maiſt thou hope to haue of thy
wife, or what comfort can I expect of my daughter
in law? Who for the loue of a ſtranger, cared
not to hate her owne father: Yea, and was not aſhamed

to diſcloſe her diſordinate luſt vnto one whom ſhe neuer
knew before. Thou wilt ſay that firſt of all ſhe had
compaſſion of thy miſerie, and from that compaſſion
did loue ſpring; but I anſwere that it was neither compaſſion
nor loue towards thee, but rather a deſire to ſatisfie
her owne luſt and pleaſures, that prouoked her to
deliuer thee: wherefore thou art not in any ſort bound
vnto her hauing partly ſatisfied her deſire, for it ſhould
bee impoſſible for thee wholy to ſatisfie the ſame; ſeeing
the drie earth, the graue, and a womans wombe, are
three inſatiable things.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  I Should greatly erre to put away, or leaue her, who
hath not forſaken me in ſuch a place, where not onely
my father himſelfe feared to come, but alſo where he
either durſt not, or would not once ſuccour or releeue
me. If you had ſeene my bodie ouerloden with chains
and bonds, my hollow cheekes, my deepe ſunken eies,
as alſo my blacke and vnprofitable hands clogged with
giues, you would trulie haue ſaid that compaſſion onlie
mooued her to deliuer me, the which ſhe could not
doe without running away with me; and becauſe I
would not be vnthankful for ſo high a fauor, what better
reward could I beſtow vpon her then my ſelfe, ſince
I was the chiefeſt cauſe that ſhee hath nothing wherewithall
to marrie her: being then my wife, ſhe could do
no leſſe then loue me, but if it had beene ſo that ſhe had
loued a captiue, a ſlaue, or at the leaſt one far more miſerable,
Yet ought ſhe not to be therefore condemned.
The Romanes in times paſt did worthilie take a bondman
to be their King. Miſerie or pouertie neither hindreth

nor corrupteth vertue, but maketh it more excellent,
and is oftentimes the cauſe whereby a man may
ſhew himſelfe more worthie: but what thinke you of a
number of Romanes, who being violently taken from
the plough, haue neuertheleſſe greatly enriched and
increaſed the Commonwealth by their pouertie? why
then ſhould I make her miſerable, that hath freed mee
from miſerie? If I ſhould be ſo ill diſpoſed, yet ought
you both to reprooue me and chaſtice me for it: ſuffer
me then to performe my dutie, ſeeing you are not willing
either towards her or me to performe yours. And
in that ſhee loued mee better then her father, I am ſo
much the more bounden vnto her.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 49.
               
                  Of one that was likely to be defrauded of the honor
due to him for his victorie: becauſe he had taken
the armes belonging to a dead man.
               
               
                  A Certaine valiant conqueror chanced to
die, who hauing made his Teſtament,
he ordained that all his armes ſhould be
hanged vp for a Trophey about his ſepulchre,
and that it ſhould not be lawful
for anie man to take ought therof away.
It chanced that another man (who tofore
time had ben no leſse famous for his
victories in the Commonwealth then the other) loſt his armes
in the warres, and being charged by the enemies, he fled in the
cittie euen vnto the ſepulchre aforeſaid, from whence he tooke
the dead mans armes, wherewith he returned vnto the fight,

and there behaued himſelfe ſo valiantlie, that he came home againe
a conqueror. But like as vertue is euermore perſecuted by
enuie, ſo he (hauing placed the armes againe from whence hee
had taken them, and receiued the triumph of his victorie) is
accuſed of ſacriledge, and for robbing the ſepulchre of another
man by taking away his armes; but he excuſed himſelfe of the
crime ſaying:
               THeſe armes ſtood more in need of my aid, then I
of their aſſiſtance, for the victorie which I haue
obtained hath kept the enemies from taking the
cittie, and all that therein is, and although it were otherwiſe,
yet could not that be tearmed violence which one
taketh without reſiſtance to a good intent, and with a
will to reſtore it againe. Many ſpeake of armes which
know not what they meane, for theſe here being in my
hands at the combate were armes, but ſo long as they
ſhal remaine in the temple, or about the ſepulchre, they
can be tearmed no other then ſpoiles, or an vnprofitable
Trophey, ſo that it may well bee ſaid, that the armes
ſtood in need of my ſtrength. I lent my ſelfe vnto them,
whereby alſo the Commonwealth hath receiued great
benefit, and the dead man and his armes haue gained
more thereby then they loſt, for the dead ſhall bee the
more eterniſed, and his armes the more famous. Neceſſitie
is not only without law, but ſhe her ſelfe is the law
of time. Wherefore oftentimes ſhe cauſeth the richeſt
marchandiſe to bee throwne into the ſea to vnburthen
the ſhip: or to breake down, and ouerthrow ſome houſes
to ſaue others from fire: ſo likewiſe is one or more
members cut off to ſaue the reſt of the bodie: how
much more lawfull is it then in a neceſſity to do a good
act, as I haue done three, for I haue ouercome the enemie,

aſſured the Commonwealth, and increaſed the
glorie of theſe armes, in making them double victorious.
Is it not apparentlie knowne that manie doe morgage,
and ſell all the iewels and relicques of the church,
to conſerue the Commonwealth? Wherein then haue
I offended, imploying for the ſame a thing of ſo ſmall a
value, which ſerued but for an vnprofitable ſhew?
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THy fault is verie manifeſt hauing ſhewed thy ſelfe
badlie furniſhed for the combat, but redie inough
for the flight, and in the one and the other verie
cowardly; as alſo no leſſe impudent in defending thy
cauſe, then impious in committing ſo vild a crime: to
prooue this my ſaying true, thou haſt either loſt, or forſaken
thine armes, the which anie man of worth doth
farre preferre before his life. Thou couldſt not then (by
thine own ſaying) recouer that diſhonour of thy loſſe,
without taking away a dead mans armes, which were
hallowed and conſecrated to the church; and thou haſt
no other excuſe for thy theft or rapine, but that thou
diddeſt loſe thine: ſeeing then that both the one and
the other act is moſt execrable, whether of the twaine
will beſt ſerue thee for an excuſe? Thou ſaiſt, I haue ſet
the armes in their place againe; thou doeſt thereby confeſſe
that it was not lawfull to take them thence. It ſeemeth
thou wouldeſt inferre, that thou deſerueſt verie
much in that thou diddeſt not leaue them, as thou diddeſt
thine own, and it appeareth by thy ſpeech, that hauing
reſtored them againe, the law hath in no ſort been
offended; I anſwere, that in performing this offence,
thou haſt done like vnto him that ſhould firſt wound a

man, and afterwards heale him againe; or like vnto him
that reſtoreth any ſtolen goods, not only when he hath
no more need thereof, but after that he hath enriched
himſelfe by the means thereof. It might haue ben ſufficient
for thee, that thou haddeſt ſaued thine owne life
and reuenged the death of thy followers by theſe arms,
without vſurping the triumph and glorie of the good
lucke which they did yet containe by the vertue of the
dead man: wherefore thou art onely beholding vnto
them, els mighteſt thou as well haue beene conqueror
with thine own arms, without vſurping or taking away
theſe which thou kneweſt to be victorious. There is no
reaſon then to pardon the fault which thou thy ſelfe
haſt committed, for any the good ſucceſſe we haue receiued
by anothers mans weapons; and although the
ſame ſhould ſo be according to thine owne deſire, yet
muſt we doe iuſtice, and euen as thou haſt obtained the
honor and triumph of a conqueror, ſo muſt thou endure
the puniſhment due for crime.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 50.
               
                  Of an adulterer, who hauing ſlaine a Tyrant, claimeth
the reward and honour that was promiſed,
the which was refuſed to be giuen vnto him.
               
               
                  A Certaine Tyrant hauing by force obtained the
ſole gouernment of a Commonwealth, the Citizens
thereof did ſecretly ordain amongſt them,
that whoſoeuer could ſlay the ſaid Tyrant, hee
ſhould haue tenne thouſand crownes in recompence,
and his ſtatue or image ſhould be ſet vp in the Temple,

and bee called the onely patron and protector of his countrie.
Wherevpon it happened that a yong man did ſo well court the
Tyrants wife, that he inioied her at his pleaſure, and oftentimes
he went vnto her by night diſguiſed, and ſometimes in the habite
of a woman. In the end he was ſuddainly ſurpriſed by the
Tyrant, who would haue ſlaine him, but the yoong man being
the ſtronger, or rather being aided by the wife, tooke the tyrants
ſword from him, and ſlue him. Wherefore hee demanded of the
Commonwealth the recompence promiſed vnto him which
ſhould ſlay the Tyrant; but the Cittizens gainſaied his demand
in this ſort:
               
                  IF the Tyrant himſelfe had not armed thee,
thou haddeſt neuer ſlaine him, but what ſhall I
ſay, Seeing that one Tyrant murthered another
at all aduentures? For adulterie is no leſſe
offence then tyrannie: but of whom requireſt thou a
reward for thy not ſuffering him to ſlay thee, Seeing
that euen thoſe which are moſt wicked, doe eſchew
death as much as they may? the tyrant ſhould haue deſerued
as much if he had ſlaine thee, as thou doeſt in
killing him, ſo that can be ſaid to be nothing els but an
equall combat, the iſſue whereof hath beene happie for
thee: neither did the honeſter, nor the innocenter man
get the victorie, but rather the ſtronger, or the vilder
perſon. Seeing it was manifeſt that the Tyrant came to
murther thee who wert as wicked as himſelfe, and that
he brought the meanes to kill himſelfe, why commeſt
thou alone to demand the reward? The which if anie
were done, ought to be diuided in three parts, that is to
ſay, one part to the Tyrant for bringing thee a ſword,
another part to his wife for helping thee to take it from
him, and the laſt and leaſt part for thy ſelfe: Moreouer,

thou diddeſt not enter armed as thoſe do which would
kill, but thou camſt delicatlie apparelled, and perfumed
into the chamber, not without good eſpiall before
hand of the Tyrants abſence. A valiant man no doubt,
who deſired not to find the Tyrant, but his wife, who
was not pricked with hate, but paſſioned with loue.
They which goe purpoſely to kill anie one doe arme
themſelues with courage and courtelax, and doe goe
thether where they thinke to find thoſe they meane to
kil. Euery noble act is begun with an intent, and performed
by occaſion: for as oftentimes the vertuous enterpriſes
are rewarded, although the ſucceſſe doe fall out
ſiniſterly, ſo are wicked enterpriſes not left vnpuniſhed,
although they ſucceed not according to the meaning
of the malefactor; and as vertue without effect loſeth
not her glorie, euen ſo likewiſe is that neuer allowed for
vertue, or worthie of reputation, which happeneth by
fortune, or chance. The wiſdome of our Senat, would
neuer haue appointed ſo great a reward for him that
ſhould ſlay the Tyrant, if they had thought the ſame
ſhould haue ben performed by ſo wicked a perſon, not
willingly, but by conſtraint, not by vertue, but by vice.
Neuer was there heard of ſuch a combat, for hee which
was counted the vildeſt caitife, did fight for the beſt &
honeſteſt cauſe; the Tyrant fought to reuenge his owne
wrong, and his wiues reputation, and thou to maintain
thy lewd act and foule adulterie: ſo that it may truly bee
ſaid, that thou diddeſt murther a womans husband, and
fortune hath ſlaine the Tyrant, by whoſe death the
Commonwealth hath gained her freedome, although
he was not ſlaine for the ſame intention. It is a goodlie
matter to ſee thee come polluted with the kiſſes of an
adulterous minion, to demand the recompence belonging

vnto a vertuous man; this honor ſhould bee
due vnto ſuch a one as had freely killed the Tyrant, being
therevnto prouoked by vertue; but not vnto thee,
who diddeſt it by chance or conſtraint, thereby to defend
thine owne life: wherefore the ſame life which
thou haſt ſaued by this deed, is a recompence great enough
for thy deſert; or if thou wilt denie this, conſider
that firſt we muſt puniſh the vice, and afterwards reward
the vertue: thou canſt not denie but that thou
diddeſt firſt commit adulterie before thou ſlueſt the tyrant,
firſt then ſuffer puniſhment for thy fault, and then
we will afterwards conſult whether thou deſerueſt that
reward which thou demandeſt. But aboue all things
remember this, that no good act is to be attempted by
miſchiefe, neither muſt vertue be attained vnto by vice.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  YOu ſay that I went not of purpoſe to kill the Tyrant,
ſeeing that I did goe vnarmed: But I affirme
that I did, which is plainly approued by his death.
In that I was vnarmed, it doth not any whit deminiſh
my vertue, but rather augment my danger, the which
not to eſteeme, nor feare, can bee no other then vertue.
You muſt not examine what I carried into the Caſtle,
But what I tooke away thence; Likewiſe neuer aske
wherefore I went thether, but marke what I haue done
there: True it is that the ſword was none of mine, but
the hands were mine, the courage, counſell, danger,
paines, and laſtly the act was mine. Doe you call mee an
adulterer, who am the only cauſe that your wiues need
not ſtand in feare to be anie more rauiſhed? I did warily
conſider (ſeeing the ſtrong fortification of the caſtle)

what meanes there might bee to kill the Tyrant, but hauing
tried the ſouldiors, the ſeruants, and the maids, I
could find no fitter occaſion, then by the means of his
wife, who long before had been liberall inough of her
honor vnto others: furthermore, it can bee no more
tearmed adulterie to cuckold a Tyrant, then it is reputed
murther to kill a Tyrant; but it is rather worthie of
reward. Moreouer, it was verie dangerous to carrie a
ſword ſecretly into the caſtle, but very eaſie to find one
there, for my purpoſe was that if I could meet with the
Tyrant, euerie thing ſhould ſerue me for a ſword; likewiſe
I was ſure that hee neuer went without a ſword,
and that when two ſtriue for one ſword, it remaineth
vnto him that is the ſtrongeſt or worthieſt. Alſo I was
not ignorant how God doth alwaies reſiſt ſuch wicked
perſons as hee was, and doth fauour ſuch lawfull enterpriſes
as mine: and you cannot ſay that I went not to
ſeeke the Tyrant, ſeeing I ſtaied of purpoſe for him euen
in his bed chamber, whether I was ſure that he vſed
to come all alone. Take not then that from me by
your malice, which is due vnto me by my vertue and
manhood.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 51.
               
                  Of the father that adopted for his heire, the ſonne of
his forſaken ſonne.
               
               
                  THere was a man which had two ſonnes, the one
whereof he did vtterly denounce and forſake,
in that hee had married with a woman of loſe
life, by her had a ſon, and afterwards fell ſicke:
Whervpon he ſent to intreat his father to come

at the leaſt to viſit him once before hee died, who being come
vnto him, his forſaken ſonne commended his little child vnto
his care, and then died ſuddainly. Wherefore the grandfather
was ſo greatly moued with compaſsion that he adopted the child
for his owne, and made him coheire with his other ſonne, who
being therewithall diſpleaſed, accuſed his father to bee void of
his ſences, but he gainſaid him thus:
               THis were a verie new manner of loſing a mans
wits, ſeeing that by your ſaying I ſhould bee verie
wiſe, if I did not know thoſe which were mine
owne. Truly I did expect that ſome bodie ſhould haue
intreated or requeſted mee to haue reuoked this my
poore forſaken ſonne, but no man durſt be ſo bold, ſeeing
thou which wert his brother, diddeſt neuer doe
thine indeuor therein: wherefore it is to bee ſuppoſed,
that all men knowing thy ambition to bee fole heire,
they feared to diſpleaſe thee. Alaſſe this poore mans
life was onely prolonged but vntil he might ſpeak with
me, and when hee had once heard me, he opened his
eies, (ſhut vp in a manner alreadie) to ſee me, retaining
his fleeting ſoule but only whileſt hee bad me farewell,
ſo that I may rightlie ſay hee left both life and child in
my boſome. To conclude, I well perceiued by his end
(but alaſſe too late) that he was truly my ſonne; but thy
rigorous crueltie towards him, and thy great ingratitude
towards me, maketh mec in doubt whether thou
art his brother or no.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THe father of this child is vnknowne, and although
he were, yet doe your owne deeds ſufficiently teſtifie

that you are not well in your wits, if you forſooke
my brother without a cauſe: but if he were worthie of
your diſpleaſure, he did yet further deſerue it in marrying
with a lewd woman, and if he by this mariage were
the more vnworthie to be reuoked, much more vnworthy
then is this baſtard and vnknowne child, to be your
heire: ſo that I know not whether of the two iniuries
you do vnto my brother is the greater; either in taking
away part of his brothers inheritance from him, or in adopting
him a falſe heire. Being perſuaded and importuned
by this diſhoneſt woman, hee recommended
vnto you his ſonne, which he did very wel know he neuer
begat: but what cannot ſuch women perſuade?
Or what will he refuſe to doe for a whore, that was not
aſhamed to giue himſelfe vnto her? How then can you
be iudged wiſe in adopting another mans ſonne, to diſherit
your owne?
               
            
            
               Declamation. 52.
               
                  Of the vnchaſt woman that was adiudged to be
throwne headlong down more then one time.
               
               
                  A Woman that was attainted of whoredome, and for
the ſame condemned to be caſt headlong downe from
the top of an high tower, being readie to bee throwne
downe, did pray vnto God that he would declare her innocency,
in preſeruing her from death; her praiers being ended, ſhe fell
from the top downe to the ground without receiuing any hurt
at all. Neuertheleſse, the Marſhall would haue throwne her
downe againe. Wherevnto ſhe replied in this ſort:
               
                  
VVHerefore wil you reſiſt the wil of God, which
hath preſerued me? And were it not ſo, yet is
the iudgement accompliſhed. I was (though
wrongfullie) condemned to bee throwne headlong
downe, I haue ſo ben, my iudgement and execution being
accompliſhed, what would you els doe? Am I not
acquited, Seeing that it was not ſaid that I ſhould bee
executed anie more then once? Neither is any man euer
executed two times, eſpecially becauſe euery iudgement
ought rather to be mittigated by clemencie, then
aggrauated by crueltie. If you would puniſh me for the
offence which you ſuppoſe I haue committed againſt
God; ſeeing he hath declared me to be innocent, why
would you offend him in puniſhing me? It is the vſuall
place from whence others are throwne downe, wherefore
it is verie likely, that if I had ben guiltie, I ſhould
no doubt haue died as well as they.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     THou ſheweſt thy ſelfe to be as ſhameleſſe at thy
puniſhment, as thou wert when thou diddeſt
commit the offence which thou wouldſt now
denie. Knoweſt thou not that deniall after ſentence
is once paſt, is nothing auaileable? The meaning
of which ſentence muſt be interpreted, which is, that
thou muſt die, likewiſe it is either a chance that thou art
not dead, or els thou vſeſt ſome charmes or witchcraft:
for were it as thou ſaieſt, that God would haue thee ſaued
for thine innocencie; he would rather haue defended
thee before thou haddeſt been condemned falſely,
then ſheilded thee from death after thy fall: but it is

more likely that he would prolong thy paine, becauſe
ſo ſhort a death is too eaſie for ſo hainous a crime as
thine is: or els becauſe thou haſt committed other offences,
he would haue thee caſt down more times then
once; for God is not ſo ſlacke to helpe the innocents:
He ſaued Suſanna before ſhe was ſtoned, not ſuffering
the ſtones to touch her bodie. Finally, if it be his diuine
will that thou ſhouldeſt be vnpuniſhed, thou ſhalt haue
as little hurt at the ſecond or third throwing downe as
thou haddeſt at the firſt.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 53.
               
                  Of her who hauing killed a man being in the ſtewes,
claimed for her chastity and innocencie to be an
Abbeſſe.
               
               
                  THe order of the religious women is ſuch,
as they muſt be pure, chaſt, and free from
all crime, but the Abbeſse muſt be the
chaſteſt of all the reſt. Wherevpon it
chanced that a certaine yoong Nunne of
Naples was to ſaile into Sicilie to be an
Abbeſse there, but her miſfortune was
ſuch, that ſhe was taken vpon the ſea by Pyrats, they ſould her
vnto a bawd in Barbarie, who put the ſaid Nunne into a Brothelhouſe
to get monie by her, but ſhe declaring her miſfortune
vnto ſuch men as came to take their pleaſure of her, did ſo win
them by her perſuaſions, that they giuing her the accuſtomed reward,
left her a virgin: vntill that on a time there came vnto
her an inſolent ſouldior, who would in no ſort regard her ſpeech
but hauing paied his monie, would by force haue had his will of

her, and as he was ſtriuing with her, ſhe drew his dagger forth
of his ſheath, and ſlue him, for the which ſhe was put in priſon,
but being before the Iudges, ſhee was not onely acquited of the
murther, but alſo they ſent her back vnto Sicilie vnto the place
whether ſhee was determined to goe. She being there arriued,
they would not receiue her for Abbeſſe, but ſaid.
               
                  THis woman here which would be an Abbeſſe,
ſhould yet haue ben in the Brothelhouſe, if ſhe
had not murthered a man; but can ſhe be chaſt,
comming from ſuch a place? Nay let vs ſee
whether it be lawfull to receiue ſuch into monaſteries,
whom the ſtewes and the priſon forſaketh, Seeing the
order of religion may very lawfully be denied, euen vnto
thoſe as doe but onely paſſe by ſuch places? ſhe ſaith
fortune conſtrained mee vnto theſe inconueniences,
therefore ought euery one to haue compaſſion vpon
me: but wee ſay that thoſe which are worthie of pittie,
are vnworthie of a prelateſhip, neither is it a cuſtome amongſt
vs, that ſuch places as are of greateſt honours
ſhould be beſtowed in recompence of ſuſtained harms,
ſeeing that the only freeing them from their ſaid harms
may ſerue for a ſufficient recompence of their paſſed
miſeries. Likewiſe, we may conſider how ſmally ſhe deſerued
by the little care her parents took of her diſtreſſe,
not onely in ſuffering her to be loſt or taken away, but
being taken neuer ſought either to recouer her, or once
to ſeeke her out: and what did the Pyrats ſee in her
that they rather ſold her vnto a pandor, then to a Princeſſe,
or to ſome other honourable ladie? If ſhe knew
how to perſuade ſo manie men to leaue her a Virgine,
(as ſhe ſaith) wherefore could ſhe not perſuade her miſtreſſe
to ſuffer her to gaine her liuing by ſome other

means, rather then to put her forth to ſo vild a vſe; or els
why did ſhe not as Hippo the faire Grecian did, who
leaped into the ſea ſo ſoone as ſhe perceiued that ſhe
was taken by Pyrats. Alaſſe if this woman obtaine the
Abbeſſeſhip, greatlie are the Nunnes of this order to be
pittied, if amongſt them there cannot bee found one
more chaſt then an harlot, or more innocent then a
murtherer. She cannot be chaſt inough to rule ouer vs,
eſpeciallie ſeeing ſhe ſaith; I knew how to perſuade all
thoſe that came vnto me: the which ſheweth a certain
token of her immodeſtie, for otherwiſe how could ſhe
haue pratled ſo well in that place where ſuch as were
modeſt would haue burſt into teares, and without being
able to ſpeake one onlie word, would haue died for
ſhame. Let vs then take the caſe thus: that in her there
are three do claime to be Abbeſſe, the firſt, is one taken
by Pyrats, the ſecond ſuch a one as hath liued in the
ſtewes, & the third ſhe that murthered a man, of whom
the beſt is farre vnworthie of anie honour.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  GOd herein was minded to ſhew his power, by
making this woman free in bondage, chaſt in a diſhoneſt
place, and moſt innocent in committing
murther to defend her chaſtitie. I know not whether anie
did euer deſerue the place of Abbeſſe ſo well as ſhe:
but I am ſure there would bee ſomewhat to doe to depoſe
all the Abbeſſes that are leſſe worthie then ſhee.
How chaſt ſhe is, the blood of the ſlaine ſouldior doth
teſtifie; how innocent ſhe is, the Iudges doe declare;
how happie ſhe is, her returne doth ſhew. Wherefore it
is verie manifeſt that God would neuer haue preſerued

her from ſo manie perrils, if it had not ben to ſerue him
in ſome worthie place. Therefore the ſame God which
hath protected her, is himſelfe alone a further teſtimonie
of her chaſtitie, and he onely is able to comprehend
her admirable valor.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 54.
               
                  Of him who againſt his fathers mind perſuaded his
ſiſter to cauſe him to die that had forced her.
               
               
                  THe law is, that whoſoeuer killeth a man
by chance, he ſhould be baniſhed or put to
exile for fiue yeares: likewiſe euerie maid
that is forced or rauiſhed, may chuſe
whether ſhe will haue the raniſher die, or
whether ſhe will haue him to be her husband.
Wherevpon it chanced that a certaine
man which had a ſon and a daughter, was exiled for the
cauſe aforeſaid: his daughter that remained with her brother
in the houſe was rauiſhed by another yong man, who after his
fault committed, fled vnto the maidens father, with whom hee
ſo much preuailed, that he obtained letters from him, wherein
he commanded his daughter to chuſe her ſaid rauiſher for her
husband, and not to require his death; the father likewiſe writ
vnto his ſonne, intreating him to perſuade his ſiſter to conſent
therevnto: who on the contrarie conſtrained his ſiſter to demand
his death, ſo that the father at his returne did caſt off and
diſherit his ſonne, ſaying:
               A Laſſe my misfortune is intollerable, ſeeing that I
being (as alwaies I haue been) a louer of the Commonwealth,

haue notwithſtanding bereaued her of
two men, and both againſt my will, yet not without being
culpable therefore; in the one manſlaughter I was
abuſed by fortune, in the other by him who is in name
(yet not indeed) my ſonne, that hath inforced his ſiſter
to diſobey her father, as well as he, in a iuſt commandement,
and cauſed her to obey him in a cruell reuenge,
ſome may ſay that it is incident vnto man to offend, it
had ben a ſufficient excuſe, if I had not both aduertiſed
and intreated him the contrarie, and alſo if hee had not
knowne the griefe which I alreadie ſuſtained for being
the cauſe of a mans death, and that I did therefore owe
a citizen vnto the commonwealth, whom I might haue
ſatisfied in ſauing the life of this ſame man, by whom
manie others might haue ben begotten; ſo that hauing
ſlaine the other vnaduiſedly, I might haue ſaued this
circumſpectly: but thou becauſe thou wouldſt haue no
nephewes by thy ſiſter, and that thou mighteſt cauſe me
die with ſorrow, haſt broken my purpoſe, wherefore I
iudge thee vnworthie of the heritage, which ſo plainlie
thou ſeekeſt to obtain by ſo many vnreaſonable means.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THe death of a good Citizen, cannot be repaired by
ſauing the life of a wicked caitife, for that is no ſatisfaction,
but rather a double offence vnto the
Commonwealth: Moreouer, thoſe children which
ſhould bee borne by the marriage of a rauiſher would
ſerue but for witneſſes of their fathers ſhame, and the
wrong done vnto our ſtocke, the which ought not to
bee increaſed by him that had doublie wronged them,
hauing not onelie iniuriouſlie aſſailed the houſe of an

exile (although the affliction of the afflicted ought not
to bee increaſed) but alſo after hee had wronged him,
without anie ſhame at all comming before him, he firſt
made him priuie to the iniurie, and in a manner both
conſtrained him to conſent vnto it, and to allow thereof:
wherein then haue I offended? By complaining of
the iniurie done to my abſent father? I cannot be either
forſakē or diſherited, becaus I haue done but according
vnto law. Likewiſe my father who was ſo far off from
the place where the wrong was committed, could not
well iudge thereof, ſeeing that his griefe being abſent,
could not be like ours that were preſent, and alſo thee
ſtate wherein he was, together with his age, made him
to indure wrong better then I could. Furthermore, the
adulterer knowing the horribleneſſe of his crime, went
to make his agreement with him who was ignorant of
the truth, and returning hether, hee renued the iniurie,
prowdly commanding vs to like of his marriages, by
vertue of certain letters, that (it may be) he either obtained
by force, or at the leaſt gained by frawd. No man is
vndone too late at anie time, but a manifeſt vndoing is
it, to giue ones daughter vnto ſuch a one, as with the
helpe of ſuch wicked impes as himſelfe, hath both defloured
her and diſhonoured her, breaking into our
houſe by force of armes. I beleeue he would neuer tell
you all this (father) or if he did tell you, and you were
content therewith, or that you bewaile his death anie
more, you are no leſſe faultie then he.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 55.
               
                  Of him who gaue ouer his betrothed wife vnto his
ſicke ſon.
               
               
                  
                  A Certaine man had two ſonnes, neuertheleſse hee was
betrothed or made ſure vnto a yoong maiden, with
whom one of his ſonnes became ſo far in loue, that
he fell ſicke, and no doubt he had died, if the Phiſition had not
told his father that his ſonnes diſeaſe proceeded of loue, wherevpon
the father came vnto his ſon, praied him, coniured him,
and laſtly threatned, not only to curſe him, but alſo to kill him,
(holding his ſword in his hand) if he would not manifeſt vnto
him the cauſe of his ſickneſse, and what ſhe was whom he loued,
wherfore the ſonne ſeeing himſelfe in ſuch an extremitie, trembling
and weeping, confeſsed that hee was in loue with his mother
in law; the father to ſaue his ſonnes life yeelded her whom
he had betrothed vnto him, and cauſed them to be married together.
The other ſonne who was enuious againſt his brother,
accuſed his father to haue loſt his wits, the which the father denied,
ſaying:
               IT is thou that haſt loſt thy wits, or at the leaſt art vtterlie
blinded with paſſion and ill will, ſo that thou wilt
be the cauſe, that euerie man will bee amaſed at ſuch an
act as was neuer ſeene: that a mother in law ſhould bee
more pittifull vnto her ſonne in law then thou art vnto
thine owne brother. Calleſt thou that want of vnderſtanding,
when by my wiſedome I ſaue my ſon, in
granting him her, who in no ſort was aggreeable for
me: I ſay that in keeping her from him, I ſhould haue
loſt my wits, ſeeing that ſhe might haue done ill, I
might not haue done well, and my ſonne ſhould haue
died: I am ſure that he loued her better and more feruently
then I did, therefore is ſhe due vnto him, what
wrong do I thee? Art thou angrie to haue thy brother,
and not a mother in law? I did draw the ſword before

his face, the which no man could take foorth of my
hands, but only himſelfe in confeſſing the truth. Laſtlie,
all that a father doth to ſaue his ſonnes life is not onlie
very excuſable, but to be accounted for exceeding great
wiſdome and iuſt pittie.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IT had been better for my brother to haue died, then
to haue cauſed his concupiſcence ſo apparently to be
diſcloſed, Seeing the beſt that can bee ſaid of him is,
that hee was healed by adulterie: that you haue ſaued
him by execration, and ſhe hath holpen him by abhomination.
Why may not that bee tearmed worſe then
adulterie which is done chieflie by the commandemēt
of the husband? I know not whether you haue ſhewed
your ſelfe more mad in betrothing this woman, or in
forſaking her, or els in marrieng her againe with your
ſonne? But how farre beſides himſelfe is hee, that thinketh
it a good deed or a good turne to commit whoredome?
A wiſe man (no doubt) that drew his ſword, not
to puniſh adulterie, or to eſchew the ſlander thereof,
but rather to inforce his wife and ſonne to commit adulterie
together. My brother ought rather to haue periſhed,
then to bee cured ſo perniciouſlie; but ſuppoſe
that if he had luſted after his ſiſter, or his mother, ought
hee to haue had either of them? Theſe remedies are
more dangerous, and more greeuous, then danger, miſchiefe,
or death it ſelfe. But all this hath ben compacted
betwixt the ſon, the betrothed woman, and the Phiſition,
who likewiſe claimed an intereſt therein; And thus
the diſeaſe, the cure, and the adulteries proceeded of
your follie.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 56.
               
                  Of a man that is found dead in his bed, his wife
wounded, and the accuſations together with the
witneſſe of a child.
               
               
                  IT chanced that a certaine man being a
widdower that had a ſonne, married his
ſecond wife, by whom hee had another
ſon: and becauſe his firſt ſonne did but
badly agree with his mother in law, the
father gaue him part of his houſe, which
was neuertheleſſe diuided with a wall, ſo
that they were ſeuerall: likewiſe this old man had a receauer or
factor which was a yoong man and a faire, ſo that this man
was ſomewhat ſuſpicious that he loued his wife, which iealouſie
was not a little increaſed by the ſonnes perſuaſions, ſo that therby
oftentimes there chanced ſuch braules betweene them, that
his 
                     •
                  actor and he were vpon tearmes of parting. Wherevpon
it happened, that ſhortly after the nieghbors through the wiues
exclamatiōs, ran into the houſe, where they found the goodman
ſlaine in his bed, his wife wounded, and ſo much of the common
wall broken downe, that a man migh teaſily paſse thorow it:
wherefore not only the ſonne, but alſo the factor was ſuſpected
to be guiltie of this murther; and hauing apprehended them
both, they brought them before the child being of three yeares
old, who did lie in the ſame bed, and asked him which of them
it was that had beate his father, the child pointed with his ſinger
vnto the factor, wherefore the ſon accuſed him for murthering
his maſter: but the factor through the breaking of the
wall, accuſed the ſon for murthering his father, ſaying:
               
                  
O How wicked this world of ours is, ſeeing that it
hath brought foorth ſo curſed a man, that hath at
one inſtant both murthered his father, & would
haue don the like to his mother in law ſo that I beleeue
the feare of miſſing did in ſome ſort hinder or ſtay his
murtherous hand, from giuing ſo great a ſtroke as hee
intended, and ſhe fained her ſelfe dead leaſt his purpoſe
ſhould haue been effected; or to ſaue her husbands life,
whom this traitor hath murthered leaſt he ſhould haue
been a witneſſe againſt him for the fact, as alſo becauſe
he did moſt vnnaturallie hate him, for the kind and honeſt
loue the man did beare vnto his wife, and therfore
he ſought the means to expell me from hence, that hee
might better accompliſh his wicked enterpriſe, for two
are more eaſilie ſlaine then three, and it may be that he
did put on ſuch like apparell as mine to abuſe this poor
infant, and to corrupt his innocencie by falſe teſtimonie:
but what witneſſe can be more manifeſt, then the
breaking of the wall, the which is likewiſe pulled down,
for the deſire he had to murther his mother in law.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     IT is verie apparent that thou commeſt neither
vnprouided of ſophiſtical arguments long before
premeditated, nor that thou art anie whit
abaſhed of this murther, ſeeing that the horror
there of doth nothing hinder thy tongue from babling.
O miſerable man that I am: hearing the noiſe I ranne
thether thinking to haue ſeene the adulterers taken, but
alaſſe I found my father killed, which doth aſtoniſh me
in ſuch ſort as I will onely anſwere that I doe not onely

reſt vpō the childs demonſtration, but vpon his further
affirmation, although thou haſt of long time kept him
in awe, ſo that in pointing to thee with his finger, hee
hath both declared thee to bee the murtherer, and alſo
that thou haſt oftentimes forbidden him to accuſe thee
for the laſciuious kiſſes proffered in his preſence: there
is not anie witneſſe more ſufficient then the pointing of
this innocent child who is of ſufficient age to be able to
know and diſcerne, although not ſubtile inough to deceiue
faine or lie. If thou ſaieſt that one witneſſe is not
ſufficient, then wil I ſtand vnto the peoples cenſure, and
will not refuſe that thou ſhe and I may bee all three examined
by torments, for God the right and fortitude
ſhall be for the innocent.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 57.
               
                  Of him that would compell his ſonne to marry with
his ſister in law, that was by him accuſed of adultery.
               
               
                  A Man had two ſonnes, to the one whereof hee gaue a
wife, who being married, made a certain very long voiage
into a far countrie, during his abſence, his brother
tooke ſuch an hatred againſt his ſiſter in law that hee accuſed
her of adultery, but yet not before the Iudges, wherevpon her
husband being returned, took a bondwoman that was his wiues
ſeruant, and cauſed her to bee tortured ſo extreamely to know
the truth, that ſhee died with the torment not confesſing anie
thing, wherefore his father, that loued his daughter in law, did
ſharpely reprooue him, that hee would ſo lightly conceiue an ill
opinion of her. He as well for greefe that he had wrongfully ſuſpected

his wiues honeſtie, and vniuſtly killed her bondwoman,
as alſo to perceiue his brothers malice, and to haue procured his
fathers diſpleaſure, did diſpaire, and either hanged or killed
himſelfe, wherfore the father willed that according to the Iewiſh
law, the other ſonne ſhould marrie his brothers widdow, or
if otherwiſe he refuſed, hee would vtterly forſake him and renounce
him for his heire, against the which his ſonne pleaded
in this ſort:
               YOu would haue me to marrie with my brothers
widdow, whom I haue accuſed for an adultreſſe,
(as in ſooth ſhe is) who cauſed both my brother
to kill himſelfe for griefe, and compelleth you to diſherit
me. I beleeue that you tempt me to take her to trie
whether I did accuſe her wrongfully or no, for you
your ſelfe would neuer giue mee an adultreſſe to wife:
but you might thinke, if I did take her that ſhe is chaſt,
and I am falſe: truly if you could make mee to marrie
her that both hateth me mortallie, and I know to bee a
diſhoneſt woman, one might then aſſuredlie beleeue
that nothing would bee euer impoſſible for you to effect.
But why would you compell me to make her my
bedfellow that hath made mee brotherleſſe? Her I ſay
that is the cauſe of her husbands death, of the diſcord
twixt you and me, of the ſcandale to our linage, and of
the peoples murmuring? I haue alreadie choſen a wife
that loueth me, that will follow me if I will, that wil neuer
forſake me either in aduerſitie or proſperitie, and finallie
that will bee ſuch a one vnto me as a wife ought
to be vnto her husband, which will be more worth vnto
me then a moſt great inheritance; whereas if on the
contrary I ſhould marrie this woman, euery one might
ſuppoſe that I loued my brother but little, to wed her
that was the cauſe of his loſſe.
               
                  
                  The Anſwere.
                  THere is nothing more reaſonable (ſeeing thy brother
was deſirous by his death to acquite the
wrong which he had don vnto his wiſe, by giuing
credit to thy falſe accuſation) then that thou by marrying
her, mighteſt alſo declare her innocencie; for the
ſhorteſt follies are beſt: wherefore it were better for
thee to confeſſe, and blot out thy fault by doing well,
then in perſeuering alwaies in thine obſtinacie, to ſhew
thy ſelfe in a double fault, for thou art the onely cauſe
of all theſe chances and ſlanders which thou obiecteſt;
therefore in not making amends for thy fault, I may
lawfully diſinherit thee for thy follie.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 58.
               
                  Of the ſorcereſse, which poyſoned her ſon in law, and
accuſed her owne daughter to haue ben conſenting
therevnto.
               
               
                  THe law appointeth that euery woman which vſeth
poyſoh, being conuinced of the crime, ſhould
be tortured, vntill ſhe accuſed ſuch as were partakers
or conſenting vnto her wicked act. Whervpon
it happened that a man hauing but one
ſonne, married a ſecond wife, of whom hee had one daughter,
who being of reaſonable yeares, the ſonne died of poyſon, and
the mother in law is not onely ſuſpected for his death, but accuſed
and conuinced thereof; wherefore ſhe being laied vpon the
racke to make her confeſſe ſuch as were conſenting to her fact,

ſhe accuſed her owne daughter, ſo that ſhee was adiudged to bee
burned with her mother: but the poor father gainſaid it thus.
               AH miſerable child, ſeeing thy mother hateth thee
as much as thy father loueth thee; O miſcheeuous
woman that euen vnto thine owne daughter thou art
worſe then a ſtepdame, art thou not ſufficiently glutted
with thy paſſed murthers, but thou muſt further gorge
thee with thy daughters maſſacre? But who knoweth
not that ſuch kind of people deſire not to die without
ſlaughter? Wherefore amongſt the fencers, or ſouldiors,
that combat is moſt cruell which is fought againſt a
deſperate man that is ſure to die: no doubt but they
that may not liue, will procure any murther if they can,
for the death of others maketh them the leſſe to bewaile
the life which they are readie to loſe; and where
deſpaire is, there doth rage abound, becauſe the horror
of death, filleth their courage with furie, & they reſemble
certaine beaſts that bite thoſe weapons wherewith
they are wounded, & being thruſt through, they make
their wound the greater, that they might approch neere
him that hath gored them. But how ſhould ſhe feare to
belie one, that taketh a pleaſure to poyſon anie? Why
will not ſhe effect my daughters death, that without anie
cauſe wrought my ſonnes decay? But what ſonne?
Truly euen he that might haue been beloued of euerie
ſtepdame that had been leſſe wicked then ſhe, that cannot
ſo much as loue her owne husband. But to do him
a diſpight, ſhe hateth her owne daughter to death, and
remembring that ſhe was a mother in law, forgetteth
that euer ſhe was a mother indeed: let then the truth of
the innocēt father be of more eſtimatiō thē the leaſings
of the guiltie mother, ſeeing that in the extremitie of

death or torments, the wicked doe neuer ſpeake truth.
For proofe whereof, a bondman that Cato had, being
conuinced of theft, and tortured therefore, affirmed
that Cato was acceſſarie to the theft, who was then better
to be beleeued, the bondman and the torture, or Cato?
In like ſort you are more to credit the innocencie of
the daughter, then the malice of the mother.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THere are ſome beaſts ſo raging mad, that their
yong ones are no ſooner brought forth, but they
become as fierce as their dames, wherefore it is
beſt to ſtrangle them while they are yoong; likewiſe the
venomous hearb taketh his poyſon from the root, how
much more then may this girle be wicked, being born
of a mother ſo execrable, and ſo much the rather, becauſe
the daughters doe alwaies reſemble the mother
more then the father: how greatly then hath her wicked
nature ben furthered by lewd counſell, with hope
and ambition to be her ſelfe the ſole heire? Which was
the principall occaſions, that this ſtepmother poyſoned
your ſonne, and that the daughter conſented therevnto:
wherefore it were no reaſon that ſhee ſhould eſcape
puniſhment.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 59.
               
                  Of the Praetor that cauſed the head of a malefactor
to be cut off at the requeſt of a whore.
               
               
                  
                  
                     FLaminius the Romane Praetor gouerning in
France, ſitting at the table with a comman woman
whom he deerely loued, ſhee ſaid vnto him,
that ſhe had of long time deſired to ſee ſome man
executed by iuſtice, but ſhee was aſhamed to goe
vnto the common place of execution. Wherevpon he forthwith
commanded a condemned priſoner to bee brought, and in the
hall where he ſupped, hee cauſed him to bee beheaded in his preſence:
the which deed was reported at Rome, wherefore a long
time after Cato accuſed him of Treaſon againſt the Commonwealth,
ſaying:
               THe enterludes, comedies, flatteries, whoredomes,
and other trickes farre vnworthie a Romane Praetor,
might verie well haue ſufficed, without further adding
therevnto a ſpectacle ſo cruel, for the recompence
of a banquet ſo laſciuious; It may be one only kiſſe of a
minion, bought all the whole blood & life of a man, ſo
that he might be iuſtlie termed a worſe hangman which
ſat at the table to behold the ſame with pleaſure, then
was he which ſmit of the head, perchance not without
pittie: I doe not ſeeke to rip vp all the faults of ſo many
yeares paſt to accuſe him, but that one onely night his
act. It is more likely that he which beſtoweth much vpon
a woman, would denie her the ſlaughter of a man,
thē it is poſſible for him which granteth her the ſlaughter
of a man, to denie her any thing; if thou wouldeſt
whip a ſlaue, wouldeſt thou not carrie him forth of the
banqueting hall? But who would euer haue beleeued
that a whoore ſhould haue deſired to behold the hangmans
ſword vpon the cupbord, and the table to be ſtained
with humane blood: but yet who would haue

thought that euer any Romane Praetor could haue
granted ſuch a matter? Oh what an abhominable act is
this? But what ſhall I ſay, ſeeing the Romane Empire
hath ben in ſuch ſort blemiſhed, and the law rather polluted,
then the offender thereof puniſhed? Forſake
your graues, O you Bruti, Horatij, Fabritij, and all the reſt
of you who were the ornament of this Empire, alaſſe
behold how your rods, axes, and other ſignes of office,
haue ben abandoned vnto diſhoneſt damſels onely to
pleaſe them, and to make them ſport: euery offence that
is committed by a Magiſtrate vnder coulor of his authoritie,
is more puniſhable then anie other fault; for
the Magiſtrate is a ſpectacle for all other men, becauſe
all men doe marke and caſt their eies vpon his acts, and
this man whileſt the beholders, the hangman, and the
poore priſoner, ſtoood all looking vpon him, ſuffered
both his owne eies, and vnderſtanding to bee rauiſhed
by the lookes of an harlot. O earth couer this abhomination,
to the end that it may be no more remembred.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     IF hipocriſie or ſecret ambition did not more
prouoke thee then doth the zeale of the Commonwealth,
I ſuppoſe thou wouldeſt haue ben
as ſlacke in accuſing me, as thou knoweſt the
ſame hath in no ſort ben wronged by me, becauſe the
Commonwealth can no more bee diſgraced by one
mans folly, then it may be dignified by one alone mans
forwardnes: but as nothing is well ſaid which is not
rightly vnderſtood, ſo is nothing well done that is
wrongfullie interpreted, otherwiſe I ſhould be vntouched
of crime, and you not vntaxed of ſlander. For

the Commonwealth is able inough to reprooue that
which is not done according to reaſon and equitie, but
alſo to reprehend whatſoeuer is vnprofitable for it.
Haue not the Senat and people refuſed to hold thoſe agreements
which were made by their Emperors or Generals,
and ſent them bound vnto the enemies? If they
haue not allowed the faults of two Emperors together,
wherefore ſhould the fault of one onlie Praetor be laid
vnto their charge? (If to execute a man by iuſtice may
be termed a fault.) But what need you to inquire where
or when ſuch a one did die that was worthie to die?
You ſay that I haue ſlaine one; It is true: but whome
haue I ſlaine, ſaue only a condemned man? You aske
when and where? I anſwer that it was in the night, and
in the common hall. And I doe aske you if anie time or
place is limited wherein or where a malefactor ought
to ſuffer? and although there were, yet who knoweth
not that in the preſence or companie of a loſe woman,
there is alwaies little good performed? and that the
common hall or the priſon is no other then a place of
horror and miſerie for offenders? But it hath beene an
ancient cuſtome at Rome, that againſt ſuch as they cannot
charge with any great crime, they would faine find
out ſome ſmall occaſion of quarrell, like as they ſought
to condemne Brutus, who did afterwards recouer their
libertie, and ſo did they accuſe Manlius of inhumanity,
Silla of crueltie, Marius of ambition, Lucullus of ſuperfluitie,
and manie others of couetouſneſſe. But touching
my deed, what art thou more thē the other Cenſors,
that haue ben euer ſince the fault which thou chargeſt
me withall, who haue neuer accuſed me therfore,
not that they are any whit thy inferiors in wiſdome, or
equitie, or that they are leſſe louers of the Commonwealth

then thou, but becauſe they could better then
thou conſider that it was not lawfull, and leſſe reaſonable
to blemiſh ſo many worthie actions of our linage,
for a ſmall vanitie of one alone, who cannot yet bee
ſaid to haue done any act, either contrarie to dutie or againſt
iuſtice.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 60.
               
                  Of a man without hands that renounced his ſonne,
becauſe he would not kill his mother being found
in adulterie.
               
               
                  THe law ſaith, that if any man doe take his wife committing
adulterie, it is lawfull for him to ſlay them
both her and the adulterer, but yet it muſt be without
deceit; likewiſe it ſaith, that the ſonne may reuenge
the adulterie for his father. Whervpon it happened that a martiall
man loſt his two hands in the wars, and as one miſchance
doth neuer happen alone, within a ſmall time after he ſurpriſed
his wife in adulterie, and finding himſelfe vnable, he commanded
his ſonne to ſlay them, the ſonne would not, wherevpon hee
renounced him for his heire, ſaying:
               I Shall then by thy fault amongſt all men bee he alone
that hath neither pardoned nor puniſhed adulterie;
but who in this caſe will not imagine that either I had
no ſonne, or that my ſonne had no hands? Yet my
greateſt griefe conſiſteth in this, that I know the contrary.
Alaſſe, in finding the adulterers, I felt in good earneſt
how great a miſſe I had of my hands, alacke I loſt
them in the warres, and my ſonne could not find his in

the houſe; wherefore I may ſay that he ſtood mee in as
little ſtead as my ſword which I could not vſe. How
ſhall he either vanquiſh the enemy, or defend his countrie,
which hath denied the helpe of his hands vnto his
father? When will he ſight for vs, that could not fight
for himſelfe? Get thee packing then with the adulterers
whom thou haſt ſuffred to eſcape, and leaue me rather
alone, then ſo badly accompanied. Thou ſaieſt thy
heart would neuer ſerue thee to kill thy mother; why
doeſt thou not alſo ſay that the adulterer is thy father,
as I doe verily beleeue, and thou doeſt ſhew he is? Seeing
thou ſoughteſt rather to pleaſe him in a matter vniuſt
and execrable, then me in that wherin by the gods,
law, and reaſon, thou wert commanded. Wherefore it
cannot bee ſaid that I doe either renounce or diſinherit
thee without a cauſe.
               
                  A very notable anſwere of the ſonne.
                  ALas, me thought it was in a maner all one to murther
my father, as to kill my mother in his preſence;
and as it was neuer allowable in a reaſonable
man to be cruell, ſo were rigorous laws made more
to terrifie all, thē to torment anie; for if the law be ſtrict,
the interpretation thereof is large, and they ought to
tend rather vnto clemencie, then crueltie: a great miſchiefe
can neuer be appeaſed in cōmitting two others.
Moreouer, the pleaſure of reuenge doth ſuddainlie vaniſh,
but the contentment of mercie dooth neuer vade;
ſo likewiſe dooth euery pittifull heart melt, in thinking
vpon the horribleneſſe of murther, wherefore with the
ſpectacle of a misfortune ſo ſuddaine, all my bodie became
ſenceleſſe. You good father did lacke your hands,

but before I could recouer my ſpirits, I loſt al my members;
yet was the miſchiefe which you commanded
more great, then all the miſerie which had happened
was greeuous: pardon me then if I did not accompliſh
your commandement, in a thing which farre exceeded
my ſtrength and courage. A father pardoneth his ſon,
if he refuſe to faile, becauſe hee cannot brooke the ſeas,
& that his heart doth faint as mine did; the like happeneth
if his heareſerueth not to goe vnto the warres, although
he bee the ſonne of a warlike father; for euerie
man is not borne to manage armes. And it is to be conſidered
for what intent the law ſaith that it is lawful for
the father or the ſonne to ſlay the adulterers: Truly it
was becauſe the lawmakers were not ignorāt that there
were ſome men which either could not or would not
kill one another; what can I doe with all if we are both
of the ſame number, you made by the warre vnapt, and
I by nature vnable: wherein then can you blame me, ſauing
that the adulterers are eſcaped, becauſe you were
maimed and I amaſed or almoſt in a ſwound? If the
fault then be common, why ſhould I for the ſame bee
onely condemned?
               
            
            
               Declamation. 61.
               
                  Of two maidens rauiſhed by one man, for the which
the one required his death, and the other deſired
him for her husband
               
               THe law permitteth a maiden that is rauiſhed, to chuſe either
the death of the rauiſher, or to take him for her husband.
Wherevpon it chanced that one man defloured

two maidens in one night, ſo that the next morning the one required
that he might die, and the other requeſted to haue him
for her husband, wherfore ſhe that deſired his death, ſaid thus:
               VVHo did euer ſee anie man ſaued for one offence,
by the meanes of another fault farre
more hainous? For if ſinne proceed from humane
frailtie, to perſeuere in the 
                     •
                  an
                     •
                  e is a diueliſh obſtinacie;
one defloured maid accuſeth him, the other
defendeth him: reuenge you our cauſe then O you iudges,
let the ſeueritie of your diſcipline bee redoubled,
ſeeing the crime is double: the people doe already ſecretly
deſire it, for he hath not onlie forced or rauiſhed
twaine, but I alone haue ben defloured by twaine, that
is to ſay, by him that did the deed, & by her that would
preſerue him from death: muſt he be ſuffred to liue, that
hath deſerued to die twiſe? Had hee but deſerued one
death onlie, he ſhould not liue anie longer, becauſe no
bodie would haue defended him; but this woman
would vnto our ſhame verifie the Prouerb, which men
do impoſe vpon our ſex, ſaying, That women are ſelfe-willed,
and that they do alwaies chuſe the worſt. If thou
haddeſt ben the firſt that had ben forced, I doe hardlie
beleeue that thou wouldeſt haue deſired him for thy
husband. To conclude, as thou canſt not ſue anie further
in his behalfe, ſaue onely that thou maieſt not bee
depriued of thy choice; ſo alſo canſt thou not abridge
me of my requeſt: it is in thy choice to ſaue his life for
the fault he hath cōmitted againſt thee, but thou canſt
not command his life for the iniurie done againſt mee,
ſeeing that I was firſt wronged, let me be firſt reuenged,
and afterwards thou ſhalt wed him if thou wilt.
               
                  
                  The Anſwere.
                  THou ſaieſt that thou wert the firſt that was wronged,
I doe not know ſo much, and therefore affirm
that it was I; or if I were the laſt, thē was mine the greater
wrong: for that which hee did vnto thee, may bee
excuſed, either by loue, or neceſſitie; but what hee offered
vnto me can be no better tearmed then inſolencie,
malice, or diſdain, ſeeing that then his greateſt heat was
paſt: neuertheleſſe, conſidering that clemencie is more
naturall vnto our ſex then crueltie, I ſay that where the
prerogatiues or claimes are of equal force, there is more
reſpect to be had vnto humanitie then rigor: and if you
alleage vnto mee the examples of Lucrece and Virginia,
I will in like ſort alleage vnto you the Sabines, and others,
no leſſe honeſt but more diſcreet, and the greater
number, from whō hath proceeded greater good, witneſſe
ſo many worthy Romanes iſſued from them. His
death can ſerue to no other end, but to eterniſe the memorie
of our infamie, either by the publick or ſecret reuenge
of his kindred: neuer did any mans death profit
a woman. Laſtlie, if thou thinkeſt that thy honour deſerueth
his death, I anſwere that mine is not vnworthie
of his life, and I beleeue that the iudges will affirme my
wiſh to be more iuſt then thy will.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 62.
               
                  Of him that his father did diſherit, becauſe he went
vnto the wars.
               
               
                  
                  THe priuiledge of the war was that he which had ben
thriſe a conqueror, ſhould bee freed from going to the
warres any more. Wherevpon it happened that a certaine
Romane, which had beene thriſe a conqueror,
would returne vnto the warres againſt his fathers will. Who
ſeeing that hee would needs goe, did for his obſtinacie diſherit
him, wherevnto the ſonne pleaded in this ſort.
               FIrſt I am bound vnto God that hee hath made mee
three times victorious; and next vnto him, am I
bound vnto my countrie, for the loue which I haue
born vnto it hath ben the cauſe that I did fight and got
the victorie; wherefore after I haue performed my duty
vnto theſe twaine I will obey my father in all things,
who ought not to be againſt the publick good, and my
glorie▪ it may be that he himſelfe hath not ben thriſe a
conqueror, wherefore it is requiſit that I ſhould ſupplie
his default, or my childrens defect, who peraduenture
ſhall neuer be of ſuch deſert; but why would you diſſuade
me from ſighting after the obtaining of three victories,
Seeing that they doe yet fight whome I haue
thriſe vanquiſhed? As the Senator which is paſt threeſcore
years of age, may chuſe whether he will come to
Counſell yee or no, and yet ſuch as are much older do
notwithſtanding come thether ſo long as they liue, ſo
is it 
                     〈◊〉
                   for me to goe vnto the warres, when honor
commandeth me, as oft as liſt. In that which is paſt, I

                     〈…〉
                   no more then my dutie, and therefore I 
                     〈…〉
                  
reward, but that which hereafter I ſhall doe of
free will, ſhall merit a recompence. You would haue
him to be idle, that neuer loued eaſe; you ſee the danger
wherein we ſtand, all the Citizens doe fixe their eies

vpon me, and to ſpeake the truth, the Commonwealth
doth yet owe me nothing for my paſſed victories, ſeeing
that it could not excuſe me from the battaile, but
now the ſame law ſhall allow it to be deſert, which before
did appoint it a dutie. Seeing then that what I do is
but for your profit and honour, why ſhould you diſauow
me for your heire, mee I ſay which will fight to
maintaine your life, your houſe, and the inheritance
which you will take from me.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THou doeſt acquit thy ſelfe towards God and thy
countrie in obeying thy father in a matter both
lawfull and reaſonable, for the Commonwealth
hath as great need of pittifull and obedient men vnto
the lawes, and their Parents, as it hath of ſuch as are valiant,
wherefore thou art bound to be both the one and
the other; thou art alreadie knowne to bee valiant, bee
thou then likewiſe knowne to be pittifull, obedient, and
louing towards thy poore father, who ſhall die if thou
ſhouldeſt miſcarrie by thy ouer boldneſſe. Doeſt thou
thinke to be victorious in fighting againſt the law and
the will of thy father? No, for God is too iuſt. A
                           •
                        neas
was not ſo much praiſed for all his heroicall deeds, as
he was commended for louing his aged father, and for
preſeruing him from the Troian ſite. Doeſt thou wonder
if thy father be no leſſe carefull for the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of thy
perſon, then the law is which forbiddeth 
                        〈…〉
                      hazard
thy ſelfe anie more in the like perill. I had rather to
renounce thee ſuddainlie, then hauing loſt thee in the
warres, to be attached with a double ſorrow: it is therefore
in thy choice to remaine my ſonne or no. It is a far

greater vertue to bee able to containe thy ſelfe within
thy bounds, then to periſh in this battaile: thou ſhalt
go in greater danger to loſe thy gotten reputation, then
to inlarge thy future renowne; therefore thou being my
ſonne no longer, my griefe ſhall be the leſſe.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 63.
               
                  Of him that appeaſed the father of a maiden whom
he had rauiſhed, and yet could not pacify his own
father.
               
               
                  THe law commandeth, that if any man do rauiſh
a virgin, that he ſhould die therefore, vnleſſe
that within thirtie daies hee doe both pacifie or
appeaſe the next of kin vnto the ſaid damſell, &
likewiſe the neereſt of kin vnto himſelfe. Whervpon
it fell out ſo, that a certaine yoong man rauiſhed a yoong
virgin, and before the prefixed tearm he had thorowly appeaſed
the maidens father, but yet his owne father would by no means
be ſatisfied, wherefore he accuſed his father to haue loſt his wits,
ſaying:
               HOw can that man bee ſaid to haue his vnderſtanding,
that is more cruell vnto his owne ſon, then
is he that hath been offended? There is no beaſt
in the world ſo fierce, that ſeeketh not to preſerue that
which it hath it hath engendered; whereby it appeareth that
thoſe which do otherwiſe, may be iudged to haue leſſe
vnderſtanding then brute beaſts. If you thinke that I
haue wronged you in not comming rather vnto you as
to him whom I was moſt bounden vnto, then vnto the

virgines father; You muſt conſider that it was becauſe
he was more wronged then you, and that I iudged you
more pittifull then he, and hee harder to bee entreated
then you. But alaſſe infortunate that I am, I haue found
mine enemie more fauourable then mine owne father,
ſo that I know not what els to ſay, but that amongſt
ſuch men as haue their wits, the loue of the father doth
alwaies exceed the ſonnes follie. If it pleaſe you to ſaue
my life, or if your crueltie bee ſuch as you loath to ſee
me liue, ſpeake, for the time is at hand? But I grieue not
ſo much to die, (if you haue loſt your wits) as I ſorrow
for the perpetuall mone that you will make, in that you
haue ben the abridger of my daies, when as time more
then reaſon ſhal haue mittigated your choler, and reſtored
your vnderſtanding, whereof now I may well ſay
you are depriued, or at the leaſt that the ſame is mightily
deminiſhed.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  THou ſaieſt that the maidēs father was more wronged
then was I, I graunt it, yet canſt thou not likewiſe
deny but that I haue greater cauſe of offence
thē he: for thy force did take away the maidens ſhame,
but I ſhall bee euer diſhonoured to haue begotten a ſon
ſo diſſolute, that hath diſpleaſed his father, wronged a
Cittizen, defloured a virgin, defamed his ſtocke, and giuen
cauſe of offence vnto the Commonwealth. It is
thou that wantedſt thy wits, ſeeing thou couldeſt not
know that at one inſtant thou ſhouldeſt not haue committed
ſo many miſchiefes together; and moſt mad
thou wert, if in knowing the ſame thou couldeſt not
ſhun the ſame, but heaping one offence vpon another,

thou wouldeſt ſlander me to haue loſt my wits, whereby
it appeareth that as vertues, ſo are vices linked together.
Thou accuſeſt me before I haue condemned thee,
the tearme is not yet expired, I do very well know that
thy life and death are yet in my choice: Haue I then
loſt mine vnderſtanding, wherfore doeſt thou tremble?
why doth thy tongue faulter? For what cauſe are thine
eies troubled? The thirtieth day is not yet come: but
wherefore wouldeſt thou that anie man ſhould pittie
thee, ſeeing thou wert pittileſſe vnto the damſell, who
when thou diddeſt rauiſh her, ſhewed no leſſe ſorrow
then thou doeſt now? Wherefore couldeſt not thou
conſider what vice is at the firſt, as well as at the laſt,
which is alwaies a preſent pleaſure, but a parting
paine, leauing alwaies either ſome ſcourge, or at the
leaſt a moſte ſound ſorrow accompained with a horrible
fear? but although I ſhould leaue thee thy life, doſt
thou thinke to remain vnpuniſhed? will not thin own
conſience torment thee far worſe then any hangman
would? Nay why ſhould I graunt that vnto mine enemie,
which I haue denied vnto my ſonne? For ſeeing
thou accuſeſt me, thou canſt not be rightly tearmed my
friend, much leſſe my ſonne. Is it to be wondered at if
I reſt doubtfull, ſeeing that the law it ſelfe hath neither
determined thy death, nor concluded thy marriage?
Thou haſt alwaies behaued thy ſelfe as if thou haddeſt
ben allowed to doe anie ſinne, thou haſt not yet intreated
me as thou oughteſt, but haſt rather requeſted the
other his friendſhip then my fauour; and hauing firſt
appeaſed his furie, thou afterwards thoughteſt aſſuredly
to conſtrain me to winck at thy fault. Would a foole
conſider thus much? Tel me then wherin I am a foole:
Haue I liued badly, or committed ſuch follie as thou

haſt? Haue I forgotten the lawes? Haue I not counted
thy daies? Can I not prooue wherefore thou art vnworthie
of my fauor, demanding it after ſuch a faſhion?
I haue conſulted with our kinred, I haue deuiſed with
our friends, alaſſe what paines haue I taken, to perform
a fathers dutie. Ah me moſt miſerable, ſeeing that my
anger is ſo iuſt, that I cannot yet forget it. I do not wonder
although thou haſt appeaſed the maidens father, for
it is eaſier to pardon an iniurie then a crime, yea when
he came to entreat for thee, his kindneſſe did the more
harden my heart againſt thee, for me thought that a
man ſo honeſt ought in no ſort to be harmed: thou telleſt
me that the time is ſhort, how then couldeſt thou
find ſo much leaſure as to accuſe me? Doe men appeaſe
their miſdeeds after ſuch a manner? Is that the way to
obtaine fauour? Doeſt thou now thinke it fit to entreat?
But tell me wherefore am I beſides my wits? Is
it becauſe I haue not pardoned thee? The time is
not yet paſt, I may yet pardon thee, although thou art
vnworthie, ſeeing thou accuſeſt mee before I haue hurt
thee.
               
            
            
               Declamation 64.
               
                  Of the husband that did put away his wife, who
being tortured, did yet ſaue his life in not confeſſing
that he pretended to murther the Tyrant.
               
               
                  A Tyrant being ſuſpitious that a Cittizen pretended his
death, cauſed him to be apprehended, and committed
him to priſon, and there tortured him, to cauſe him
to confeſſe his conſpiracie, and who were his confederats;

but the Cittizen would not confeſse any thing, whereupon
the Tyrant did alſo cauſe the Citizens wife to be tortured, who
in like ſort would confeſſe nothing, wherefore they were deliuered
and ſet at libertie. Within a ſhort time after the ſaid Cittizen
killed the Tyrant, and being greatly rewarded and honoured
by the Commonwealth for the deed, he put away his wife as
one that was barren, becauſe ſhe had ben fiue yeares with him,
and neuer conceiued anie child. For which cauſe ſhee accuſed
him of ingratiude, ſaying:
               THat which the Tyrant was vnwilling to doe, hee
that killed the Tyrant would doe, to ſhew himſelf
more vniuſt then was hee; hee would fruſtrate our
marriage, which at his owne requeſt and intreat was ſolemnized,
and to manifeſt his ingratitude the more, hee
would needs ſtay vntill he ſtood indebted vnto mee for
his life: if he ment to forſake me, he ſhould haue put me
away before I had ben tortured for his loue, the which
torture is cauſe of my barrenneſſe. O miſerable woman
that I am, ſeeing that my kindneſſe hath procured mee
care, and my good deeds turneth vnto my decay. Is it
not verie well knowne, that the conſtancie of my courage,
and the ſilence of my tongue, haue ben the onely
ouerthrow of the Tyrant; I then being the cauſe that
the Tyrant can no more break the marriages of others,
why ſhould mine be ſuffered to be broken. But who is
ignorant, that during the Tyrants life, the barren were
eſteemed moſt happie, becauſe they could not ſee their
children rauiſhed at the Tyrants pleaſure? True it is
that I haue borne no children for the Commonwealth,
but I dare affirm, that I am the cauſe that manie are and
ſhall be borne, and that henceforth there ſhall bee no
more taken from it. The Tyrant ſuſpected my husband

his intention; becauſe either hee had diſcloſed ſomething,
or els his countenance or behauiour diſcouered
his pretence, but yet in anie ſort hee cannot complaine
of his wiues tatling, no not when ſhe was in her extreameſt
torments, I had alwaies more reſpect vnto my husband
that was abſent, then vnto the Tyrant who was
preſent, being more carefull of his health then fearefull
of mine own hurt. But who can expreſſe all the preparation
that was made for inſtruments of crueltie (able inough
to daunt the courages of many men) to terrifie
the conſtancie of a feminine heart, the whips tearing
my fleſh, the fire, the yron ſhoes, the whot egs vnder
mine armholes, the buskins, the treſtles, the pullies, the
cords, the napkin, water, oile, and the hangmen: yet all
theſe together could neuer draw one onely word from
me to the preiudice of my husband, but prouing by
liuely reaſons, the contrarie of all that was of me demanded,
I was the cauſe of his deliuerance: wherefore
doth he vaunt that he hath ſlaine the Tyrant, ſeeing the
ſame was more eaſie for him to accompliſh, then for me
to indure ſo manie torments; for I haue ſuffered whatſoeuer
ancient cruelty was able to inuent, & that which
this preſent age might poſſiblie ad thervnto: what ſhall
I further ſay, but that the hangmen were wearie and tired,
and the Tyrant himſelfe was tormented at my tortures.
Hauing then bought with ſuch exceeding pains,
life, honour, glorie, and riches for this ingratefull man,
why would he put me away, to take a richer wife? For
one more noble he cannot haue, if that be true nobilitie
which proceedeth from vertue. O how plainely doth it
appeare by him, that abundance engendereth auarice,
which is the root of all vice, and enemie to all vertue, as
he doth very well declare: for when he was more poor,

and leſſe wealthie, then had he more pittie, and leſſe
wickedneſſe. But what is this fellow that would preſcribe
nature a law, and appoint the times wherein a
woman ſhould conceiue? Muſt hee be like vnto God?
Doth he not yet know that he is worſe then a beaſt that
would be better then a man? Muſt he be ſo preſumptious?
Conſider onely that if you are worthie to bee
honoured, I deſerue not to be hated.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  YOu might haue iuſt cauſe to reprooue mee for your
torment, if I had not reuenged your torture; if you
did know that I intended to ſlay the Tyrant, and you
neither did reueale nor confeſſe the ſame, you muſt not
thinke that I am anie whit then more bounden vnto
you for it, for it is no good deed to abſtain from doing
ill, but to perſeuere in doing good: and I doe verily beleeue
that you were ignorant of my intention, for I neuer
made you acquainted with anie thing, not minding
to truſt a pratling woman (whoſe nature is to keepe nothing
but that which ſhee knoweth not) with a matter
which was only worthie of the aduice of a manly courage,
both graue, ſound, and wiſe, the which parts I did
then know to bee vtterlie wanting in you. Nay I may
trulie ſay that before your torments, I neuer determined
to kill the tyrant, but your ſuſtained wrongs inforced
me to ſeeke reuenge. But although you had heard
ſomething and diſcloſed it not, yet was the ſame no
good turne, but fidelitie; in like ſort if you had but confeſſed
neuer ſo little, you ſhould haue beene worſe tormented
to haue gotten more matter from you, and you
had been deemed the more guiltie in not reuealing the

deed before you came to the torture. Wherfore in confeſſing
anie thing, you could not but prolong your
paines and ſhorten your life, you haue then done more
for your ſelfe then for me. Hauing then done nothing
for me, I cannot be beholding to you; not being beholding
to you, I cannot bee called vnthankfull; and the rather,
becauſe I do not wrong you in putting you away,
ſeeing it is not becauſe I diſpiſe you: but you muſt
know that Cato in his old age was married againe vnto a
poore yoong maiden, whervpon his ſonne demanding
of him why hee gaue him a mother in law? He anſwered:
My ſonne, it is not to offend thee, but to giue vnto
thee more brethren as victorious as thy ſelf, to the end
that you may altogether profit the Commonwealth So
mine intention is to beget children, which (as I haue
ſaid) may one day bee profitable vnto the Commonwealth.
Suffer me then to haue that of another which I
can neuer hope for of thee, and let the good and profit
of the Commonwealth be preferred before our owne
pleaſure; for we ought not to be born for our own commoditie,
but for the good of our natiue countrie, and
thoſe which doe otherwiſe thinke, may not onely ſay
that they are vnborne, but that they are vnworthie to
be borne: I would not then that you ſhould bee of the
ſame number.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 65.
               
                  Of a rich man that died for the loue of a chaſt woman,
vnto whom he bequeathed all his goods,
whervpon her husband accuſed her of adultery.
               
               
                  
                  IT chanced that a certaine man hauing a
paſsing faire wife, left her alone at home,
and he made a voiage to Ieruſalem: In
ſo much that there happened a verie
rich marchant being a ſtranger to come
and lodge hard by this fair womans
houſe, ſo as the ſaid marchant became in
loue with her, and ſending her ſundrie great preſents, he ſolicited
her to loue him, but ſhe refuſed his preſents three times,
and being thereby fruſtrate of all hope to ſpeed, the ſaid marchant
became exceeding ſicke, bequeathing all his wealth vnto
this faire wife, adding theſe words vnto his teſtament: Becauſe
I haue found her chaſt and modeſt. He being dead, the faire woman
receiued the riches and goods, her husband is aduertiſed
thereof before he come home to his houſe. Wherevpon hee became
ſo ſuddainly iealous, that at his return he accuſed his wife
of adulterie, ſaying:
               THou canſt not denie but that either in deed or
thought thou art an adultreſſe, for theſe riches doe
witneſſe againſt thee; I will confeſſe one onely point,
which is, that my abſence might haue beene the cauſe
thereof, but now it muſt be conſidered what a wife you
are vnto me, & what an husband I haue ben vnto thee:
haſt thou euer wanted anie thing? Or didſt thou feare
that thou ſhouldeſt want? What haddeſt thou then to
doe with theſe riches? But who knoweth not that the
moſt women are ſooner ouercome with couetouſneſſe
then loue? Diddeſt thou not know alſo that continency
and concupiſcence are the two keies of womens honors?
for by the one it is preſerued, and by the other it
is polluted. Wherefore euery woman of worth ought

to behold nothing but the earth, & ſometime her husbands
face, for feare leaſt ſhe ſhould deſire ſome other
thing, & vnto euerie ſtranger ſhe ought not only ſhew
her ſelfe baſhfull, but vncourteous, faining to bee blind
and deafe: for loue entreth in by the eies, and is conceiued
by the eares; alſo by a womans countenance, either
a deniall or a conſent is a great deale ſooner and
better perceiued then by her tongue, they which make
a ſound deniall at the firſt, are neuer importuned the ſecond
time, much leſſe the third time. Who will euer beleeue
that anie man would haue left all his goods vnto
a woman becauſe hee found her contrarie to his wiſh?
If he were ſo glad to find her chaſt, why did hee ſolicite
her to bee immodeſt? It is a great follie for anie man to
ſeeke for that which he would not find: Who may not
ſay or thinke that this our age is void of all ſhame?
Seeing that a ſtranger witneſſeth the chaſtitie of a woman
towards her husband before hee is required: ſhee
that feareth not to be thought an adultereſte, wil neuer
be aſhamed to be one indeed; for opinion gouerneth
all things at her pleaſure, and if ſhame or feare of infamie
did not reſtraine ſome more then another, there
would not be one good woman: for ſhame ſerueth as a
bridle to the immodeſt, and as a guide vnto the chaſt.
What will bee ſaid, if all the world will affirme with me
that thou art diſhoneſt, Except one man onely, and he
but a ſtranger, which ſaith thou art chaſt? wherefore the
praiſe which hee giueth thee, and the falſe teſtimonie
which he alleageth for thee, doth as much harme thee,
as my true accuſation doth hurt thee. A goodlie matter
no doubt, when no man aſſureth mee of my wiues honeſtie,
but a common whorehunter: he ſaith that thou
art to thy husband conſtant, and I affirme the contrarie,

who is more worthie to bee beleeued, a Cittizen or a
ſtranger? A husband, or a whoremonger? Imagine (O
you Iudges) that if this womans ſhame were not too
apparent, I would rather haue diſſembled it, then haue
brought it to this extremitie: for he which diſcouereth
his wiues faults doth but ſhame himſelf: but I remember
that notwithſtāding that Caeſar could not get Claudius
to be conuinced of the adulterie wherewith he was
charged, for being found in Caeſars chamber in womans
apparrell, yet did not he let to put away his wife, ſaying,
That it behooued Caeſars wife not onlie to be free from
ſhame, but from ſuſpition. Wherfore there is no reaſon
that I ſhould keepe her that is publikely defamed.
               
                  The Anſwere for the woman.
                  
                     THat woman which is either beloued or courted,
is not to be deemed therfore the leſſe chaſt,
for a womans reputation and good name depends
neither vpon the malice nor follie of
men, who doe alwaies moſt deſire thoſe whom they
haue leaſt hope to obtaine, modeſtie being the ſpeciall
reaſon that prouoketh a man to fancie a woman; therefore
they affirme that beautie doth onlie ingender luſt,
but vertue is it that moſt winneth loue: and like as vertue
is neuer knowne but when it is tried, ſo alſo doth it
moſt appeare in the reſiſting of vices. But what can a
woman doe withall, if men doe loue her, or if they bee
vicio
                        •
                     s or importunate? It is impoſſible to hinder anie
one from louing, eſpeciallie ſeeing the Philoſophers affirme,
that the firſt motions of our owne paſſions are
not in our power, but afterwards they may be brideled
by reaſon: what power then haue wee ouer another

mans paſſions? Concerning the teſtimonie of the teſtator,
there is more likelihood of truth therein, then otherwiſe,
for if the truth be euer ſpoken, it is when wee
muſt forſake this falſe world: and it is to bee ſuppoſed
that he bequeathed his goods vnto her, as well becauſe
the womans chaſtitie had not onely increaſed loue in
him, but alſo had conuerted the ſame into holie loue;
for the conſtancie of the woman, changed the mans
vice into vertue, ſo that by this good deed hee thought
to requite the bad opinion which hee had wrongfullie
conceiued of her, before hee did throughly know her.
Wherefore I will onely ſay that if ſhe be to be blamed
for her beautie, nature is the cauſe; if in that ſhe was alone,
her husband is to bee condemned; if for being
courted, the louer was culpable: ſhee did denie his requeſt,
in that ſhe was chaſt; he made her his heire, therein
was ſhe happie; ſhe accepted the inheritance, therein
ſhe did wiſelie: whervpon ſhe cannot be ſaid to be faultie
in any thing, but it is your ouergreat proſperitie that
hindereth you from taſting the ſweetnes of her vertue.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 66.
               
                  Of him that cauſed his eies to be pulled forth, to
gaine tenne ounces of gold, the which was refuſed
to be giuen vnto him.
               
               
                  IT was the cuſtome of a certaine Commonwealth
that euery Cittizen which was fallen blind by
miſchance, ſhould out of the common treaſor bee
allowed ten ounces of gold for his maintenance.
Wherevpon it happened that tenne or twelue diſordered

Cittizens which wanted meanes to maintaine their
accuſtomed riotous cheare, caſt lots amongſt them, which
of them ſhould haue his eies pulled forth, to the end that hee
might receiue the aboueſaid ſumme of gold to ſpend vpon good
cheare amongſt them: it chanced (as oftentimes it falleth out,
that wicked counſell is moſt hurtfull vnto him that giueth it)
that the lot fell vnto him that was the inuenter of this wickedneſse:
Wherefore the reſt tooke him by force, and pulled out his
eies, and ſent him vnto the Magiſtrate to demand the tenne
ounces of gold, but the Magiſtrat being aduertiſed of the manner
of the fact, would giue him nothing, ſaying:
               HOw long haue you been blind? By what chance
loſt you your ſight ſo ſuddainely? Was it by doing
anie good ſeruice for the Commonwealth? I
am aſſured it was not, for it ſhould be contrarie to thy
cuſtome, becauſe thou neuer diddeſt anie, vnleſſe thy
follies and diſorders ſhould be accounted for ſeruice, ſo
that firſt it may be aduouched that thou art no Citizen,
for the honour of that name belongeth onely vnto the
vertuous, therefore ſuch as reſemble thee may bee iuſtlie
tearmed the ſcumme and reproch of the Commonwealth.
Moreouer, I am not ignorant that thou diddeſt
ſuffer thine eies to be plucked out, that thou mighteſt
with thy companions continue as long as you could
that beaſtlie life which you haue begun, therfore both
thou and they deſerue double puniſhment, they for
pulling out thine eies, and thou for ſuffering them, for
it is to the preiudice of the Commōwealth, the which
if thou haddeſt thine eies might if need were haue imploied
thee as a pyoner in the wars, or to doe ſome ſuch
thing, but now the beſt that can bee done with thee,
ſhould be to hang thee vp, to the end that thou mightſt

no trouble vnto others, but rather ſerue for an example
vnto all. Likewiſe it is to bee conſidered, that the law
ſhould bee vniuſt if it ſhould make men blind of purpoſe;
the law was made to comfort the afflicted, but not
for to buy them; miſerie needeth not to be bought, being
alreadie too abundant: therefore it is better to refuſe
our liberalitie vnto one, then to bee the cauſe that
many others ſhould make themſelues blind: we releeue
thoſe which for their blindnes haue need of releife, but
not thoſe that plucke out their owne eies, becauſe they
would be releeued.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  AS it is not the Magiſtrats office to increaſe the affliction
of the afflicted, ſo likewiſe ought you not to
wrong him that requireth but the performance or decree
of the law, which ſimply ſaith, that euerie Cittizen
being blind, ought to haue ten ounces of gold. Wherefore
am not I a Cittizen, ſeeing I was neuer reprooued
by iuſtice, or noted of infamie? Alſo I haue wronged
none but my ſelfe: if I haue waſted my patrimonie, I
onlie ſuffer therefore, and diuers Cittizens haue beene
profited thereby: I haue not then done the Commonwealth
anie wrong in profiting manie. As for the loſſe
of mine eies, my meaning was not that anie mans eies
ſhould haue beene pulled out, but that the lot ſhould
haue ben caſt by way of paſtime, onlie to laugh at him
vpon whom it ſhould light, but lighting vpon me, they
pulled out mine eies by force: wherefore there is great
reaſon to puniſh them for the wrong which they haue
done vnto mee, but yet ought not I to loſe that which
the law hath allotted mee: if Democritus bee praiſed of

many for pulling out his eies, that hee might the better
wade in the contemplation of Naturall Philoſophie,
why ſhould I be blamed although I had voluntarily ſuffered
mine eies to be plucked forth that I might the better
abſtaine from vices? Take it then which way you
liſt; I ought not to be denied the tenne ounces of gold,
ſeeing that I am a Cittizen, and haue loſt my ſight either
by force or willingly.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 67.
               
                  Of the forſaken ſonne who firſt would and could not,
and afterward might and would not returne vnto
his father.
               
               
                  
                     A
                   Man forſaketh or diſheriteth his ſon,
who went vnto the warres, and returned
home a conqueror, wherefore he demandeth
for his reward of the Commonwealth
that his father might bee
compelled to receiue him into fauour againe.
But the father being vnwilling
to bee compelled to receiue his ſonne, defended
himſelfe ſo well, that he was no more vrged therevnto.
Yet becauſe he was very deſirous to haue his ſonne againe without
being conſtrained, but rather that his ſonne might acknowledge
it meerely to bee his beneuolence: he went alſo vnto the
wars, and returning with conqueſt, requeſteth for his reward,
that his ſonne might returne vnto him; and if he refuſed, that
he ſhould be inforced to come home againe, and obeying his father,
receiue his inheritance, the ſon would not. Wherevpon the
father ſummoned him to the law, and in the preſence of the iudges
ſaid thus:
               
                  
                  MY victorie is more famous then thine, for after
that thou hadſt vanquiſhed, wee had yet cauſe
of further warre, but my conqueſt was the vtter
ouerthrow of our enemies, the end of all
our warres, and the aſſurance of our Commonwealth.
But although it had not ben ſo, yet what art thou? who
begot thee but I? Say that I haue not made thee worthie
to return home vnto me, yet theſe eies, theſe hāds,
this bodie, theſe feet which thou haſt, haddeſt thou thē
from anie other then me? The courage, wiſedome, yea
and this ſtoutneſſe which thou now ſheweſt, takeſt not
thou the ſame from my nature? For if a villaine had
begotten thee, thou ſhouldeſt be like vnto him; as for
example, the Eagle engendereth not a doue, nor doth a
lion beget a hare; wherefore one of theſe two muſt be
granted, either that I am worthie of reward, or that I
am vnworthie to haue anie at all: If I bee worthie, then
my reward is, that thou returne home againe? If I deſerue
none, reſtore vnto mee all thoſe aboue rehearſed
graces which thou holdeſt of me. Thou wilt ſay, I
could not obtain the ſame reward which thou demandeſt;
in ſaying ſo, thou wilt but renue the quarrell for
which I did renounce thee, which is, that thou wouldſt
neuer acknowledge the preheminence that in al things
I ought to haue ouer thee; but if thou ſhouldeſt be beleeued,
thou wouldſt take vpon thee the authoritie of
thy father, and yet thou knoweſt not how to loue me ſo
well as a ſon. O my child thou knoweſt not what it is to
bee a father, I would giue thee that which thou haſt eſpeciallie
required for thy reward: Thou maieſt ſay, I
will not be at your diſcretion to bee caſt off ſome other
time when you liſt: in ſaying ſo, a man may iudge that

thou deſireſt to giue me the like occaſion. Doeſt thou
not know that a father neuer forſaketh his ſonne, without
feeling far greater griefe then doth he which is forſaken?
But comming againe vnto both our deſerts: I
haue behaued my ſelfe more valiantly in the wars, from
whence although the aged are eſpecially exempted, yet
haue I ben therein imploied, therefore it is a queſtion
whether thou haſt ben a conqueror or no? thou haſt exerciſed
thine age, but I haue ouercome mine age; thou
haſt made war, but I haue finiſhed the warre; I did not
onlie fight valiantlie my ſelf, but by my aged manhood
did greatlie animate the courages of yoong men, therefore
it may be ſaid that I deſerued a double reward; be
thou then the recompence of my valor. I haue foughten
being old, I haue aduentured that litle blood which
I had left me to gain thee. Alaſſe how farre beſides our
ſelues are we both twaine, ſeeing that when wee are requeſted
then we doe refuſe, & being refuſed, we would
with all our hearts enioy that which wee are denied, I
had not ſo ſoone renounced thee, but I did as ſpeedilie
deſire to reuoke thee, if I had not ben aſſured that thou
wouldeſt neuer acknowledge anie good turne to come
from me; but doeſt not thou compell me to bee ſuſpitious,
whē thou wilt not return vnto thy fathers houſe,
vnleſſe it be by thine own authoritie, or after a boaſting
manner? Conſider only how much more honorable it
is for thee to return at mine inſtance then at thine own.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  YOu are not to augment your victorie to the preiudice
of mine, in doing whereof you wrong your
ſelfe, and ſo much the rather, by how much you

confeſſe that the valor of men redoundeth to the glorie
of thoſe that ingendered them, ſo as in like ſort the
vicious ſonne can bee no other then a reproch to his father
and mother, wherefore it was ſaid that Agrippina
was worthie of that cruell death which ſhe had, onely
becauſe ſhe brought forth ſo vild a ſonne as Nero. Alſo
it cannot bee died, that my victorie was leſſe famous
then yours, which by mine became the more eaſie, becauſe
he is eaſilie vanquiſhed, which hath been once ouercome.
But ſetting all this apart, becauſe vnto the iudges
I would not bee ſo troubleſome as you haue beene
tedious, I will onelie ſay thus much, that of a free man,
I deſire not to become a bondman, in as much as none
can conſtraine a valiant man vnto anie thing againſt his
mind, and ſeeing that you haue renounced me, I am no
more your ſonne, but if you deeme mee ſo, either there
is no reaſon to reward you with that which you affirm
to bee your owne, or els it is more reaſon that my victorie
which was the firſt, ſhould firſt rewarded by my return
vnto you, and afterwards demand what you think
beſt for the recompence of yours.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 68.
               
                  Of a maiden who being rauiſhed, did first require
her rauiſher for her husband, and afterwards requested
his death.
               
               
                  THe law is ſo, that a maid being rauiſhed
may either demand to be married vnto
the rauiſher, without bringing him anie
marriage good at all, or els ſhe may cauſe
him to die. Wherevpon it happened that
a yoong maiden being rauiſhed, accuſed
him that rauiſhed her, and required him

for her husband, but he denied the fact, and affirmed that hee
neuer knew the maiden, yet ſhee found the means to prooue him
guiltie, and hauing conuinced him thereof, ſhee would not then
marie with him, but ſued that he might die. Againſt the which
he pleaded thus:
               THou canſt make thy choice but once, and the rather,
becauſe I doe not yet know whether that
which I alleaged in my owne defence was more to ſaue
my life then to ſalue the law, which being once corrupted,
would be farre more preiudiciall vnto others then
vnto me, who if the worſt doe chance, can haue but a
bad choice, when I muſt be conſtrained either to marry
ſuch a one as deſireth my death, or els die for one whō
I loued too dearely. Thou art not only the procurer of
my ſhame, but alſo of my ſlaughter; for the ſcaffold,
the hangman, the ſword, the bands, and laſtly my death,
are all readie prepared for mee, and that onely by thy
meanes. Will not al men (thinkſt thou) ſay theſe are too
manie euils to be borne at one time, vnleſſe thou mighteſt
be likewiſe a partaker therof? Dooſt thou not know
that ouerferuent loue depriueth a man of his vnderſtanding?
And that the law neuer puniſheth thoſe that
offend for want of wit? They then are to be puniſhed
that offend through malice or hatred, and not ſuch as
ſinne through want of diſcretion, or too much loue?
Thou ſeekeſt my death becauſe I denied the deed, but I
ſay my deniall maketh me more worthie to be excuſed,
for thou canſt not ſay but that it proceeded either for
want of remembrance of the deed, being void of ſence
when I did it, or els becauſe I was ſorrie or rather aſhamed
for mine offence; wherefore if the worſt doe happen,
the one cauſe freeth me from puniſhment, and the

other maketh me worthie to bee pardoned, ſeeing that
to euery noble heart, ſorrow, ſhame, and repentance for
miſdeeds, are three puniſhments more worſe thē death,
which doth ſpeedilie free vs from all miſerie, and impoſſible
is it for anie man to eſcape it, how ſoone or late
ſoeuer it commeth; nay rather in prolonging of our
liues we lengthen out our miſerie. But I pray thee tell
me, ſeeing thou haſt choſen me for thy husband, am I
not the ſame? Wherefore then wilt thou kill thy husband,
when thou meanteſt to ſaue thy rauiſher? Therfore
I may ſay that herein thou reſembleſt the ſhee
wolfe. When thou diddeſt demand mee for thy husband,
thou diddeſt not then know me to be honeſt and
ſhamefaſt, or that I would doe my beſt to conceale thy
ſhame and my diſcredit; and now thou haſt tried mine
honeſtie, thou ſeekeſt mine ouerthrow: ſo that it ſeemeth
thou art more angrie in that I am aſhamed of my
follie, then thou art aggreeued with my fault: why art
thou angrie? Doeſt thou not know that loue, wine, and
women, do make the wiſeſt witleſſe? as Salomon, Sampſon,
Hercules, Lot, Noe, and an infinit number beſides doe
witneſſe: likewiſe the night is void of ſhame, ſo that it is
lawfull by day to denie the faults of the darke. Thou
diddeſt chuſe me for thy husband, therefore thou maiſt
not reuoke thy choice, nor the iudge his ſentence; nothing
can be more politick or profitable in a Commonwealth,
then the performance of euerie ſentence that is
giuen, and the obſeruation of ancient lawes. Whereby
I conclude, that if thou be permitted to chuſe twice, the
law is falſe, for neuer did anie maid doe the like, then
ſeeing thou art no better then others, thou oughteſt to
obtaine no more then they.
               
                  
                  The maidens Anſwere.
                  I Knowing thy malice, and that he which is not aſhamed
to commit a fault, wil neuer be aſhamed to denie
the fact, did not chuſe thy death which thou deſeruedſt,
but thy wedding, whereof thou art vnworthie;
thereby to make thee acknowledge thine offence, the
which thou wouldeſt neuer haue done, haddeſt thou
not ben conuinced by moſt apparent witneſſe: ſo that it
cannot be ſaid that thou meanteſt to hide my diſcredit,
but rather to make it more euident by the teſtimonie of
diuers, and thou diddeſt not care if I had been found a
lier. They which are aſhamed, ſorrie, or repentant for
their miſdeeds, haue not the face to denie ſo audiciouſlie
their miſdemeanors; but thereby it appeareth, that
before thou diddeſt commit the fact, thou thoughteſt
to eſcape by thy falſhood. My choice was of no value,
ſeeing the crime was not verified, neither art thou my
husband, ſeeing by thy deniall thou haſt affirmed that I
had no action at all to demand thee, I do craue then the
death of the malefactor, that would not take the aduantage
of my mercie. Likewiſe the law maketh no mention
how manie times I am to make my choiſe, but onlie
that I may chuſe the one or the other, muſt not the
choiſe for the offence be effectuall? it hath not yet been
becauſe that hee himſelfe would not haue it effected; I
haue not then choſen, but indeuoured to chuſe, if hee
had not by his deniall hindered my choiſe. Yet now
ſeeing the deed is no more doubtfull, I doe chuſe his
death, as well becauſe in going about to prooue my allegation
falſe, he ſought to take away my life, or to take
me with double infamie: the iudge cannot giue away

my right, therefore in cauſing him to die, he ſhall ſatiſfie
thoſe points which he ſaith are requiſit in a Commonwealth.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 69.
               
                  Of him that would be paied for his houſe, wherein a
Tyrant was burned.
               
               
                  
                     A
                   Tyrant ſeeing that he was beſieged in his caſtle or fortreſſe,
fled vnto a Cittizens houſe to hide himſelfe.
Some one of the tounſmen being aduertiſed thereof,
burned the houſe and the Tyrant within it, for which deed hee
obtained both the honour, gained the reward belonging therevnto,
and likewiſe receiued many preſents and gifts from the citizens.
Which when hee whoſe houſe was burned did perceiue,
he required to be ſatisfied for his loſſe by him that ſet it on fire,
but the other refuſed to pay him any thing at all, ſaying:
               VVHerefore diddeſt thou receiue the Tyrant?
Why couldeſt thou not driue him foorth, or
ſlay him? What was the reaſon that hee fled
to thy houſe rather then to another mans? What cauſe
had he to think himſelfe more ſure in thy weak cottage,
then in a ſtrong caſtle? Why doeſt thou eſteeme thy
houſe better then the Commonwealths benefit? Muſt
you that neither killed the Tyrant, nor yet reuealed nor
brought him forth that he might be ſlaine, be partner
of the reward? I affirm, and do verily ſuppoſe that thou
bewaileſt his death, and it is verie likely that either thou
waſt his friend or his ſeruant: at the leaſt thou canſt
not denie but that thou waſt his hoſt, yea, and I aſſuredly

beleeue that thou didſt watch of purpoſe to ſaue
him from perill: a mā might eaſily accuſe thee to be one
of his confederats, and that thou diddeſt offer him thy
houſe, ſeeing that therein he thought himſelf more ſure
then in anie other houſe beſides. It were farre better
that one hundred houſes much fairer thē thine ſhould
be vtterlie loſt then ſo vild a Tyrant as he ſhould be yet
liuing. Nay it were better to ſee a citie quite raced down
to the earth, then the Cittizens ſhould bee continuallie
ſpoiled by tyrannous crueltie, without all hope of amendment.
Seeing then that for the common good ſo
great loſſes are ſo ſleightlie regarded, there is no reaſon
that thy pettie loſſe ſhould be in anie ſort recōpenced,
eſpecially becauſe thou canſt not ſay that thy hurt came
by me, but by the Tirant, and no way better canſt thou
excuſe thy fault, then in accuſing thine owne hard
fortune, which was the onely cauſe of thy harme, by
bringing the tyrant vnto thy houſe.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  HE which hath all the profit and honor, ought likewiſe
to be partaker of the hurt: as I doe not vniuſtlie
reprooue thee, for the wrong which thou
haſt done me, ſo alſo dare I aduouch, that thou haſt not
killed the Tyrant, ſeeing thou diddeſt neither ſee him,
nor once touch him, but my houſe was it that ſlew him,
therefore it is not againſt reaſon, if for the loſſe thereof,
I doe at the leaſt demand ſome part of the reward. The
tyrant did not make anie ſpeciall choiſe of my houſe,
much leſſe was it offered or prepared for him, but as he
could, he entered therein, becauſe I was not at home to
hinder him; likewiſe thou mightedſt as wel haue follow-

him in and killed him, but thy heart ſerued thee not,
and therefore thou didſt rather chuſe to fire my houſe,
then otherwiſe to ſlay him, and in danger thy ſelfe to be
hurt: thou then haſt the reward, but deſeruedſt it not,
and yet thou wouldeſt haue mee loſe my houſe, which
was his ouerthrow. Who can tel but that he might well
haue eſcaped if therein he had not entered; If then my
houſe did keepe him, and receiue the fire that burned
him, why ought it not as I haue ſaid, bee likewiſe partaker
of the reward?
               
            
            
               Declamation. 70.
               
                  Of the grandfather that did ſecretly ſteale away his
deceaſed daughters child, for feare leaſt it ſhould
be poyſoned by the ſtepmother, as two other before
had ben, wherevpon the ſaid childs father accuſed
his father in law of violence.
               
               
                  IT happened that a man had three children,
whereof two died, not without ſuſpition that the
ſtepmother had beene the cauſe of their death.
The father of the ſaid childrens mother did ſecretly
ſteale away the third child, leaſt it might
come to the like end as the reſt did. Neither had the ſaid
grandfather viſited the other children during their ſickeneſſe,
becauſe he could not be ſuffered to come in, but was kept out of
dores. The father cauſed his child to be cried, the grandfather
ſaid that he had him, wherevpon the father accuſed the grandfather
of violence, ſaying that he had stolen his child; the good
old man made his excuſe, ſaying:
               
                  
SEeing that this is all the ſonnes that my daughter
hath aliue, ſuffer me to bring him vp. What doeſt
thou feare? That I will not let thee enter in when
thou commeſt to viſit him, as I was ſerued at thy houſe?
thou art deceiued, I am not ſo ingratefull: fond fooliſh
man as thou art, thou ſeekeſt not thoſe two children
which thou haſt loſt, nor once hearkeneſt after them
which haue ben wilfullie made away, but ſeekeſt him
that is not loſt, that he might likewiſe be loſt as the reſt
were. Thou askeſt one of me whoſe life I will charilie
protect, and I doe require two of thee whom thou haſt
careleſlie ſuffered to periſh. Why is not a grandfather
better to be truſted then a ſtepmother? I came to viſite
my little nephewes being ſick, yet might not ſee them;
that was violence, and not this which I haue done? For
therein hath neither beene vſed weapons, combat, reſiſtance,
nor force, but ſuch as was too friendly. Let al the
aſſiſtance bee iudge of this controuerſie which is between
a yoong man and an old. Thou ſaieſt that I haue
ſtolen thy ſonne, I anſwere that I doe keepe my daughters
ſonne, thou ſaieſt that I haue taken him away from
thee, and I denie it; but true it is that when hee came
vnto mee, I would not driue him away from me, and I
am the cauſe that he is yet liuing. So doe the Phiſitions
and Chirurgions oftentimes bind vs, and whether wee
will or no applie ſuch medicines as are moſt needfull
for the recuring of our maladies. That which I haue
done is no ſtrangers deed: Nature hath her right, & this
difference is there betwixt the father and the grandfather,
that it is lawfull for the grandfather to preſerue his
children in ſafetie, but not for the father to ſuffer his to
be ſlaine. Whence proceedeth this thy ouerlate pittie,

to begin to ſeek thy loſt ſons of this which is here in ſafetie?
Seeſt thou not that all thoſe that fauor the child,
do deſire that thou mighteſt not find him?
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  HE hath not taken away the child to keepe him, or
for anie feare he had of his ſafetie, but onelie to
ſlander my wife with ſorcerie, and to make mee
ſuſpected to be therevnto conſenting. What haue I to
do with this man, O you Iudges, who while his daughter
liued, did neuer beare me anie loue, and now after
her deceaſſe dooth hate me deadlie? and hauing ſcantlie
viſited my children when they were ſound, he came
crieng out and lamenting during their ſickneſſe, propheſieng
that which hath ſince happened, and would
but haue increaſed their griefe to haue heard it. He was
kept foorth, becauſe his comming was well knowne to
be more hurtfull to all, then helpfull to anie, and that he
ſhould neither by his needleſſe exclamations ſhorten
the liues of the poor infants, nor ſteale this other child,
which now appeareth was his onlie intent.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 71.
               
                  Of him that being accuſed for intending his fathers
death, is thervpon renounced of him, although that
in open Iudgement he was clearely acquited by equall
ſentence.
               
               YOu muſt conſider tbat in times paſt, when in iudgement
there were as many voices on the one ſide as on the other,

in any criminall cauſe, the partie accuſed was acquited, becauſe
that iuſtice ought to regard clemency more then cruelty. Whervpon
it happened that a father accuſed his ſonne of paricide,
ſaying that hee intended to murther him: wherefore he being
impriſoned, and the informations made on either ſide, the
proofe was found ſo vncertaine, that the partie accuſed had as
manie voices in iudgement on his ſide as the accuſer, whereby
the accuſed is acquited. Notwithſtanding the father being diſpleaſed,
forſaketh and diſheriteth his ſonne, though hee were acquited
by iuſtice, ſaying:
               My requeſt is now leſſe then it was, for I doe not
deſire to be reuenged of thee, but only that I may
be rid of him that would haue ſlaine me, I do no more
accuſe him, but ſhun him. Do you thinke that hee will
ſpare me being his foe, that would not ſpare me being
his father? No ſurely, For becauſe hee would no difference
betweene my teſtament and my death. He is not
acquited of his offence, but onlie freed of his puniſhment,
becauſe the ſentences were alike. To prooue him
innocent hee ought to haue had manie voices, but to
condemne him, there needed no more then one. The
Iudges haue not found him faultleſſe, but onlie ſpared
the puniſhing of his fault: wonderfull is the mercie of
the law of this countrie, ſeeing that the equalitie of voices
may acquite malefactors. Thou maieſt then thanke
the law, not thine innocencie, for thine eſcape. Thou
ſaieſt, I am acquited, and therefore you can neither account
me nor call me a paricide. I allow it ſo to be, neither
will I diſherit thee therefore, but for thy other vices,
which are the cauſe that there are as manie that beleeue
thou wouldeſt haue murthered mee as there bee
that doe ſtand in doubt thereof. But who knoweth not
that it is a greife for a father to accuſe his ſon, & to bring

him in danger of death, although it be his deſert? What
is he then that would be ſo cruel to accuſe him wrongfullie?
I take God to witnes that as I am verie glad becauſe
thou haſt eſcaped puniſhment, ſo likewiſe would
I take away all occaſion, to accuſe thee anie more; and
in putting thee away, I would take all occaſion from
thee to murther thy father.
               
                  The ſonnes Anſwere.
                  AS there needeth but one voice to condemne me,
which God hath withheld to defend mine innocencie,
ſo is my ioy exceeding great in that I am
freed from crime and diſgrace, as well as from puniſhment;
and a verie likelie matter is it, that ſome of the
Counſell (beleeuing it to bee impoſſible that a father
would euer accuſe his ſonne wrongfullie) haue ben on
your ſide, but the other, s who conſidering all men bee
ſubiect to paſſion, and that manie fathers doe imagine
that the liues and deaths of their ſons ought to be doomed
by them and at their choice onelie; haue equallie
taken my part, eſpeciallie becauſe there was no proofe
or witneſſe againſt mee. And notwithſtanding you diſherit
me, becauſe I ſhould alwaies be ſecretly ſuſpected
of infamie, wherby it appeareth that your meaning was
neuer good towards mee, or at the leaſt it is corrupted
by ſuch as pretend to bee your heires, ſo that although
I am now oppreſſed by your authoritie, I hope that by
my patience all men ſhall know, and your ſelfe wil confeſſe,
what a ſon I both haue ben, am, and euer ſhall be;
and it may bee that time may cauſe you change your euill
opinion (if God ſo pleaſe) who neuer forſaketh the
innocent.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 72.
               
                  Of the ſonne who ſtriuing againſt his father, obtained
the dignity of Emperor, afterwards being taken
in the wars and crucified, his father is accuſed
to haue betraied him.
               
               
                  IT is to be conſidered, that amongſt our
anceſtors the dignitie of Emperour was
no other then that which we at this day
doe call Generall of an armie, or Commonwealth,
the which dignitie was once
demaunded by an ancient and valiant
man; But his ſonne reſiſted him in ſuch
ſort as hee obtained the place for himſelfe, and as the Prouerbe
ſaith, Mowed the graſse vnder his fathers feet: Neuertheleſse
they went to the wars together, where it chanced the Emperor
to be taken by the enemies. Whervpon the Commonwealth ſent
fortie Embaſsadors to redeeme him, vpon any condition whatſoeuer.
Theſe Embaſsadors met the Emperors father, who told
them, that he had brought gold to ſaue his ſonnes life, but it was
too late, becauſe he was crucified before he came. The Embaſſadors
notwithſtanding paſsed on further, they found their Emperor
according to his report crucified, yet not ſo thorowly dead,
but that he ſaid thus vnto them, Beware of Treaſon: Who at
their returne, vpon theſe words of the ſonne, accuſed his father
to haue betraied him, ſaying:
               OVr Emperor hath ſuffered a ſhamefull death, and
the traitor hath receiued monie for the reward of
his Treaſon? We haue ſeen this ſame man more

ſad to ſee his ſonne pronounced Emperour, then ſorrie
to behold him taken of his enemies. How was it poſſible
that thou couldeſt returne alone, being old and ouerladen
with monie, ſeeing they did take the Emperor?
Thou haſt receiued more monie then thou couldeſt
well hide: but that is no great wonder, ſeeing that
in one perſon thou haſt ſold both a ſonne and an Emperor
together; Who ſaid vnto vs, Beware of Treaſon, but
alaſſe he ſaid it too late. Trulie if the enemies had not
giuen thee this gold, they would haue taken it from
thee as well as from others. This ſentence of the Emperor
(being readie to die) was ſhort, and euen for ſhame
verie hardly vttered, ſeeing that thereby he accuſed his
father. Why diddeſt thou eſcape leauing thy ſonne behind
thee, who was borne to be an Emperour? Surelie
for no other cauſe but that hee hindered thee from being
one. His proceeding againſt his father by lot and electiue
voices was done to no other end, but onelie
thereby modeſtlie to ſhew that from henceforth hee
would neither truſt thee with the gouernement of the
Commonwealth, neither yet ought the ſame truſt thee
to gouerne it. Our Embaſſadors carried gold thether to
redeeme our Emperor, and his father brought gold hether
which hee receiued for ſelling him vnto the enemies.
How happeneth it that thou art not dead, or at
the leaſt without motion, and as it were crucified with
thy ſonne? why diddeſt thou return ſo ſpeedilie, ſeeing
he was aliue and did yet ſpeake? Certainlie his ſpeech
bewraied the Treaſon, but his ſilence indeuoring to
conceale the ſame, did better decipher the Traitor, that
would not once ſtay the comming of the Embaſſadors,
nor yet returne with them againe. This good Emperor
although hee were crucified, yet left not to bee

carefull for the Commonwealth. And therefore he ſaid
take you heed of Treaſon: Behold how he could not
conceale the Treaſon; but like a child hee would not
name the traitor. Thou wilt ſay that compaſſion vrged
thee to depart ſo quicklie. We would know, ſeeing thou
couldeſt not haue him aliue, why thou diddeſt not at
the leaſt redeeme him when hee was dead? For neuer
was anie enemie ſo cruell but that he would be moued
with a fathers teares, and ſo great a ſumme of gold together.
This word, Take heed of Treaſon, ſignifieth, beware
leaſt anie without the priuitie of your towneguards
doe come foorth of your cittie, or without the
knowledge of the Commonwealth doe goe vnto the
enemie, or leaſt anie one doe returne from the General
of the enemies loden with gold: Nothing of this wanteth,
in all mens iudgement thou haſt done al this, thou
wenteſt forth of the cittie, thou haſt ben in the enemies
campe, thou art returned thence loden with gold, the
Emperor warned vs of Treaſon, the Embaſſadors haue
diſcloſed the traitor, all doubt is taken away, conſider
onlie (O Iudges) who did ſpeake, who now ſpeaketh,
and who ſpeaketh not.
               
                  The fathers Anſwere.
                  I Did demand the Empire to ſaue my ſonne from the
danger whereinto himſelfe hath fallen, I know not
whether there be anie Treaſon, but you may thinke
that if I were culpable therein, my ſonne would haue
as little reſpect to accuſe me, as he had to ſtriue with me
for the Empire. I did carrie monie thether, which I haue
brought backe againe, for ſeeing my ſonne taken, I took
all the gold which of long time I had hidden in my

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
Nay who will doubt that ſhee hath not committed this
fact wherewith ſhe is ſuſpected, ſeeing that ſhee cannot
denie that fault which one would neuer haue charged
her withall. You ſee worthie Iudges that her ſinne, her
conſcience, and her owne mouth beare witneſſe againſt
her, pittie then this poore dead bodie burſt and ouerflowing
with poyſon, behold the bride, bed, and feaſt,
turned into tears and funerals, take compaſſion of him
who aboue all others is a miſerable father, and a moſt
vnfortunate husband.
               
               
                  The wiues Anſwere.
                  YOu charge me with two great crimes without any
likelihood of truth, that is to ſay, with adultery,
and poyſoning; of the one there is neither proofe
nor witnes, of the other there is a tormented ſlaue witneſſe,
who not onlie to eſcape from tortures, but alſo to
bee reuenged of the ſtripes which heretofore ſhe hath
receiued, accuſeth her miſtris: but who is ſo ignorant,
that knoweth not that ſuch vild wretches as ſhee doe
ſeeke for nothing els but miſchiefe, or at the leaſt for alteration
or change, and eſpeciallie when the husband
and the wife are at variance, becauſe that for the moſt
part all the anger lighteth vpon their ſhoulders therfore
they ſeeke to mittigate their owne diſgrace by anothers
diſcredite: likewiſe your ſickleneſſe, euermore
readie to beleeue falſe reports, and not my faults, doth
induce you to accuſe me falſely. The malice which this
ſlaue did beare vnto my daughter, perſuadeth mee that
ſhe hath poyſoned her, becauſe ſhee would not behold
her mariage, for fear of falling forth of my hands into
hers, that was yonger, & therfore more rigorous, as being

leſſe ſubiect to reaſon: O what a goodlie man is
this, who dooth giue more credite to a tortured ſlaues
words, then vnto the long experience of the integritie
of his wife: you do your ſelfe confeſſe that you would
neuer haue thought that in ſeeking for the murtherer of
your daughter you ſhould haue found out your wiues
adulterie; it is then a ſigne that I neuer heretofore gaue
you anie occaſiō to ſuſpect me for a laſciuious woman:
what mooueth you then to beleeue it now? A wicked
and diſloiall bond woman. Who prouoked you to ſuſpect
mee for poiſoning your daughter? One word ſpoken
by mee in my anger: Doe you not know that they
which are iuſtly angrie or grieued do ſpeake that which
they neuer thinke? Thinke you that the mother hath
not a iuſt cauſe to bee angrie, when ſhee ſeeth that her
daughter ſhall be married without her conſent? Seeing
the mother and not the father ſuffered all the paine in
bearing her, & that inforceth her alſo to loue her more
tenderlie. Since I could not abide to ſee her badly married,
could I bee ſo hard hearted as to cauſe her to bee
murthered? Alaſſe the feare that I had of her death,
made me to diuine her deſtruction. In like ſort it is euident
that thoſe which are ouercharged either with anger
or feare, doe oftentimes vnaduiſedly foretell ſuch
miſchiefe as ſhortlie after falleth out but too true: euen
ſo hath it happened vnto mee, being ouerburdened
both with the one and the other accident; conſider O
you Iudges, how mad this man is, who vnto his daughters
death would ad his innocent wiues decay, grounding
his opinion therein, vpon ſuch a word, as any one
that deſired to kill another would neuer vtter. Laſtly I
proteſt that he wrongfully ſeeketh my diſcredit, & therfore
I requeſt that he may make me amends for my diſgrace.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 74.
               
                  Of Romulus who cauſed his brother Remus to be beheaded.
               
               
                  
                     ROmulus and Remus being both brethren
and twins, were the founders of Rome, and
the firſt Kings thereof, neuertheleſſe they
were ruled by the aduice of the Senate, who
had eſtabliſhed a law, that hee which went
forth of the citty without leaue of the kings
or the licence of the Senat, ſhould bee guilty of Treaſon and bee
forthwith beheaded: Vpon this decree they began to build the
wals of their cittie. Where the two Kings being one day both
together, and Romulus praiſing the diligence of the workemen,
ſaying that they had in a ſhort time raiſed the walles ſo
high, as they might be well tearmed defenſible. Remus to ſhew
the agilitie of his perſon, or it may be to contrarie his brothers
ſpeeches, leaped at one iumpe ouer the wall foorth of the cittie:
wherevpon Romulus being greatlie diſpleaſed, and exceeding
angrie, or rather becauſe loue and rule can neuer abide anie
companion, ſo it may be he hauing long before ſought for ſome
occaſion, cauſed his brother to bee ſuddainely taken, and affirming
that he was gone forth of the cittie without leaue, hee did
by the law condemne him, and made him to be preſently beheaded:
Wherewithal the Senat being diſpleaſed, accuſed Romulus
for killing not onely his brother, but alſo their King, And
thus they ſay:
               WHat good lucke or happineſſe may wee hope to
reape of our Commonwealth or cittie, ſeeing that

in the beginning thereof, not onlie one twinne brother
hath preſumed to kill the other, but alſo the King hath
murthered the King. If one hand ſhould cut off the other,
one foot tread vpon the other, one eie darken
the other, and finallie if all the members would ſeeke to
hinder each other, what benefit or helpe may be hoped
for of the bodie? As the man which hath but one eie is
alwaies in danger to be ſtarke blind, or as he which hath
but one hand, the leaſt hurt which the other hand receiueth
maketh the man altogether impotent, euen ſo
wee thought our ſelues happie to bee free from the like
danger hauing two kings, to the end that if the one
were ſicke, the other might gouerne and aid the Commonwealth;
thoſe dangers which the one might incur
for want of foreſight, the other might preuent by his
forecaſt, the one being abroad, the other was in the cittie,
and being not onelie brethren but twinnes, wee hoped
that they ſhould be inuincible, but alaſſe the one
hath ouerthrowne the other. What puniſhment then
dooth not hee deſerue, which hath depriued the Commonwealth
of ſo great a hope? Who knoweth not that
kings are the true guides of the people, and how good
or bad ſoeuer they be, the moſt part will follow their example?
Vnhappie then are thoſe Commonwealths
where the kings are wicked, and eſpeciallie when their
chiefeſt fault is crueltie, which in them is moſt odious:
therefore hath nature framed the drone being king of
the bees without a ſting, or at the leaſt if he haue one, he
vſeth it not: if crueltie then be ſo vnſeemely for kings,
how much more is it for ſuch as are the firſt kings, ſeeing
that they doe inſtruct and embolden all their ſucceſſors
to follow their ſteps; for mans frailtie is more
prone to follow the bad then the good: doe wee not

know that ſharpe lawes are made not to deſtroy Cittizens,
much leſſe Kings, but onlie to bridle the vicious,
and by keeping them in aw to aſſure the vertuous; the
text of the law is ſtrict, but the gloſe is ample, & ought
alwaies to tend rather vnto clemencie then crueltie.
What would you ſay if a man (ouercome with a iealous
care of his countrie) ſhould goe forth of the cittie
without leaue to doe ſome exploit for the benefit therof;
Ought he to die? Are not the lawes made for the
profit and ſafetie of the Commonwealth? Let vs conſider
to what end the King leaped ouer, was it to goe
ſeeke the enemies? No, but rather thereby ſecretly to
ſhew, that as he could leape foorth of the cittie at one
iumpe, ſo might the enemies as eaſilie paſſe our ſuch
low wals; wherefore as hee would neither flatter the
workemen, ſo without gaining their ill will, hee would
prouoke them to be more diligent in their labour, and
for the ſame purpoſe he indeuoured to pleaſe both thē
& alſo the aſſiſtants in ſhewing the agilitie of his bodie:
O how worthie of commendation is that man which
ioineth profit with pleaſure, as he did! but wee may ſay
that he in ſteed of receiuing honour by the people for
his reward, obtained cruell death at his brothers hands
for his recompence. Seeing the law was by the Senat inuented,
why were not they acquainted with his execution;
that ſo his integritie might haue ben made manifeſt?
For that which a king doth cannot bee ſaid to bee
done without leaue, ſo that the people be not hurt therby:
for in euery lawful act he may take leaue by his own
authoritie, wherfore you haue no other excuſe, but that
the onlie ambition to raigne alone, incited you to kill
your brother, murther our King, & hurt the Commonwealth,
whereby it appeareth that the greedie deſire to

rule is void of all pittie or remorſe: if we ſay that hee
which parteth from his friend parteth from himſelfe,
what may be ſaid of him that hath by death ſundred his
brother from him? Which at one inſtant was conceaued
with him, who hath remained in his mothers
wombe vntill his procreation with him, who was caſt
forth vnto the beaſts, & foſtered vp together with him,
who hath holpen him to build this citie, to appoint the
Senat, and was created King with him; what iudge wil
bee then ſo ignorant which will not ſay that you ought
to die with him? And that you doe wrongfullie vſurpe
the time wherein you doe liue longer then hee. Giue
rightfull doome then, O you Senators, to the end that
he which hath killed his brother without your conſent,
may no longer tyranniſe ouer the Commonwealth.
               
                  The Anſwere of Romulus.
                  AL happineſſe ought to be hoped for (graue fathers)
when in the Commonwealth the laws are not onelie
good, but when they be obſerued and kept, and by
the puniſhment of a great one, all the reſt are threatened
if they miſſe in their dutie: mine integritie is ſufficientlie
declared in ſubmitting me vnto the lawes, yea,
euen in the not ſparing of mine owne brother, as in
like ſort I would not exempt mine owne perſon for the
obſeruation thereof. If Minus, Radamanthus, and Eocus
had not ben iuſt and ſomewhat ſeuere in the performance
of their lawes, they ſhould not haue obtained
that immortall renowne which they now haue, neither
ſhould bee held as Iudges of the infernall manſions:
like as it is manie times not onlie lawfull, but neceſſarie
for one hand to chop of another to preſerue the reſt of

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
executing one of the enemies therof, not without your
iudgement, but by you both condemned and adiudged,
euer ſince the law was by you made & allowed; for
you haue added no exception therevnto. Conſider then
moſt graue Senators, and you couragious people, that
if I receiue anie hurt, it is for doing good, beſeeching
you alſo to beleeue, that what miſchiefe or good ſoeuer
ſhall happen vnto me, cannot happen vnto anie that is
more affected vnto you, or more carefull of your welfare
then I.
                  
                     Romulus eſcaped at this time, and raigned a long time
after very cruellie, but finallie at a ſacrifice which was
made out of the cittie, there fell great ſtore of rain, with
horrible thunder and lightening, wherevpon the Senators
tooke occaſion to kill Romulus, and afterwards hauing
hewed him in an hundred peeces, euery man carried
away a peece, and made the people beleeue that he
was taken vp into heauen aliue, whileſt they were offering
their ſacrifice, and hee was placed in the temple amongſt
the gods, and named Quirinus.
                  
               
            
            
               Declamation. 75.
               
                  Of him who being found with a poyſoned potion, is
thereby accuſed to haue gone about to poyſon
his father.
               
               
                  
                     A
                   Certaine rich man had one onlie ſonne, who was
of ſuch bad behauiour, that he renounced him,
and receiued him againe three times. Laſtly, he
found him at vnawares in a very ſecret place of
his houſe, where he was brewing a poyſoned potion,

the father asked him what drinke that was, hee not being
able to denie it, ſaid that it was poyſon, the which he thought to
drinke becauſe hee was wearie of his life: afterwards he threw
the poyſon on the ground, the father knowing his malice long
before, accuſed him that hee had prepared that poyſon for him,
ſaying:
               IT is far vnlike that he which in three times being forſaken
did neuer make anie ſhew to bee deſirous of
death, would now poyſon himſelfe being both in the
good fauour, and in the houſe of his aged father, whoſe
inheritance hee did dailie expect; but it is rather moſt
certaine, that he being vnwilling to ſtay for it vntill my
death, was deſirous to attempt the abridging of my
daies. What likelihood was there that he would willinglie
die, who being ſuddainly taken, threw the poyſon
downe for feare leaſt he ſhould haue been compelled
to drinke it? Why ſhould you think that ſuch a one
is wearie of his life that dooth now defend himſelfe as
much as he can, becauſe he would not bee condemned
to death? Thoſe which deſire to die, doe goe vnto the
warres or trauell by ſea, and ſo die with honor: in denieng
thy crime thou prooueſt thy ſelfe culpable; canſt
thou denie that thou diddeſt ſeeke, find, buy, and bring
the poyſon into thy fathers houſe? Vnto whom thou
ſhewing thy ſelfe an enemie more then a thouſand
times, haſt compelled him againſt his will to reiect and
diſherit thee three times, and thinking alwaies by my
exceeding mildneſſe to ouercome thine extreame maliciouſneſſe,
I haue thrice returned to receiue thee with
more then a fatherly kindnes, but I perceiue that all the
good which is done vnto the wicked, is not onlie loſt,
but alſo increaſeth their wickedneſſe: for thou canſt

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  THe law is, that whoſoeuer killeth any man,
ſhould not be buried at all. Wherevpon a certain
rich man of a good ſtocke happened by ſome occaſion
to kill himſelfe. So that thereby the Magiſtrate
accounted him for a murtherer, and
therefore would not ſuffer him to be buried: but the kinared of
the dead man ſtood againſt him therein, and ſaid:
               
                  IF this poore man had ſlaine anie one, your reaſon
were of ſome worth, for it might haue ben
ſuppoſed that malice, hatred, enuie, or ſome other
vice, had procured him to commit manſlaughter,
but alaſſe he hath ſlaine himſelfe being ouercome
with miſerie, or els becauſe he had loſt his wits: I
know not whether of theſe two accidents were the
cauſe of his fall, yet am I ſure that they are not to be imputed
vnto his fault, but he is more worthie to be pittied
then to be puniſhed. What greater crueltie can there
bee in the world, then not onelie to puniſh a dead man,
but ſuch a one as died miſerablie? We cannot but ſuſpect
that he perceiuing the Magiſtrate did wrongfullie
hate him, hath therefore ſhortened his owne daies: for
if you did not bear him ſome ill wil what ſhould moue
you to goe about to depriue him of that which in the
end time will graunt vnto him? For euen thoſe which
are hanged doe at one time or other not remaine vnburied;
wherefore Diogenes ſaid well vnto his diſciples,
that demanded of him where he would be buried: lay
me (ſaid he) vpon the earth, for the ſame it ſelfe will in
time burie me: this your rigor then is more preiudiciall
vnto vs that liue, then vnto the dead man: if the worſt
happen, what can you ſay of him? Or wherewith are

you able to accuſe him, ſaue onlie that his great miſfortune
made him to imagine that hee could no way end
his miſerie but by death? But alaſſe hee was deceiued,
for although he be dead, yet dooth miſhap follow him,
ſo as he cannot by his ſepulchre hide his ſhame; whereby
it appeareth, that misfortune dooth ſooner beat
downe the wretched then it dooth the wicked. Surelie
conſidering that which is denied vnto him, I cannot
blame him for being wearie of his life; in his death hee
hath immitated Cato, why thē ought this man to be vnburied
more then he? In your iudgement then do you
thinke that Curtius ſhould haue remained without a ſepulchre,
if in his very death he had not found the ſame,
caſting himſelfe while he was yet aliue into the burning
gulfe? Who is more miſerable then he that whileſt he
liueth is wearie of his life? And who is more vnhappie
then he that is dead, and wanteth a ſepulchre? Is it to
be wondered at if this man were willing to die, ſeeing
that for all he ſhunneth it, miſchiefe purſueth him? Nature
affoordeth a ſepulchre vnto all men, yea the ſea caſteth
the dead vpon the land to be buried, thoſe which
are hanged in chaines, do by little and little ſlide down
into their graues, for in the end they become earth;
they which are burned, the ſelfeſame fire that cōſumeth
their bodie, dooth burie their bones conuerting them
into aſhes; others are intombed in the bellies of fiſhes,
and of other land beaſtes. As it is the office of Magiſtrats
to perſecute murtherers, ſo likewiſe ought they to
pittie the murthered. If you ſay that hee which killeth
himſelfe is a murtherer, you muſt yet conſider that hee
hath wronged none but himſelfe: it may bee that hee
did procure his owne death for feare leaſt he ſhould be
conſtrained to wrong ſome other, what thing then can

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
example others might bee warned to bee more carefull
of their kindred. This law was inuented but onelie to
terrifie thoſe who neither feared death nor damnation.
Aſſure you that he would neuer haue died in that ſort,
vnleſſe he had committed ſome hainous offence, for
there is no ſin ſo great but that hee which dare kill himſelfe
will be bold to commit.
            
            
               Declamation. 77.
               
                  Of the ſeruant of Lucullus who thinking to giue
his maiſter a drinke to make him to loue him, cauſed
him to become a foole.
               
               
                  
                     LVcullus was a Romane Senator, very rich and
wealthy in goods, gotten by the warres, who both
liued moſt deliciouſly, and alſo ſpent more largely
then any other Roman: but moſt of all he greatly
loued learned men, and rewarded them very
liberally. Wherevpon it chanced that one of his houſhold ſeruants
was verie deſirous to worke ſome meanes that hee might
likewiſe chuſe him to loue him, and the better to effect the ſame,
he prepared a certaine loue drinke, and made his maiſter to
drinke thereof (for that which fooles cannot attaine vnto by
vertue, they thinke to accompliſh by villanie) but as from follie
there neuer commeth anie thing but miſchiefe, ſo happened it
by this fooliſh ſeruant, for in ſtead of making himſelfe to be beloued,
hee troubled his maſters ſences, becauſe hee knew not how
to mingle his drinke aright. Wherefore the kindred of Lucullus
brought him into iudgement, and accuſed him for poyſoning
his maiſter, whervnto the ſeruant replied thus:
               
                  
                  TRue it is that I gaue him a loue drinke, but not
producing ſuch an accident as hath ſince vnto
him happened; and that ſeruant is in no ſort
faultie, which as much as in him lieth, ſeeketh
to procure his maiſters fauour, prouided that it be not
to his hurt: the drinke which I haue giuen him, hath
ben tried by manie, and may yet be proued by more, I
meant neither to hurt my maiſters bodie, nor to trouble
his mind, ſeeing that I neuer hoped for any good in
the world but from him; but thoſe which gape for his
lands after his death, or that deſire to haue the managing
of his goods during his life, haue taken occaſion
by this my potion, to giue him ſome other drinke that
vnto his ſences hath ben more pernicious, that therby
they might both defraud me of my hoped good intention,
& alſo accompliſh their wicked expectation: who
hath euer heard that to loue ones maiſter well, and to
deſire to be beloued of him, ſhould be an offence? and
ſo much the rather, was my meaning lawfull, becauſe I
neither haue loued him, nor deſired his loue for any couetouſneſſe,
but to gaine this onlie good, alwaies to do
vnto him moſt faithfull, moſt humble, and acceptable
ſeruice; but as there is no word well ſpoken which is
badlie conſtrued, ſo there is nothing well done if it be
taken in ill part, or ſiniſterly wreſted, which is ſo much
the ſooner done, becauſe the moſt part of men do not
iudge according to the meaning, but according to the
iſſue of our actions, although he which hath done them
bee in no ſort faultie. But I beſeech you worthie Iudges
to conſider what reaſon there is to accuſe him for a
malefactor who hath giuen the loue drinke, and not
once to ſeeke out or to inquire after him that hath giuen
the noiſome and hurtfull drinke Thinke you if I

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
mous as Lucullus was? What theft can be more manifeſt
then in deſiring to vſurpe a loue ſo worthie, being
thy ſelfe in all points ſo worthleſſe? We doe in deed
confeſſe that the ſeruant is permitted to loue his maiſter,
and by his good ſeruice to winne his maiſters loue,
but it is not lawful to inforce the loue of any man, how
much leſſe then is it for a ſeruant to conſtraine his maiſter?
So that as well the intention as the iſſue of thy
deed, appeareth to be damnable; and there is no need
to inquire who gaue the peſtilent potion, ſeeing thou
diddeſt it thine owne ſelfe, and that thou canſt not denie
the ſame: moreouer, that which thou confeſſeſt to
haue done is no ſigne that thou diddeſt loue thy maiſter
very well, but rather that thou diddeſt loue thy ſelfe
too much, for thoſe which do loue intirely do ſeeke all
the meanes they can to pleaſe thoſe whō they loue, but
not to force or conſtraine them to anie thing againſt
their liking, whereby it may be prooued that thou onely
diddeſt miſchief Lucullus, in going about to take from
him his libertie, hauing thereby depriued him of his
ſences. And there is not any that pretended any profit
by his hurt but onelie thou, ſeeing that all the wealth
which Lucullus had, was ours and his friends more then
his owne, for hee was neuer borne but for the profit of
the Commonwealth, and to pleaſure his friends. Therfore
we doe alſo require no other thing, but that the innocent
may be acquited, & the guiltie not onely ſought
out (for he is found in thee) but alſo puniſhed, as well
to giue an example vnto all other ſeruants not to enterpriſe
any thing againſt their maiſters, as to reuenge the
Commonwealth, and Lucullus himſelfe for this iniurie.
            
            
               
               Declamation. 78.
               
                  Of a woman who ſlew hir daughter, that had through
childiſhneſſe killed her little brother.
               
               
                  THe law appointeth, that euery woman
which killeth her child ſhould bee burned.
Wherevpon it chanced in Orleans,
that a poor woman which got her liuing
partly by waſhing of bucks, and ſomtime
with carrying of fagots about the cittie
to ſell, had one daughter about the age of
foure yeares, and a ſonne about one yeare old, with the which
children ſhe was left a widdow by her husband. So that ſhee oftentimes
being forced to ſhift the little child, ſhe ſaid vnto him
as the most part of mothers and nources vſe to ſay, that if hee
piſſed his clothes any more, ſhe would cut off his prick; the which
the little girle hearing many times, ſhee forgot it not: but one
day when her mother was gone vnto the wood, ſhe began to vnſwaddle
her brother, and ſeeing that hee had piſſed his clothes,
ſhe tooke a knife and cut off his yard, wherewith he loſt ſo much
bloud that he died, afterwards ſhee told her mother at her returne
home what ſhe had done, who ſeeing her child dead, ſhee
was ſo ſurpriſed with anger, that ſhe tooke vp a little ſtoole, and
ſtrooke ſo great a blow therewithall vpon the girles head, that
ſhe preſently died. For the which ſhe was caried to priſon, & hir
husbands brother ſuing her to death, accuſed her ſaying:
               THis woman hath both ſlaine her daughter, and in
like ſort was the cauſe of her ſonnes death, not
onlie in that ſhe left it to the keeping and diſcretion

of a little girle, but alſo becauſe ſhee had oftentimes
ſpoken fondly, and threatned the child fooliſhly: did
ſhe not know that whatſoeuer was ill to bee done, was
not good to be ſpoken, vpon what occaſion or intent
ſoeuer it be? And that as euery word that is ſpoken, is
eaſily imprinted in the yoong and tender hearts of little
children, ſo will they like apes imitate all that they
ſee, and as children, doe whatſoeuer they heare ſpoken:
why then did ſhe ſay before this child anie thing which
ſhould not be done? And chiefly a matter ſo dangerous
and ſo vnfitting? Did ſhe not know that children (as
being humane creatures, and ſubiect naturally vnto vices)
doe keepe and remember the bad ſooner then the
good? And eſpecially the females, as being more vicious
then the males. Some may ſay that it was a miſchiefe,
which ſhee nor any other would euer haue
thought vpon: but I anſwere that they ought to bee
cut of which are the cauſe of ſuch miſfortunes, to the
end that they may no more commit the like miſchiefs,
or at the leaſt by their occaſion there doe not happen
ſome other greater miſchances. If ſhe haue liued ſo
badly, that ſhe had no neighbour or friend ſo fauourable
vnto her with whom ſhe might haue left her little
ſon in her abſence, ſhee is not worthy to liue any longer;
and if ſhe had any vnto whom ſhe might haue recommended
the ſame, ſhe is likewiſe worthy of death
for not doing the ſame. Of what thing ought a mother
to be more tender and charie, then of her child? Why
then could ſhee ſuffer the one to die by her negligence,
and heaping miſchiefe vpon miſchiefe, murther the other
by her malice? What Tigre, Wolfe, or other wild
beaſt, though neuer ſo cruell, which will not onely bee
carefull of her yoong ones, but alſo will euen vnto the

death defend them from thoſe that ſeeke to hurt or
harme them in anie ſort? How much leſſe then will
they themſelues be ſo cruell as to kill them? Wherefore
muſt I be the only ſpeaker in this caſe, when as with iuſt
griefe I can hardlie ſpeak anie more? If no puniſhment
ſhall be vſed when women (who ought to bee true examples
or perfect patternes of kindneſſe and pittie) are
more cruell thē ſauage beaſts, I know not what I ſhould
ſay? Sauing onelie that they are happy which either liued
before vs, or that ſhall be born after vs, without beholding
this our moſt vnhappie age, if ſuch a woman
may be ſuffered to liue anie longer therein, who after
ſhe hath ben the cauſe of her ſonnes death, hath yet further
ben the author of her daughters deſtruction.
               
                  The Anſwere of a friend for the woman.
                  VVHerefore doe you procure the death of ſuch
a one who deſireth nothing ſo much, as to
die? Doe you thinke that this poore woman
is not ſufficientlie afflicted, but that you muſt further
ſeeke to aggrauate her ſorrow? Alaſſe wee may by her
example verie wel perceiue, that a miſchiefe neuer commeth
alone, ſeeing that firſt we haue euer known her to
be poore, next ſhe hath loſt her husband, the onlie ſtay
of her poore life, then her ſonne, and afterwards her
daughter, and that which is worſt, ſhe is not onlie a priſoner
in danger to loſe her life, but alſo he which ought
to releiue her and procure her deliuerie, ſeeketh her deſtruction.
Surelie the leaſt of ſo manie miſeries wherein
ſhe is on all ſides cōpaſſed, is ſufficient inough to make
her worthie of compaſſion, and free her from puniſhment.
Whereof doe you accuſe her? Do you not know

that it is not in our power to bridle the firſt motions
of a iuſt anger? Know you not that the griefe which ſhe
ſuffereth becauſe ſhe hath killed her daughter, exceedeth
all the tortures that may bee inuented to torment
her? For more harme doth a miſchiefe that tormenteth
the heart, then all the tortures which may wound the
bodie are able to hurt. Whereas you accuſe her of follie,
the follie is your own when you would find in a ſilie
woman, that which may hardlie be found in thoſe that
gouerne monarchies or Prouinces Doe you not know
that there is no vertue which is not by pouertie neglected?
And that neceſſitie hath no law? Wherein then
hath a poore woman offended, who hauing no other
means, did leaue her children at home, whilſt ſhe went
abroad to get her liuing? You ſpeake of friends, and
neighbours; it is too manifeſt that charitie is ſo exceeding
cold, that if one doe but twiſe deſire a fauour or
pleaſure at anie mans hands, he is ſtraight ſaid to be importunate:
moreouer, it is to be conſidered, that to take
thoſe out of the world who haue ben the cauſe of ſome
great miſchance is not the next way to redreſſe the miſchiefe,
but rather to encreaſe it. Concerning the naturall
malice of little children, being conceiued in ſinne,
and that they retaine, or imitate the bad rather then the
good, aske nature wherefore they are ſo? But you ſhall
find that he which accuſeth nature, condemneth himſelfe,
for we are all ſubiect to her lawes. If euerie thing
ſhould be taken at the worſt, and according to your ſaieng,
the moſt part of men ſhould deſerue death, and
you might be one of the ſame number? Where do you
find that he or ſhe is vnworthie to liue which hath not
either a faithfull friend, or a louing neighbour? Seeing
ſuch happineſſe is ſo rare, as all thoſe which haue written

vnto this preſent time, doe not make mention of ſix
paire of faithfull friends? Amongſt whom are Theſeus
and Perithous, Achilles and Patrocles, Laelius and Scipio, Oreſtes
and Pilades, & he muſt be a good friend with whō
one would truſt his child, and more then a good one, if
he will ordinatily haue the care and trouble to look vnto
it. How would you then find amongſt poor women
that which ſo ſildome is found amongſt ſo many famous
men? It is verie likelie that this woman did not
kill her daughter as being cruelly addicted to murther,
but rather as being ouercome with a iuſt cauſe of anger.
The compariſon which you make in likening her
vnto a brute beaſt is very odious, ſeeing that ſhe would
not onelie haue defended her children againſt all thoſe
that would hurt them, but alſo that the compaſſion

                        ••
                     ich ſhe had to ſee one of them dead, induced her to
ſtrike the other. In all ages there haue ben ſeene manie
ſhrewd turnes and miſchances, therefore the fault happened
in this our age may be repaired, if the Iudges wil
be pleaſed to bee as mercifull as you would haue them
mercileſſe, for by that meanes the offence of a woman
ſhall be the cauſe that in after ages the mildneſſe of our
Iudges ſhall be remembred.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 79.
               
                  Of a Turke who bought a child with a red head to
make poyſon of him.
               
               
                  
                     A
                   Poore woman hauing but one ſonne which was of a
red coloured haire, which the Frenchmen doe in a
mockerie call the diſsembling haire, put her ſaid ſon
to ſerue a merchant, who within a while carried the child with

him into Turkey, who whileſt he there remained, there came
a Turkiſh Phiſition oftentimes vnto the ſaid merchant, to enquire
whether he would ſell the red boy? But the merchant alwaies
anſwered him that he would not, vntil that on a time the
boy ſaid vnto him ſecretly: Maiſter ſell me well, and giue the
money vnto my mother to releeue her pouertie, and I will find
the meanes to run away, and to eſcape from him well enough, ſo
that I will returne vnto you or to my mother; the merchant agreed
therevnto, and ſold the boy for a certaine ſumme of Ducats,
hoping to ſee the boy againe, but within a while after hee
was very much abaſhed when he could ſee him no more. Wherfore
he demanded of the Turke where the boy was, and intreated
him ſo earneſtly that he might ſee him again, that the Turk
hauing brought him into his houſe ſhewed him onely the boies
head, and all the reſt of his quarters boiling in a cauldron,
wherewith the merchant was greatly amaſed, but diſsembling
his ſorrow as much as he could, asked the Turke what he would
doe with that child boiled, the Turke anſwered him that it was
to make poyſon, and that he hoped to gaine more then ten thouſand
ducats by him: the poore merchant being very ſorrowfull,
brought the money home with him, and gaue it vnto the boies
mother, telling her not without teares the whole truth of the
matter, the mother refuſed the money, and required iuſtice of
him that had ſold her ſonne, accuſing him to be the cauſe of his
death, and theſe were her reaſons:
               
                  WHo is more miſerable then I? Seeing by the
fault of him, with whom I would haue truſted
mine owne life, my ſonne (being his ſeruant)
was euen in one month ſold as a ſlaue, & then
moſt cruellie ſlaine: and why was he ſlaine? Alaſſe to
be not onelie the inſtrument and cauſe of the death of
manie others, but it may be to ſerue for the ruin and deſtruction

of all Chriſtendome; ſince there needeth
but a little poyſon to murther thoſe that defend the
ſame: I did lend thee my ſonne to doe thee all good
and honeſt ſeruice, vpon thy promiſe that thou wouldſt
vſe him as thine owne; I doe aske thee whether thou
wouldeſt euer haue ſold thine owne ſonne vpon anie
condition whatſoeuer? Wouldeſt thou not haue ſent
him to trauell abroad, to ſee the world, and to learn vertuous
qualities, that he might bee a ſtay vnto thy age,
and a profitable member in the Cōmonwelth? I hoped
to haue had the like of my ſonne, and the loſſe ought
not to be eſteemed anie thing the leſſe, becauſe he was
ſonne vnto a poore woman, for they when they once
giue their minds vnto learning or anie other good qualitie,
doe become more vertuous: as for example, Ag
                        •
                     
                     thocles
King of Scicilia, was not he the ſon of a potter?
Viriat king of Portugal, Otto, and Tamberlane Emperors
of the Eaſt, were all three ſhepheards: Arſaces king of
the Parthians would neuer bewray who were his Parents.
Ptolomey the firſt of that name being king of Aegypt,
the ſon of an Eſquire, Eumenes one of the ſucceſſors
of Alexander was the ſonne of a wagonmaker, Diocleſian
Emperor of Rome was the ſonne of a Notarie,
Pertinax likewiſe an Emperor of Rome, his grandfather
was a bondman; Valentinian, the ſonne of a ropemaker;
Proba the ſoune of a gardener; Aemilius knew not from
whence he came; Maximinus was the ſon of a Muletter,
with an infinit number of others of farre baſer parentage
then was my ſonne, that haue ben the honor of
all their countrie. Alas muſt the loue which I did beare
vnto my child be meaſured by thy couetouſnes? Doeſt
thou not know that a Turke neuer buieth a Chriſtian
for anie good that he wiſheth vnto him? And if he did,

oughteſt thou to allow him to deceiue his maiſter, and
to run away from him? Thou ſhouldeſt haue chaſtened
him for inuenting ſuch a villanie; for I did not
giue him vnto thee to the end that thou ſhouldeſt conſent
vnto his wicked counſell, but that he ſhould be wel
counſelled and inſtructed by thee: but I doe very well
perceiue, that it is not ſaid in vaine, that couetouſneſſe
is the root of all miſchiefe. Curſed be the gold, I will
haue none of it, for I know wel that they which wil liue
according to the rule of nature, haue no need thereof,
and they which will liue after their owne mind, haue
neuer inough, of which number thou art one, and that
hath cauſed thee to caſt away my ſon ſo miſerablie, for
the which I demand iuſtice.
               
                  The Merchants Anſwere.
                  WHy doeſt thou perſecute me, O thou woman, for
a miſchance that diſpleaſeth mee no leſſe then it
doth thee? If it were otherwiſe, might not I haue kept
this gold and haue made thee beleeue that thy ſon had
ben run away from me? Yea, and that he had robbed
me, or els that hee had died by ſome other accident,
then couldeſt thou well haue indured thy ſonnes loſſe,
together with thy poore life; but indeed thou verifieſt
the old Prouerb, which ſaith, That a woman is extream
in all things, and that likewiſe ſhee commonly chuſeth
the worſt: whereby I might haue been better aduiſed,
when I told thee of this miſhap, being therfore no leſſe
ſorrowfull then thy ſelfe, for to ſay the truth, it was a
great lamentable miſchance, and now I doe verie well
know how vnſeemely it is for anie man to ſay, I had not
thought, becauſe euery wiſe man thinketh vpon euerie

thing before hee doe anie thing: Notwithſtanding, I
dare affirme that few men would euer haue ſuppoſed
that of a child there might be poyſon made to kill men:
and ſurely I doubt whether thou art to bee blamed or
no for bearing ſuch a one: for ſuch children are begotten
by vnlawfull coniunction, when the woman is in
her wicked diſpoſition. Furthermore, if my ſon ſhould
haue perſuaded mee to leaue him with that Turke, I
know not whether I ſhould haue done it yea or no.
Laſtly, I ſuffered him to doe what he would, thinking it
ſhould haue beene for his profit and thine, our deedes
ought to bee meaſured by our good or bad meaning,
and not according to the euent therof: and ſay not that
a Turke dooth neuer buy a Chriſtian to doe him anie
good, for manie ſlaues doe there become great lords,
and gouernors of Prouinces: thy ſonne would not credit
my counſell, and although I had not conſented vnto
his requeſt, yet would he haue left me to accompliſh
it: the couetouſneſſe was in him, and not in me, hardlie
may he bee either counſelled or corrected that is naturallie
enclined to wickedneſſe as hee was, and I beleeue
that hee had that from thee, ſeeing that to the death of
thy ſonne thou wouldeſt ad the deſtruction of the deareſt
friend that thou haſt in the wortd, and who in ſtead
of thy ſonne and husband would bee the ſtay of thine
age, and alwaies helpefull vnto thee. But it is trulie ſaid:
women naturallie can neuer forgiue a fault, nor acknowledge
anie ſeruice or fauour that is done vnto thē.
               
            
            
               Declamation 80.
               
                  Of him that agreed to behead his father, after his father
refuſed to doe the like by him.
               
               
                  
                  IT chanced that a father & his ſon were
both conuinced of treaſon, for the which
they were condemned to die, neuertheles
as they were readie to bee executed, the
Iudges being inclined to mercie rather
then rigor, were willing to ſaue one of
them, ſaying that the griefe which hee
ſhould haue that might ſee his kinsman die, would ſerue for a
ſufficient puniſhment, and to encreaſe the ſame, they feigned
that the one of them ſhould be the others executioner, & they
put it vnto their choice who ſhould be the executioner, and
who the partie to be executed: wherefore either of them ſtriued
a great while who ſhould be the partie to be executed, but in the
end the ſon agreed to the death of his father, and according to
the decree would haue beheaded him, the which the Iudges perceiuing,
they cauſed the execution to bee ſtaied, and pardoned
the father, and ſent for the hangman to behead the ſonne, but
the father defended him, ſaying:
               YOu ought not, O you Iudges, to pronounce your
ſentences in manner of a mockerie, or by the ambiguitie
or reuocation of them to increaſe the affliction
of the afflicted, vnder a coulour of moderating
iuſtice with mercie: if mine offence be not worthie of
death, why will you make me ſuffer many? That is to
ſay, one in ſeeing the extremitie of the choice wherevnto
you haue put vs, another in contemning my life and
offering vp my necke at naught to be cut of by my ſon,
and the third in ſeeing him to be condemned for being
willing to accompliſh your ſentence? If it bee a cruell
deed to ſee a ſonne execute his father that thereby hee
might haue his owne life ſaued, a greater cruelty would

it be for the father to kill the ſonne? Wherefore O you
Iudges you ſhould not haue giuen ſo cruell a ſentence:
but can you blame a child if to ſaue the prime time of
his youth, he doe not ſpare the withered age of his father,
whoſe yeares are not manie, and they miſerable?
For to ſay the truth, age is an incurable maladie; but although
it were not, yet ſure griefe and diſpaire would
be my deſtruction: if you haue anie children, conſider
then what our miſerie is? And if you haue none, learn
of thoſe which haue them, what the affection of fathers
towards their children is? And then may you know
that the extremitie of the choice which we haue beene
put vnto, without encreaſing our miſerie, is ſufficient to
make vs ſeem more worthie of preſent pittie thē of further
puniſhment. Not in vain did Liſander of Sparta ſay
vnto him that found him childiſhlie playing with his
children, I pray thee (quoth hee) doe not diſcloſe this
my follie at anie time, vnleſſe it be when thou haſt children
as wel as I: for that diſcreet perſonage did very wel
know, that thoſe which haue no children, doe neuer
know how great the father and childrens loue is one
vnto another, the which doth wax more feruent as our
years and age increaſeth: wherefore it is no great wonder
if my ſon hath conſented to doe that which I could
neuer agree vnto, ſeeing that his yeares are all too yong
as yet to vnderſtand ſo wel as I what true affection meaneth:
therefore I cannot beleeue that he whom Manlius
Torquatus cauſed to be beheaded (to manifeſt his care
in obſeruing militarie diſcipline) could aſſuredlie be his
own ſon, the which perchance himſelfe did well vnderſtand,
& for that cauſe hee found occaſion at one ſtroke
to be both reuēged of the mother, in grieuing her with
the ſlaughter of her ſonne (the cauſe and witneſſe of

his ſorrow) and alſo by the ſame means to gaine an immortall
memorie: I ſay memorie, becauſe ſuch kind of
crueltie is not to be tearmed glorie. But how many are
there who for want of yeares and diſcretion haue conſpired
their fathers death, and yet haue not beene compelled
therevnto as this my ſonne was, but onlie either
for the deſire of rule or greedineſſe of goods? notwithſtanding
there was neuer anie father ſo cruell as to puniſh
his ſonne for all that, except Herod that abhominable
monſter, more cruell then anie brute beaſt; But Dauid
did not he weepe for his ſonne Abſolon, by whom
he had receaued ſo manie deteſtable perſecutions, and
iniuries? Muſt there then be a quarrell taken, becauſe I
haue ben more pittiful then my ſonne? who neuertheleſſe
would not do anie thing without my commandement,
& by the dutie whcih he ought vnto me, which
hath chieflie induced him heretofore to commit that
offence for which we are both condemned. Laſtlie, reaſon
willeth that your laſt ſentence be not reuoked, for
no ſentēce ought euer to be reuoked to the hinderance
or preiudice of ſuch as are to ſuffer: if one of vs muſt
die, it is I that ought ſo to doe, ſeeing that I was firſt
born, and being the elder, I haue offended through malice,
but he through ignorance, I willinglie, and he in obeying
me; I then being the onlie cauſe that both hee
and I haue offended, it is requiſit that I onlie ſhould
die for both our miſdeeds: and neuer imagine that my
ſonne doth for all that eſcape vnpuniſhed, for as all my
miſerie ſhall in my death haue an end, ſo ſhall his calamitie
in liuing together with his yeares dailie more and
more increaſe, as well in grieuing that hee hath offended
the Commonwealth, as that he hath ben conſtrained
to kill his father by their commandement, who

ought to abhorre the onelie thought of ſo execrable a
crueltie.
               
                  The anſwere of the Iudges.
                  OVr ſentence was not pronounced by way of
mockerie, neither was it reuoked to encreaſe
your miſeries, but onlie to know (ſeeing you are
both twaine worthie to die) whether of you is moſt vnworthie
to liue: for mercie which aſſuageth Iuſtice,
ought alwaies to be extended towards him that is leaſt
culpable. Wherefore finding your ſonne more faultie
then you, we haue appointed him to die, yet not by
your hands, for we know that the ſame were rather crueltie
then iuſtice, but we haue hereby made a certaine
triall whether there were anie vertue remaining in him,
when in conſenting vnto your death, he hath bewraied
his vngraciouſneſſe, ſo that except you bee yet an enemie
to your countrie, you ought not to bewaile the
death of a man ſo wicked, or a ſonne ſo worthleſſe; but
we plainlie perceiue that euerie one fauoureth ſuch as
himſelfe is, and that you will neuer ſurceaſſe to hate the
Commonwealth: ſo that it will bee no great loſſe although
you ſhould (as you ſay) die with griefe; for
ſuch a loſſe ſhall be more profitable to all, then hurtfull
to anie: likewiſe of two wicked men we had rather ſaue
him that by courſe of nature will die the ſooneſt, and
which hath little time, and leſſe ſtrength to accompliſh
his wicked purpoſe. We haue children, but if wee did
know that they would euer bee like vnto you or your
ſonne, wee would preſentlie doe with them as wee will
with him, and as wee ought to doe with you; they are
to bee pittied which are poore and miſerable, not ſuch

as are wicked and malefactors, for as to afflict the good
it is an act of crueltie, ſo to puniſh the bad, is a deed of
charitie: we doe not cauſe your ſonne to die, for being
willing to accompliſh our ſentence, as you ſay, but becauſe
he being alreadie worthie of death, the ſame doth
make him more worthie, and wee doe ſaue you by our
ſpeciall grace, becauſe you would not kill him, ſhewing
your ſelfe at the leaſt a better father, then he is a ſonne:
and the dutie which he ought vnto you can bee no excuſe
for him, for it is verie apparent that he would hardlie
euer haue obeied you, had you commanded him to
doe anie good: true it is that neuer anie ſentence is to
bee reuoked to the hinderance of the good, but as wee
haue moderated the firſt to ſaue the life of one of you,
ſo is it lawful for vs now to applie the other in ſuch ſort,
that he may die which is moſt wicked. Alſo the choice
which we doe put you vnto cannot bee called crueltie,
ſeeing that it was not to that end that it ſhould be ſo effected,
neither was the ſame anie ſuddaine inuention of
our owne thoughts, but it is to bee conſidered that the
wickednes of malefactors cauſeth the iudges to inuent
new & extraordinary puniſhments, thereby to repreſſe
vice the ſooner. To conclude, if you thinke that we do
you any wrong, you may appeale vnto thoſe who haue
as great authoritie ouer vs as ouer you.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 81.
               
                  Of a Chirurgion who murthered a man to ſee the
mouing of a quicke heart.
               
               
                  
                  THere was in Padua a moſt cunning Chirurgion,
excelling all others of his time, who hauing
made wonderfull experiences of his art (for no
leſse is the deſire of cunning, then is couetous of
coine) had alſo a wonderfull great deſire to open a
liue man, that he might perfectly know the motion of the heart,
wherevpon hee made diuers and ſundrie requeſts vnto the Senat
of Venice, that they would grant vnto him ſome condemned
malefactor, to make therewith this his deſired experience,
but he could neuer obtaine the ſame at their hands, for the Venetians
are by nature not only pittifull, but alſo ſomewhat ſuperſticious.
But theſe refuſals did but the more encreaſe the longing
of this Chirurgion: for to ſay the truth, euery haulty ſpirit
are in that like vnto women, who doe for the moſt part couet
after that which they are forbidden to touch. So that hee being
ſtill in this rauing or rather longing, there came vnto his doore
a poore ſouldiour, very well proportioned and of a ſound bodie,
comming newly from the wars, and demanded his almes of the
Chirurgion, who cauſed him to come in, and cheriſhed him ſecretly
ſome three daies after his owne fantaſie, afterwards hauing
brought him downe into a caue, he cauſed him by certaine
fellows hired for that purpoſe, to be bound vnto a poſt, and opening
him aliue, he ſaw that in him which he ſo greatly deſired,
but as no murther can euer remaine vndiſcloſed long, ſo it happened
that one of his confederats was taken for ſome other
crime, and being vpon the racke, he amongſt other matters, reuealed
the murther which he, his companions, and the Chirurgion
had committed wherevpon they were all taken, and the
Chirurgion confeſsed the fact, ſaying:
               TRue it is moſt iuſt Iudge, and you worthie Senators,
that I haue ben the death of one man to ſaue

the liues of an infinit number of others, not onelie by
the cures which I hope to performe during my life, but
by that which I will leaue behind mee in writing after
my death: wherefore it may bee ſaid that hauing made
an experience ſo notable and profitable, I haue done
worthilie, but hauing killed a guiltles man I haue done
wickedly. I confeſſe it, and would confeſſe to haue offended
more hainouſlie, if I had not more then once
intreated, that to preuent a further miſchiefe, I might
haue beene allowed to make this triall vpon ſome condemned
malefactor, the which I was neuer permitted
to doe: ſome one may anſwere, muſt you therefore kill
an innocent? Or doe that by your owne authoritie,
which a whole Senate would neuer allow? Doe you
thinke that your authoritie alone is greater, or your wiſdome
more then all theirs together? God forbid worthie
lords, that I ſhould euer preſume anie ſuch matter;
but I dare & that trulie affirme that it is lawfull for Chirurgions
to doe many things which is not decent to be
allowed by the Senators: nay, they would abhorre to
heare it but mentioned; what a thing were it if at all
times when a mans leg or arme, or the breaſt of a woman
muſt bee cut off, to ſaue the reſt of the bodie, that
firſt the Counſell ſhould bee moued, or leaue requeſted
of the Senat for the ſame, would it not bee a horrible
matter? And as at Rome heretofore the firſt Chirurgion
was ſtoned by the people; ſo would they now become
verie odious vnto the Senators, being vnskilfull
of the profit of that art: therefore all things which are
odious, but neceſſarie, ought to be done in the moſt ſecret
manner that poſſiblie they may be; let not this then
be any further reuealed, which for a good intent & vpon
a moſt iuſt occaſion I haue done ſecretly: concerning

the innocencie of him vpon whom this trial hath
ben made, there is no proofe nor any certainty thereof,
but rather manie preſumptions to the contrarie: for
firſt he had a bad countenance, hee came from the wars
which is a place wherevnto one goeth to no other end
but to kill, or to be killed, he left his captain in the midſt
of his wars, without either leaue or paſport from him,
which is a manifeſt proofe that hee was attainted of
ſome notable crime, or els is worthie ſo to be for flying
from the field, or not performing ſuch duties as ſouldior
are ſworne to obſerue; for none ought to bind himſelfe
vnto anie thing without doing his indeuor to diſcharge
the ſame; He was poor and oppreſſed with hunger,
wherefore I may ſay that his death hath ſaued their
liues whom it may bee hee would haue robbed by the
high waies: for commonly thoſe which are idelly
brought vp in the wars, doe neuer deſire to gaine their
liuing by an honeſt trade or exerciſe, ſo that in the end
they become fit to furniſh the gallows. If then his offences
haue induced mee and mooued my mind vnto his
preiudice alone, to act that which is for the commoditie
of many, euery louer of arts, and welwiller of the
Commonwealth, will not find this deed ſo ſtrange as it
ſeemeth in ſhew to be vnto the ignorant & vulgar ſort,
but they will rather iudge it to be ſomewhat commendable.
To conclude, moſt worthie Iudge, and you famous
Senators, I truſt ſo much in your wiſdomes, as it
will pleaſe you to conſider that euery bad act, which is
not onely grounded vpon ſome iuſt reaſon, but alſo
which redoundeth to a benefit & profit no leſſe wholeſome
then neceſſarie for the whole Commonwealth, is
turned into a good act, or at the leaſt is ſufficient to excuſe
the authour thereof: and eſpecially when the ſame

happeneth not caſually or by chance: but proceedeth
of a good, free, and ſincere intention as mine may bee
tearmed, and as all my actions haue euer beene knowne
to be.
               
                  The Anſwere of the Attorney Generall.
                  THe accuſation of your companions inforceth
you to confeſſe your fault, and your iniquitie cauſeth
you to allow the fact, which maketh your offence
not only double, but alſo treble, in that you ſeem
to prooue by friuolous reaſons, before ſo worthie an
aſſemblie, that you haue not miſdone; which is both
abſurd and falſe, for neuer can anie bad act, bee the beginning
of anie good deed: but I would know, who
hath made you more able, or more bold, to deſire to try
that which ſo manie excellent men in times paſt, would
neuer attempt, becauſe they woulde not doe anie
thing cōtrarie vnto humane pittie, could not you comprehend
that which you ſeeke by conſideration, as well
as others haue done before you? Truſt me, in going about
to ſhew that you are more ſufficient then all men,
you therein do plainlie ſet forth your ignorance, which
can comprehend nothing without experience. It ſeemeth
by your ſaieng, that all the skill of your art conſiſteth
in experience; if it bee ſo, you ought to haue in
your bodie euery diſeaſe or accident one by one, wherof
you would cure others, or els you muſt beleeeue
that which other men haue written thereof: the which
you ſhould alſo haue done without making ſuch a cruel
experiment, the which (if you had been as well aduiſed
as you were curious) might haue ben done vpon ſome
beaſt whoſe entrals had not beene much vnlike vnto a

mans; but as thoſe that haue vſed to ſhead humane
blood, cannot refrain from the ſame when they would,
ſo you being accuſtomed to cut off members before
there be anie great need, waxing euerie day more cruel
then other, were deſirous to come ſo neer as the heart:
Therefore he which ſaid that Phiſitions are Alquimiſts
of mens bodies, ſhould likewiſe haue ſaid that Chirurgions
deſire nothing ſo much as wounds and ſores. If
the decrees doe forbid to make an anothomie of a dead
bodie, & the Senat would not grant vnto you one that
was condemned, was not that ſufficient to make you
know that you ſhould offend God and his law in cauſing
a man to die for your owne pleaſure? And it is not
enough for you to haue ſlaughtered him, but you muſt
yet further goe about to ſlander him; ſurelie, it is an ancient
cuſtome of the wicked to blame the good, for you
who are a notorious malefactor, would reproch him
whom you neither knew nor euer frequented his companie,
except when you murthered him, vnder the coulor
of charitie and deuout hoſpitalitie. Were not you
bound (he being in your houſe and protection) to defend
him againſt all thoſe that would in anie ſort hurt
him, which is farre from murthering him your ſelfe? I
know not whether the Romanes did amiſſe in ſtoning
Taliſter their firſt Chirurgion: but I am ſure that wee
had beene better not to haue giuen ſo much authoritie
vnto ours. The ſurmiſes which you alleage againſt the
dead, are neither credible nor of anie worth, for few
men had a worſe countenance then Socrates, neuertheleſſe
there was hardlie found a better man in all Greece
or one more harmleſſe then he: you ſay he came from
the warres; It was a ſigne that he abhorred the crueltie
thereof, and there is none but you that ſaith he was run

away from thence without a paſport; I would know if
it were ſo, how he could paſſe ſo far as your dore? You
reprooue him for his pouertie, but where doe you find
that pouertie is a vice? I ſay that when a ſouldiour commeth
poore from the warres, it is a ſigne that hee hateth
the thefts and robberies wherewith by ſuppoſition you
would accuſe the poore dead man: but who hath appointed
you to puniſh another mans faults: and eſpeciallie
thoſe which are vnknowne vnto you? If as you
ſay your ſpirit was mooued to doe the ſame, it behooueth
to ſeperate that ſpirit from the bodie, which is ſo
readie to effect the euill deſires thereof: Neither is that
fit to be allowed which the people doe diſlike altogether,
for it is the common opinion, that the peoples
voice proceedeth from Gods voice. Moreouer, if ſuch
faults ſhould be borne withall, it is to be feared that the
people ſhould not (onlie) be ſcandalized therby, but alſo
they might eaſilie immitate the ſame, for there is no
offence ſo great that findeth not ſome ſhew of a lawfull
excuſe, when the Iudges are diſpoſed to winke thereat:
But why doe I ſay (onlie) ſaue onelie becauſe vices are
vnpuniſhed? Let vs therefore doe well, leaſt this Commonwealth
which hath flouriſhed twelue hundered
years through the good iuſtice obſerued therin, ſhould
decay if the ſame were now neglected, for the ſame corruption
which is in a bodie without a ſoule, is in a
Commonwealth without Iuſtice. Conſider then you
worthie Iudge and Senators, that neuer murtherer had
his wil or intention, good, free, or ſincere, as this fellow
ſaith his is, for the actions are alwaies witneſſes of the
intent and meaning of men.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 82.
               
                  Of a rich man that compelled a poore man to giue
him his daughter in marriage.
               
               
                  THe law appointeth, that euery maiden that is
taken by force, or ſhe whom one hath had at his
pleaſure by any manner of compulſion or abuſe,
may either chuſe the death of him who hath forced,
conſtrained, or abuſed her, or els he ſhall bee
bound to take her to wife without anie portion at all to her mariage.
Wherevpon it happened that a rich man of Greece entreated
a poore man of the ſame contrie three ſundrie times,
to giue him his daughter for wife, but the poor man would not,
within a ſhort time after as hee went together with his daughter
to goe to ſome place by ſea, the ſhip happened to wracke, ſo
that the poore man and his daughter ſaued themſelues in a little
Iſland belonging to the ſaid rich man, who at the ſame inſtant
chanced to be there, wherefore this occaſion fitting to his
deſire, hee friendly entertained the old man, made him good
cheare, and again requeſted him to beſtow his daughter vpon
him, the poore man made him no anſwere at all but wept; the
rich man finiſhed the marriage with her the ſame euening: euerie
one being returned into the cittie, the father would haue
carried his daughter before the Magiſtrate, but her husband
would not conſent that ſhe ſhould goe thether. Wherevpon the
poore man ſaid vnto him:
               LEt my daughter come before the Magiſtrat, if thou
be an honeſt man, for if ſhe bee thy wife, what needeſt
thou to feare? But if thou haſt conſtrained her,

why wilt not thou ſubmit thy ſelfe vnto her choice,
thy feare accuſeth thee, and is a witneſſe that thou didſt
take her againſt her will; thou art no honeſt man if thou
feareſt that ſhe will chuſe thy death, for he which forceth
a maid cannot die too ſoone; why doe you doubt
if I haue giuen you my conſent? If I haue denied you,
why ſhould you haue her? Hauing demanded her of
me when I was at libertie three ſeuerall times, I did euerie
time denie thee: and the fourth time being in thy
power, not daring to refuſe thee with my tongue, I refuſed
thee with mine eies and my teares, ſeeing then
that by two ſeuerall meanes thou wert refuſed, and that
no bodie agreed that thou ſhouldeſt haue her, how
canſt thou denie that thou tookeſt her by force? Alas, I
doe leſſe grieue at my loſſe by ſea, then I am ſorrie for
the other which I haue ſuffered ſince my comming to
ſhoare, for betweene the time of my ſhipwracke, and
the forced marriage of my daughter, there was not one
night. What ſonne in law would not tarrie vntill his father
in law had dried vp his teares? But how ſhould I
truſt thee with my daughter, ſeeing thou dareſt not truſt
me? Thy malice is an hinderance thereof, for thou
knoweſt verie well that thou art the cauſe of our ſhipwrack,
hauing made a fire not in the vſuall port of thine
Iſland, but in ſuch a place where thou wert well aſſured
the ſhip could not arriue without wracking, ſo as not in
the ſea but in the countrie wee were caſt away? And I
was twiſe caſt away by the loſſe of my daughter, euen
when I was wet, and being aſtoniſhed with the ſea, and
giddie with the wind and waues, thou cameſt vnto me
to requeſt my daughter: as a ſhip wracked man, and a
captiue I did my indeuour, refuſing that by my teares,
which being free I did with my tongue three times denie

thee, thou rich leacher, but yet thou ſeing vs in ſuch
calamitie, thoughteſt once more to win vs to thy lure.
It muſt be knowne whether that may be called a mariage
which is done in the nooke of an iſland being almoſt
deſert, where none were preſent but a few people
that eſcaped from ſhipwracke, all our tears were tokens
that wee deſired no ſuch thing. They are arguments of
vnwillingneſſe and witneſſes of the hearts ſorrow, no
man weepeth for that which he deſireth, but teares are
in ſteed of intreaties for thoſe which are ſhamfaſte, and
are aſhamed to intreat; Thou canſt not then deny that
thou tookeſt my daughter by force, and it is the more
likelie, becauſe thou wilt not ſubmit thy ſelfe to law,
and ſtand to her choice whether ſhee will haue thee for
her husband or no.
               
                  The rich mans anſwere.
                  THou haſt nothing to ſay nor anie thing to doe with
my wife, except it be to ſee her. Neuertheleſſe, I refer
it to her owne choice whether ſhee will goe to the Magiſtrate
yea or no: but I would not that it ſhould bee at
thine inſtance nor when thou wouldeſt, for I doe verie
well know that ſhe was neuer content with thoſe refuſals
that thou madeſt me, therefore can it not bee ſaid
that I haue taken her againſt her will, nor againſt thy liking,
for by the lawes ſilence is a conſent; concerning
thy teares, I tooke them for a good token, beleeuing
that they proceeded for ioy, not only that thou haddeſt
eſcaped drowning, but to ſee that in ſo great miſerie I
did not yet diſdaine to be thy ſonne in law, as alſo that
thou wert ioiful to behold my conſtancie in louing thy
daughter. For teares are not as thou ſaieſt alwaies ſigns

of ſadneſſe, but ſometimes tokens of ioy, and eſpecially
when they are accompanied with ſilence, for ſorrow inforceth
a man to ſpeake, and ioy prouoketh ſilence. As
for the fire which thou ſaieſt I did make to cauſe the
ſhip wherein thou waſt to bee caſt away, there is none
but thou that cōplaineth thereof, for euerie one knoweth
that my ſheepeheards made that fire for their commoditie,
without thinking to hurt anie man thereby.
And for the marriage it was ſolemnized as commodiouſlie
as the place could afford. And it is not to be wondered
at, if one who hath long time loued moſt feruentlie,
did take the fruition of his loue as ſoone as poſſiblie
he might, for the nature of louers is, to thinke euerie
minute a month; and fearing to loſe the good ſo
much of them deſired, they can hardlie beleeue that
which they both ſee and touch. I will willinglie ſubmit
my ſelfe to the law, but I will not that thou ſhouldeſt
haue the credit to compel me in anie ſort. Thou haſt no
cauſe to complaine of thy ſhipwracke, ſeeing that from
the ſame two holie actions haue proceeded, that is to
ſay, hoſpitalitie, and mariage, I offered thee the one, and
intreated thee for the other. Thou art deceiued if thou
thinkeſt that I will loue thee or thy daughter anie whit
the more, my life hauing ben once in your power, the
loue which I doe beare vnto her is great inough, without
bringing me vnto ſuch an ouergreat extremitie, far
better is a free and voluntarie loue, then is that which
proceedeth from anie bond; my affection cannot be increaſed,
becauſe it is alreadie perfect. My marriage declareth
that I neither rauiſhed nor conſtrained thy
daughter at all, vnleſſe it be becauſe I married her without
anie ſubſtance at all, if thou art not content that I
haue ſo done, giue mee her portion and I will accept it.

If thou haſt no goods, vſe mine as the goods of thy
daughter, and let vs liue in peace.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 83.
               
                  Of a blind woman that would haue detained her
ſonne from redeeming his father out of priſon.
               
               
                  THe law appointeth, that euery child which was
old inough to ſerue and releeue his father or mother,
and would not indeuour himſelfe ſo to doe,
ought to bee impriſoned or kept in bonds as a
bondſlaue. Wherevpon it chanced that a man
made a long voiage by ſea, leauing his wife and ſonne at home;
being vpon the ſea, he fortuned to be taken by Pyrats, ſo that he
was conſtrained to write vnto his wife and ſon, that they might
find the means to ranſome him out of captiuitie. The wife wept
ſo much as ſhe became blind therewith, the ſonne would needes
depart to redeeme his father, but his mother would detain him,
demanding that ſeruice at his hands wherevnto the law did
bind him, and would haue cauſed him to be laid in bonds, becauſe
he would not tarrie, the ſonne pleaded againſt her thus:
               
                  IT is ſufficient that two remaine in bondage
without deſiring that the third ſhould likewiſe
bee laid in bonds, the priſon detaineth my father
in thraldome, and your bondage mother
is your blindneſſe. Wherefore will you heape miſerie
vpon calamitie in bringing me alſo in captiuitie? what
wrong doe I vnto you in leauing you a little while for
ſo good an intent as to releiue my father? Will you
haue the world to doubt that you are not ſo louing a

wife towards your husband as alwaies hetherto they
haue eſteemed you? Will you that for your ſake a man
may ſay that all women are in their extremities? Doe
you not know that vertue conſiſteth in a meane? Will
you haue me to forſake my father? do you not perceiue
that his captiuitie ſummoneth mee to trauell for his libertie?
Doe you not conſider that the chiefeſt part belongeth
to the father, and the ſecond vnto the mother?
He is abroad, you are at home, he is in bondage, you
are free, you are amongſt pittifull Cittizens, hee in the
hands of pittileſſe Pirats, his feet are fettered, but thanks
to God yours are at libertie: true it is that you are blind
but alaſſe he is farre more miſerable then you, for your
blindneſſe hindereth you from beholding an infinite
number of things which would vex you, but he continuallie
ſeeth his enemies, vieweth his chaines whippes
and baſtinadoes which he often feeleth and hourly feareth,
and looketh vpon the oare and other inſtruments
wherewith he is euermore tired. You ſay the voiage is
too dangerous for me, how manie are there, that to win
the loue of ſome gay ladie, will not ſticke to aduenture
anie daunger whatſoeuer? Why then ſhould I feare to
deliuer my father? Conſider that ſuch as hinder others
from well doing, doe amiſſe themſelues, and that hee
which giueth not all the aid he can vnto thoſe that are
afflicted may be well ſaid to bee the onlie cauſe of their
affliction. Wherefore deare mother, I beſeech you not
to be one of that number, or if you will needs bee, yet
ſuffer me not ſo to be.
               
                  The mothers Anſwere.
                  IT is thou that deſireſt vnto my husbands loſſe to ad
my ſonnes lacke, and ſo finallie to procure my vtter
deſolation, leauing mee here alone blind and poore;

If thy father being old & ſubtle, could not eſcape from
being taken by Pirats? How wilt thou being yong and
ſimple, ſhun the like perils? Doeſt thou ſay that thou
ſhalt leaue me for a ſmall time, when I know thou canſt
neuer return? If thy father had beleeued me, he ſhould
not now haue ben in that calamitie wherein he remaineth,
and into that which thou wouldeſt caſt thy ſelfe,
neither yet ſhould I haue beene conſtrained to haue
brought that loue in queſtion which thou ſaieſt thou
beareſt vnto vs both; in that which I require, there is
no extremitie at all, for being bound vnto twaine, he or
ſhe that is preſent, may command as being the neareſt:
thy death or thy loſſe will not anie whit deminiſh, but
rather double thy fathers miſerie, when he ſhal know it,
if he be not dead alreadie, as I fear he is: For yong men
may die too ſoone, but old men cannot liue anie long
time: if he were aduertiſed of my blindneſſe, I am ſure
he would command thee not to forſake me; how wouldeſt
thou then haue thy voiage to proſper when thou
vndertakeſt it contrarie to thy fatherrs meaning, and againſt
thy mothers mind? Where is thy true obedience?
Is this the recompence for my bringing thee
forth with ſo great pain? And for nurſing and bringing
thee vp with ſuch exceeding care? In ſeruing me thou
doeſt well, in leauing me thou doeſt ill: ſo that thou
canſt not ſaie that I hinder thee from well doing. But I
would rather perſuade and compell thee therevnto if
I could: likewiſe, I haue as much need of helpe as thy
father hath, who did himſelf command thee not to forſake
me, when he departed from hence; and then being
not blind, I had no ſuch need of thee as now I haue.
Neuer imagine that God will euer fauour thee if thou
now forſakeſt me.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 84.
               
                  Of a rich man who thinking to burne the tree of a
poore man, did alſo burne his houſe.
               
               
                  THe law appointeth, that whoſoeuer harmeth
another man vnaduiſedly, he muſt
but onely recompence the hurt that is
done, but if anie doe a miſchiefe of ſet
purpoſe or maliciouſly, hee muſt make ſatisfaction
for the ſame fourefold. Wherevpon
it happened, that a rich man dwelt
next houſe vnto a poore man, that had in his ſmall garden a
great tree growing, which did take away a great part of the
proſpect from the rich mans houſe, who did oftentimes intreat
the poore man to ſell him the ſaid tree, but hee would in no ſort
conſent therevnto, affirming that it ought to remaine there in
remembrance of his deceaſsed father, who had himſelfe planted
the ſame. At the laſt, the rich man ſeeing that he could not
preuaile, did vpon a night ſet the ſaid tree a fire, which flamed
out ſo vehemently, that therewithall he burned the poore mans
houſe. For which the rich man offered to pay for the tree fourefold,
but for the houſe he would pay no more then once. On the
contrarie the poore man would haue him make a fourefold ſatisfaction
both for the one and the other, ſaying:
               IF you had not maliciouſlie ſet my tree on fire, my
houſe had not ben burned. But what likelihood or
proofe is there, that you meant not to burne my houſe
with me and my familie therein, as well as the tree, ſeeing
that the one was ſo neere adioining to the other,

and that you fired the ſame in the night ſeaſon, yea, and
that about the time of our firſt ſleepe, which is the deadeſt
time of all, watching a fit ſeaſon when as the wind
blew directly toward my houſe that you might be able
to ſaue your own from harme? Where is iuſtice? What
is become of the laws, ſeeing that what could not bee
obtainted by entreaties, nor effected by threats, is attained
by force vnto the daunger of the liues of a whole
familie? What doe you call tyrannie, but onlie when a
man doth what he liſteth, and without reaſon vſeth reuenge,
when no offence hath ben offered? And when
that which cannot be wonne with ſiluer is wrought by
fire? If lawes take any place, there is no difference betweene
the rich and the poore, and as well may the one
as the other enioy that which is his owne: you haue
large poſſeſſions and houſes in the countrie as well as
in the cittie, betweene your buildings and round about
them, you haue meddows, woods, and riuers to delight
you, and yet of all theſe nothing was more pleaſant to
you then my ruine, in cauſing me to loſe my houſe; me
I ſay, who onlie could paſſe no further then this tree:
why ſhal I not ſay that thy voluptuouſneſſe and thy delicacie
maketh thee like vnto Nero, who delighted to ſee
Rome a fire? Euen ſo for thy pleaſure thou haſt in one
houre burned all my patrimonie, and mooueables, as
thou wouldeſt in like ſort haue burned vs, had wee not
eſcaped from the fire ſtarke naked. You ſay that my tree
kept the aire from your houſe, I pray you ſir did not
your galleries and high wals doe the like by mine and
others mens? And your great ſtore of ſeruants do not
they dailie moleſt vs, vnder the coulor of your greatneſſe?
And the dunge of ſo manie horſes as you keepe
doth not it infect our aire thinke you? You deeme that

all theſe diſcommodities are nothing at all vnto vs, but
yet one poore tree of mine ſeemed vnto you a whole
forreſt, my loſſe is ineſtimable, ſeeing that by the ſaieng
of my furious enemie, I haue loſt more then he was
willing I ſhould. My requeſt is but reaſonable, that either
the fire may end with his houſe that kindled the
ſame, or els that he may make me ſatisfaction according
to the law.
               
                  The rich mans Anſwere.
                  I Did not burne thy tree through malice, but was conſtrained
therevnto by neceſſitie, for the ſame hindering
the wholeſome aire that might breath into my
houſe, made it peſtiferous: how manie times haue I intreated
thee, ſaieng; take what thou wilt of me, and let
me at the leaſt lop the branches of this tree, for they do
not profit thee in anie ſort, but they annoy me greatlie?
Yet was it neuer poſſible for me to obtaine ſo much fauor
at thy hands: to what end ſerued thoſe boughes,
which did nothing at all ſhaddow thine but my houſe?
Manie ſuch like requeſts haue I made vnto thee, but it
was in vaine, becauſe the deſire that thou haddeſt to annoie
my houſe, hindred thee from chuſing that which
was profitable both for thee & thine; for thoſe boughs
did alreadie ouerpreſſe part of my houſe, and thruſt
downe the wal, and finallie would at the length not onlie
haue ſhaken, but quite throwne downe the ſame, for
there is no violence ſo great as that which increaſeth by
little and little; but why was the law of fourefold reſtitution
made, but onlie becauſe the lawmakers did aſſuredlie
thinke, that there would be men as obſtinate as
thou, of whom it ſhould be impoſſible to obtaine anie

reaſonable thing by courteſie? I cauſed the tree to be
burned in the night, to auoid the ſedition of the people,
I did not think that the fire ſhould haue paſſed anie
further, but what can I doe withall if misfortune (the
iuſt reuenger of thy obſtinacie) do purſue thee? It cannot
be ſaid that I vſe anie tyrannie, becauſe I am readie
to ſubmit my ſelf vnto law. And the compariſon which
thou makeſt between the rich and the poore man is no
leſſe odious then abſurd: for the difference conſiſteth
in that the rich man is able to doe more for the conſeruation
of the Commonwealth then the poor man can;
for he vnto the great ſtore of his houſhold ſeruāts may
likewiſe entertaine other ſouldiors for the defence therof,
whereas the poore man at that inſtant ſerueth for no
other end but to increaſe the famine, or to diſcourage
others: in like ſort there is as great difference betwixt
my deed and the fact of Nero, as there was betwixt thy
tree and thy houſe, and the great cittie of Rome. Finally
ſo ſmall a trifle is not worth ſo much talking, and
chiefly becauſe I refuſe not to ſatisfie thee according to
the law, and thine owne requeſt, for the law appointeth
that whatſoeuer I haue burned willinglie, I ſhould reſtore
vnto thee fourefold, and for the reſt which was
vnwillnglie done, I ſhould but onlie pay thee for it as
it was worth.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 85.
               
                  Of Agamemnon who firſt promiſed, and after
would not ſacrifice his daughter Iphiginia.
               
               
                  
                  ALl the Grecians being aſſembled together
at the port Aulida, to go vnto Troy
for the reuenge of the rape of the faire
Helena: The ſea became a long time ſo
tempeſtious, that they could not depart
thence; whervpon Chalcas their chiefe
prieſt cōſulting with the gods, after many
ſacrifices, propheſied that the ſea ſhold
neuer be calme vnleſſe that Iphiginia the onlie daughter of Agamemnon,
General of the whole armie and brother to Menelaus
the husband of faire Helena, were ſacrificed vnto Diana;
ſo that Agamemnon becauſe he would not loſe the honour
to be the greateſt of all the Grecians, conſented vnto the
death of his daughter, and writ vnto his wife Clitemneſtra
that ſhe ſhould ſend her daughter vnto the ſaid place, faining
that it was to aſſure her in mariage with Achilles: ſhortly after
repēting him for the abuſing of his wife in ſuch ſort, and being
ſorrie that his daughter ſhould die, he ſecretly ſent another
letter, commanding his wife to hide her daughter, that ſhee
might not be taken to be ſacrificed: this laſt meſsenger was ſurpriſed
by the way by Menelaus, who accuſed his brother of
ambition and Treaſon, ſaying:
               
                  SEeing that all the warlike men of Greece haue
done you this honour, aboue ſo manie other
noble and worthie men, to chuſe you onlie for
their Generall, why will you like a moſt iniurious
and periured man ſo wickedlie betray them? Doe
you not yet know that the gods wil neuer permit a treaſon
ſo great and manifeſt to be hidden, and eſpeciallie
when they themſelues are intereſſed therein? Know
you not that Diana requireth your daughter for ſacrifice,

it may be to puniſh your ambition, or to chaſtiſe
the pride of your wife, or rather to extirpate the preſumption
of the ſame your daughter? Trulie I beleeue
if none of all theſe three reaſons doe prouoke the chaſt
Goddeſſe vnto iuſt puniſhment, yet all theſe three together
doe ſtir her vp vnto a iuſt reuenge; iuſt I ſay, becauſe
that the gods doe neuer anie thing vniuſtlie: but
who knoweth if the goddeſſe (foreſeeing the future laſciuiouſneſſe
of your daughter) be determined to haue
her before ſhe be ſtained, or els that ſhe deſireth to haue
an vnſpotted virgine to be offered vp vnto her, that ſhe
might be the more fauorable vnto vs, and make vs conquerors
ouer the rauiſher of the chaſtitie of Helena; for
whoſe defence you and all the nobilitie of Greece were
bounden, before ſhe did chuſe me for her lord and husband:
and yet whileſt I was abſent, you ſuffered her to
be rauiſhed & caried away, which maketh me to thinke
that the Goddeſſe being diſpleaſed with you, is deſirous
to haue the ſame fault purged in the preſence of all
the Grecians, by the death of your daughter. Finallie,
the iudgements of the gods are ſecret, but when their
wils are manifeſt, they ought to be accompliſhed. The
goddeſſe requireth Iphiginia, you haue promiſed her,
we doe looke for her, therefore we ought to haue her;
eſpeciallie ſeeing all the skill that man hath is notable
to prolong her life one onlie minute againſt the will of
the gods: and although you might ſaue her, yet ought
you not to preferre her life either before ſo manie worthie
Grecians, or before the honour of all Greece. But
why ſhould all the reſt of Priams ſonnes, or anie other
Barbarian feare to enterpriſe anie thing againſt vs, If it
ſhal be reported that for to ſaue, or thinking to prolong
a maidens life, the whole armie of the Grecians aſſembled

together at ſuch an infinit charge and with ſo great
trauel ſhould of it ſelf be ſo ſuddainlie diſſolued. What
ambition can be then more great, then to vſurpe the title
of a Generall, and not to performe the dutie therof?
And what Treaſon is more manifeſt, then to goe about
to defraud all Greece of the honour obtained by the
blood of our anceſtors? If it was thought a ſtrange
matter that Vliſſes fained himſelf mad becauſe he would
not goe vnto the warres, and if for the ſame cauſe the
parents of Achilles were diſpiſed hauing concealed him
in the habite of a woman? What ſhall wee ſay of you,
who would not onlie deceiue our armie of one or two
men, but would (if our ſelues wee will not giue it ouer)
that all of vs ſhould bee ſwallowed vp in the waues of
the ſea? Doe you not conſider that the greatneſſe of
your charge bindeth you to bee more couragious and
righteous, then all the reſt? Who then will iudge you
to be ſuch a one, if you repugne againſt the will of the
gods? If you contrarie the deſire of al men? and without
anie ſhame at all, performe not your promiſe? If it
be ſo, I dare ſay the Grecians are vnhappie in chuſing
ſuch a Generall, and you an vnhappie Generall ſeeing
that by your default the Grecians ſhal loſe their ancient
reputation. You may ſay that a fathers loue is great; I
agree therevnto, ſo ought ſuch as are higheſt in authoritie
(as you would be) condiſcend vnto great things, eſpeciallie
when as reaſon requireth: conſider then for
whom you doe giue your daughter, it is for the honour
of your brother to recouer your ſiſter in law, for beautie
the onlie paragon of all the world. It is to be reuenged
of our enemies for the ſafetie of our countrie, to confirme
the ancient valor of our nation, to winne vnto
your ſelfe an immortall glorie, and that which is more

then all the reſt, to fulfill the good pleaſure of the gods:
of whō one alone is able to deſtroy all mankind. Conſent
thē (as you are bound) to obey their diuine power,
to performe your dutie, to pleaſure your brother, to recouer
your ſiſter in law, to ſaue the Grecians, to mainetaine
their ancient reputation; and eſpeciallie to ſhun
the name of a traitor. That your daughter my niece,
may bee offered vp a pleaſing ſacrifice vnto the gods,
who do neuer requeſt any thing hurtful vnto their creatures,
and it may bee that they will ſaue her; as well to
manifeſt their mercie, as to prouoke vs ioifullie to obey
their commandements, from the which wee can in no
ſort excuſe our ſelues.
               
                  Agamemnons Anſwere.
                  HE can neuer be tearmed ambitious, who neither
by force, tyrannie, nor ſubtiltie, attaineth vnto
anie rule or dignitie, but onlie by vertue, and the
election of manie▪ which in direct means there is none
can ſay that I haue vſed. As concerning the pleaſure of
the gods, that mine innocent daughter ſhould be ſacrificed,
what certaintie haue wee thereof, but onelie the
word of the prieſt Chalcas: whoſe prieſtlie dignitie I do
not contemne, but rather his humane perſon, being as
readie to erre as the worſt man in our troupes. But I
would faine know what pittie could remain in the gods
if they delighted or tooke pleaſure to behold the ſheading
of innocent blood? I cannot beleeue that the ſame
is to preuent the loſſe of her chaſtity, for as great power
hath the goddeſſe to maintain her virginitie, as to ſhorten
her daies. Moreouer, of extreames not onelie the
gods, but alſo euerie vertuous man doth alwaies endeuour

to chuſe the beſt, whereby it appeareth, that they
by the death of an innocent virgine, will neither recure
laſciuiouſneſſe, nor your owne negligence; wherevnto
neither the Grecians, I, nor my daughter are in no ſort
bound. For you needed not to haue receiued Paris, the
ſonne of a barbarous king into your houſe, much leſſe
to entertaine him there a long time, and leaſt of all to
leaue him at your departure all alone with your wife:
Do you not know that it is verie dangerous to leaue fire
and flax together? Are you ſuch a foole that you know
not how yoong men are laſciuious, and women light?
But who knoweth not that ambition and luſt reſpect no
law? Haue not you tried that loues poiſon creepeth in
by the eies and eares? Did you not thinke that the ſame
beautie, which not onlie inflamed you, but all Greece
was as able to ſet a yoong Barbarian on fire, who was
by nature laſciuious? I confeſſe that the iudgements of
the gods are ſecret, and therefore ought we firſt to bee
thorowlie aſſured of their wils, before we either giue anie
credit therevnto or effect the ſame, leaſt in thinking
to obey them, we doe diſobey them. What proofe haue
you that Diana requireth the death of my daughter,
ſaue onlie the word of an old man, who either doteth,
or it may be would haue this honour, that at his
bare word the warlike and inuincible Grecians, ouercome
with ſuperſtition, haue ſacrificed the nobleſt and
worthieſt maid of all Greece? And neuer alleage that
the gods deſire the beſt things for ſacrifice, for that is
meant onlie by brute beaſts, but as for humane creatures
they doe preſerue them, witneſſe the old age of
Neſtor and others. Neither did there euer anie great
good proceed of too much ſuperſtition, which dooth
much differ from true religion, becauſe the one alwaies

tendeth vnto that which is good, and the other vnto
that which is bad. If Diana require her death, ſhee may
find her well inough where ſhe is, without diſhonoring
me by the deliuerie of her? Which in ſooth were a trecherous
part. What certaintie or aſſurance will Chalcas
giue that the ſeas ſhall bee calme by the death of my
daughter? Durſt he gage his head that ſo it ſhall be? and
although he would ſo doe, is thoſe few years which an
old man may liue to bee compared vnto the youth of a
Princeſſe, who by her progenie will be able to illuſtrate
all the world? To kill our owne children is not the way
to combate Priam and the reſt of the Barbarians: I wil
not faile in anie ſort from the dutie of a good Generall,
no not in ſpending mine owne life; but my daughters,
that will I not giue no more then you your ſelfe would
doe, if one ſhould likewiſe demaund your Hermione as
well as my Iphiginia. I will not in anie ſort accuſe either
Vliſſes or Achilles, but I doe excuſe my daughter, who is
no way culpable of the forced or voluntarie adulterie
of her aunt. The ſame reaſon which commandeth mee
to be couragious, doth alſo forbid me to be cruell: but
what crueltie can be more vild then to kill an innocent
virgin? And how much more execrable is it, for a man
to kill his owne daughter? I did at the firſt promiſe her,
as well to auoid publicke ſedition in our armie, as alſo
to haue leiſure thereby to laue my daughter, for I hoped
that you your ſelfe, and they altogether deliberatlie
conſidering the crueltie of the fact, would at the laſt
confeſſe with me the ſame to be altogether tyrannicall
and vnlawfull: for the gods doe neuer fauour ſuch vniuſt
acts. To conclude, ſo long as the breath remaineth
in my bodie, I will neuer conſent vnto the death of my
daughter, for it is ſufficient inough that we do leaue our

houſes, forſake our wiues, abandon our children, and
freelie vndertake this iournie no leſſe painfull then perrillous
to our perſons, without ſuffering our daughters
to be ſacrificed or offered vp to recouer that which you
haue negligentlie loſt, and know no other reaſon why.
And I cannot beleeue that anie amongſt ſo manie worthie
mē ſhould be deſirous, or would willinglie behold
ſuch a deteſtable deed but onlie you, who thinke to encreaſe
your owne houſe by the ouerthrow of mine.
               
            
            
               Declamation 86.
               
                  Of him that hauing taken vp and foſtered two yong
vnknowne orphants, did maime them becauſe he
might the better beg with them.
               
               
                  THe law forbiddeth, that no man ſhould either
hurt or hinder the Commonwealth in any ſort.
Wherevpon it happened, that a man found two
infants, who through their parents pouertie
were laid abroad and left vnto the mercie of
the world. Wherefore he tooke them, and foſtering them vp in
his owne houſe, he did wryth and breake the ioints of their
armes and legs in ſuch ſort, as hee quite maimed and lamed
them, to the end that by begging with them he might gaine the
money. Which being knowne, he was taken and accuſed to bee
offenſiue and hurtfull vnto the Commonwealth. And his accuſer
ſaid in this ſort:
               
                  ALaſſe, how miſerable are theſe infants, who
haue found one that hath beene much more
cruell then he or ſhe that caſt them forth. Seeing

that with the price of their members they are forced
to paie for their bringing vp (or to ſay more trulie)
to ſatisfie the greedie couetouſnes of him that faineth
to be their foſterer: for if hee had not done it for couetouſneſſe,
the verie name of orphants might haue ſuffiſed
to haue obtained a reliefe both for them and their
foſterfather. If thoſe that through anger or malice doe
wound or kill a man are puniſhed, What puniſhment is
not this miſcheeuous wretch worthie of, who hath
done far worſe, in making theſe poore infants for euer
miſerable? Wherein hee hath ſhewed himſelfe much
more vnnaturall then the brute beaſts, (if it bee true as
Hiſtories report) that in ſuch a neceſſitie, Cirus Whilom
King of Perſia, was nouriſhed by a Bitch, and Remus and
Romulus firſt founders and Kings of Rome, by a ſhee
wolfe. O neuer hard of crueltie, when the lame and impotent
are conſtrained to get his liuing that is whole
and ſound, who hath not onelie made them vnprofitable,
but odious and burthenous vnto the Commonwealth!
For they ſerue to no other end then to increaſe
the famine therein, and alſo in the day of battaile to diſcourage
the hearts of moſt valiant by their lamentable
cries and complaints: in like ſort it may ſo happen that
ſome womā with child may dreame of thē in ſuch ſort
as with the verie fright thereof ſhe may bring forth the
like cripples. All that which this lewd fellow can alleage
is, that if he had not beene, theſe infants had died
with hunger; It may bee no: For how manie others
might haue found them, that both would haue cheriſhed
and brought them vp for the profite of the Commonwealth?
How manie ſuch as they haue become famous
warriors, yea and Kings? Whereof Cirus and the
two foreſaid Romans are ſufficient examples: but this

vngracious man hath cut off the tongues of ſome, to
the end that without ſpeaking they might be more importunate
in crauing: ſeeing then O Iudges that you
are pittifull towards cuerie one particularlie, extend
your mercie towards theſe twaine here together: he is
aboue all other moſt cruell, who vnder the coulor of
mercie, doth moſt miſchiefe: theſe poore children are
carried about to feaſts and publicke aſſemblies, to beg
their almes, where beholding the ſoundneſſe and nimbleneſſe
of others, their ſorrow is the more in ſeeing
themſelues maimed: other orphants or caſtawaies that
are ſound, are not altogether hopeleſſe to find their Parents
againe, or to be knowne by them, but theſe wretches
can neuer be knowne becauſe they were not ſuch
when they were left of them. Finallie, it may be alleaged
that it was the greateſt miſchiefe that could happen
vnto theſe twaine, to be found, and brought vp by this
bad man who is the cauſe of their perpetuall miſerie.
               
                  The beggers Anſwere.
                  HE cannot be tearmed cruell, who hath ben more
pittifull vnto theſe infants, then their owne father
or mother that abandoned them: I confeſſe
that I haue maimed them, but who can tell whether I
haue done them more hurt or good thereby, for I haue
made them ſuch as all the world is and euer will be readie
to releeue them: Moreouer, they take no paines in
getting their liuing, and they are free from the danger
of killing in the warres, or by theeues, in like ſort they
need not feare to be hanged by iuſtice, or noted of infamie.
As for anie hurt don vnto the Commonwealth,
who can tell whether they would haue been pilferers,

murtherers, theeues, traitors, ſeditious perſons, ſeducers,
Heritickes, and other ſuch like wicked fellows, as
by nature they were likelie to proue, being begotten of
ſuch parents, as cared not to leaue them to the mercie
of brute beaſts? So that it may be ſaid that by one ſmal
miſcheife I haue preuented a number of manifeſt dangers:
thoſe that inſtruct youth to skirmiſh and kil men,
are farre more hurtful vnto the Commonwealth then I,
and yet are they not puniſhed. I haue not onelie made
them as vnable to do hurt, as they are vnfit to do good,
but alſo I am the cauſe that they are yet liuing: the Cō
                     monwealth
can not be harmed by thoſe which are not
abiding therein as theſe were, being laid foorth to die,
from the which I haue ſaued them. Whereas you alleage
that I am the cauſe that they liue miſerablie, you
doe thereby affirme that it is by my meanes that they
liue, which is no ſmall matter: the charitie of manie
doth releeue them, but by my onelie compaſſion they
doe liue. If I had foſtered them vp, and not maimed
them, I ſhould haue deſerued commendation; the loſſe
thereof then is ſufficient puniſhment for my maiming
them. Who would euer haue thought that ſuch a Commonwealth
ſhould haue had officers ſo idle as to buſie
themſelues with that which a begger dooth amongſt
beggers, who haue their iuſtice and Commonwealth
by themſelues? Why may you not likewiſe ſay that Paris
being caſt foorth of his Parents, and afterwards acknowledged
by them, was the cauſe of his father & brethrens
death, his mother and ſiſters captiuitie, the deſtruction
of the nobleſt of all Greece and Phrigia, and
laſtlie the vtter ſubuerſion of his countrie Troy, as well
as you ſpeake of Cirus, who in the end ſlue his grandfather,
and Romulus his brother? What ſhould not hee

then haue deſerued that had maimed thoſe? Or who
can iudge whether I haue done good or hurt in
maiming theſe here? But the time is ſo wicked, that
whatſoeuer the poor do is accounted an offence. How
manie rich women doe cauſe the frute of their wombe
to periſh by the ſtraight girding and lacing in of their
bodies? How manie Noble men doe burſt their lacquiſe
legs with running, and lame their ſeruants with
hunting? How manie men doe they vndoe, who doe
either die with hunger, or els are forced to rob by the
high way? How manie quarrels or braules doe they
make to the hurt of the Commonwealth? If you wold
indeuour to correct ſuch kind of men, you ſhould haue
no leiſure to perſecute thoſe who haue not offended,
but in ſhew onelie: but it is not ſaid in vaine, That the
lawes are like vnto ſpiders webs, wherein the ſmall flies
are taken, but the great ones doe breake through and
eſcape.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 87.
               
                  Of a gentleman who required to haue thoſe goods of
his reſtored which his ſonne had ſold, in prouing
by law that his father was dead.
               
               
                  A Gentleman of Piemont had a quarrell, or at the leaſt
fell into the hatred of a great lord of the ſame countrie:
who did one day cauſe the ſaid gentleman to be
taken very ſecretly, and hiding his face, made him to
be carried into the dungeon of his caſtle, where he remained a
priſoner, in ſuch ſort as during the ſpace of more then eight
yeares, he could nener imagine in what place he remained: the

ſaid gentleman before he was priſoner, had likewiſe a quarrell
with two of his neighbors, who were inferiors vnto him in calling,
with whom alſo the ſaid lord was greatly diſpleaſed: whervpon
hee immagined how hee might at one inſtant cauſe them
both to die, and by the ſame means quite himſelfe from all ſuſpition
that might bee imagined of his wronging the gentleman.
So that he began to enquire what was become of the ſaid
gentleman, and vpon ſuſpition of the enmitie of theſe two
neighbours againſt him, he preuailed ſo much by falſe informations,
that the Iuſtice apprehended their bodies, and either by
examiuation or tortures they were inforced to confeſse that they
had murthered the ſaid gentleman, vpon which their confeſsion,
the Iuſtice cauſed them to be publikely beheaded: ſo that euery
one did aſſuredly beleeue that the ſaid gentleman was dead.
Wherefore a ſonne which he had, being a verie prodigall youth,
began not onelie to ſeize vpon all his fathers lands and goods,
but alſo did riotouſly waſt the ſame, and in the end ſold and conſumed
all; in ſuch ſort as ſhortly after he died in great pouerty.
It chanced about foureteene yeares after that the Frenchmen
ſurpriſed the ſaid great lord in his houſe, and for becauſe the caſtle
wherein he held this gentleman priſoner was a fort of great
importance to be kept for a frontier place, they compelled the
ſaid lord to ſurrender the ſame vp vnto the King, or his Lieutenant
Generall, the which he did: and the Frenchmen finding
the ſaid gentleman there, ſuffered him to depart, who like one
riſen from death to life, went home vnto his owne houſe, the
which he found was ſold, and the Iudge which had cauſed the others
to be executed dead: but he pretending to know nothing
of all that had happened, required reſtitution of his lands and
goods, ſaying:
               THere is no law that permitteth the ſonne to ſell his
fathers goods during his life. You ſee that I am not

dead, and that I am his father that hath ſold you his
goods: if you ſtand in doubt thereof, I wil for your further
aſſurance ſhew you euident tokens, and will proue
the ſame by ſufficient witneſſes: Your light beleefe or
want of wit to be better aduiſed, ought not to be preiudiciall
to me in anie ſort. You are not the firſt that haue
made a bad bargaine, and a good reſtitution: for moſt
commonlie men being blinded with couetouſneſſe, do
caſilie beleeue euerie thing to bee true which they deſire.
Caeſar imputed this lightneſſe vnto the Frenchmen,
the which it may bee they haue brought hether vnto
you, to make you partakers thereof, but yet for all that I
will not loſe mine inheritance; reſtore it vnto me then
or els prooue that I am not he whom you know me to
be. O you righteous Iudges, I do eſteeme you too iuſt
to ſuffer me to fall from one miſerie into another farre
more great, hauing not derued it: for not onelie is age
an incurable maladie, but pouertie ioined with it, may
be tearmed an exceeding miſchiefe. From the which
worthie Iudges I beſeech you to preſerue me.
               
                  The anſwere of the poſſeſſors.
                  WE doe allow the ſame law which you alleage to be
iuſt & right, but we know not whether we ſhould
account you amongſt the liuing or the dead: ſeeing that
not onlie the people haue accounted you dead, but the
law it ſelfe hath adiudged you both for a dead man, and
alſo hath cauſed thoſe to die who confeſſed that they
killed you. What witneſſe is more like to be true, then
that which is aduouched by twaine, not onelie to their
owne hurt againſt themſelues, but to the detriment of
their goods, their honour, and their liues? If the teſtimonie

which thoſe miſerable men haue produced againſt
themſelues, hath been ſufficient to cauſe them to
loſe their goods, honour, yea and their liues; Why
ſhould not the ſame be of force to maintaine thoſe in
their poſſeſſion which haue publikely bought an inheritance
of him, who by the witneſſe aforeſaid had
power to ſell and ſurrender the ſame? If you haue anie
intereſt therein, take it you of them who are the cauſe
of your hurt; that is of the foreſaid witneſſes, of the
Iudge, of the lord that tooke you priſoner, or of your
ſelfe, who could take no order in your owne affaires, or
ſeeing you would not agree, could not keepe you from
your enemies: it was no couetouſneſſe that made vs to
buy your heritage, but the zeale of the Commōwealth,
who are intereſſed when the lands are vnthriftilie waſted:
likewiſe you iudge amiſſe of vs, if you think that
the deſire which we had of your death, induced vs to
beleeue the ſame: for it was more hurtfull then profitable
vnto vs; becauſe it was no ſmall contentment vnto
vs to haue ſo good a neighbour as wee haue alwaies eſteemed
you to be: and for that we would be no more
in danger to haue ſo bad a one as your ſonne was, or a
worſe, we did buy his inheritance, the which as our deſire
is that you ſhould not loſe the ſame, ſo alſo would
not we loſe our ſiluer, for the recompence of our care
in preſeruing your goods, & amending your heritage;
of all matters in ſtrife, the poſſeſſor being on the ſurer
ſide, hath the aduantage: We haue nothing to proue againſt
you, but it is you that ought to prooue our bargaine
to be fraudulent or of no worth: and we beleeue
that the Iudges will remember that we are not the cauſers
either of your pouertie or age. Furthermore, they
are not ignorant that the chiefeſt point which ought to

be obſerued in the Commonwealth is, that cuerie one
ſhould bee maintained in the quiet poſſeſſion of that
which he hath iuſtlie gotten and paied for, as wee haue
done the inheritance which you doe wrongfullie require
at our hands.
                  This former proceſſe is true, and hath been reported
vnto me by the lord Iohn Chaſtillier, Knight, one of the
Kings Counſell, and ſurueior of his Maieſties treaſure,
who aſſured me that hee was in Piemount during the
foreſaid proceſſe. And moreouer, the ſaid lord told me
that after long arguing and much controuerſies it was
iudged that the plaintife ſhould inioy his inheritance
during his life, without impairing or alieating the ſame:
but after his deceaſſe it ſhould whollie reuert vnto thoſe
which did poſſeſſe and had bought the ſame of the ſaid
plaintifes ſonne.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 88.
               
                  Of Horatius, who after he had himſelfe alone vanquiſhed
the three Curiatij, ſlew his ſiſter that bewailed
the death of her husband.
               
               
                  ABout that time as Rome began to flouriſh, thoſe of
Alba, an ancient cittie, and to ſay the truth, the
very ſame from whence the Romanes had their
beginning, had ſome grudge towards Rome,
through which there aroſe a mortal war between
them, the which after many skirmiſhes, and ſundrie combates,
they agreed to end in this ſort, vz. That the three brethren of
the Albanois named the Curiatij, ſhould fight hand to hand
againſt other three brethren of the Romanes called the Horatij,
vpon condition that thoſe which were ouercome, their cittie

and Commonwealth ſhould for euer bee ſubiect vnto the other,
without contradiction or refuſall: wherevpon the ſaid combattants
being entred the liſts, the elder and the ſecond brethren of
the Horatij were ſuddainlie ſlaine, the which the yoongeſt perceiuing,
he fained to run about the field as though he had beene
ouercome: wherfore the others were aſhamed to purſue him altogether,
ſo that one alone following him eagerly, Horatius ſuddainly
turned backe and ſlew him, and in the ſame ſort he ſlew
the ſecond that was ſomwhat too ſlow in ſeconding his brother:
then making head againſt the laſt, who had maried the ſiſter of
the ſaid Horatij, he likewiſe ſlue him, not without receiuing
alſo manie wounds himſelfe, whereof when he was healed, hee
came in triumph to Rome, al the people and the nobleſt matrons
of the citie meeting him by the way, amongſt whom by the commandement
of her father his ſiſter alſo went, who had loſt her
ſaid husband in the combat; ſhe ſeeing her brother triumph ouer
the death of her husband, & her brethren in law, loſt all patience,
and ſetting apart al reſpect, inſtead of welcomming him
home, ſhe ſaid vnto him: Thou cruel menſter how haddeſt thou
the heart to ſlay my husband? and ſaying ſo, ſhe burſt forth into
abundance of tears, wherwith he being inraged, anſwered: art
thou ſhe alone amongſt ſo many honorable ladies that art ſorrie
for the proſperitie and libertie of Rome, or that repineſt at my
victory, and ſaying ſo, he gaue her a blow with his ſword on the
breaſt, afterwards ſuddainly repenting himſelfe for the deed, hee
alighted from his triumphant chaire, indeuouring (if it had
ben poſsible) to haue gotten life in her again, but he could not, for
ſhe ſuddainly died, being great with child. For which deed thoſe
that maligned the glory of Horatius, tooke occaſion to accuſe
him ſo ſharply, as he was cōdemned either to bear the yoke of an
exe vpon his neck through Rome, in ſigne of bondage, or to bee
whipped with rods, and hanged vpon a croſse vntill hee were
dead, but he appealed from this ſentence, and his father pleaded
for him in this ſort:
               
                  
                  WHether are your hearts and vnderſtandings caried,
O you Romanes, that you will thus perſecute
your redeemer? Doe you not know that
aboue all other vices, Ingratitude is moſt diſpleaſing
vnto the gods? How can you then proſper?
Surelie it is impoſſible: Will you oppreſſe him, that
could not bee diſmaied with the death of his two brethren,
much leſſe diſcouraged with the preſence of his
three enemies? Will you deſpiſe him whom the gods
haue cauſed to be borne for the libertie and honour of
Rome? Know you not that in all this, none hath been
harmed but I? Is it not ſufficient that I haue loſt two
ſonnes and a daughter, but that I muſt alſo loſe this ſon
too, who onlie is left to be the ſtaffe of my age, and
comfort to my forepaſſed afflictions? why would you
make him a bondman that hath been the cauſe of your
freedome? Doe you not feare that this is an vnluckie
token, which threateneth all your thraldomes? Alaſſe,
Romans baniſh this vnhappie preſaging from vs, and
either honour him with a perfect triumph, or at the
leaſt deſpiſe him not, whom the gods haue ben willing
to honour with ſuch a famous victorie. The zeale of the
Commonwealth induced him ſuddainlie to kill his ſiſter,
who to ſay the truth, did ſpeake verie indiſcreetelie;
let then the griefe which hee ſuffereth for committing
ſuch a fact be a ſufficient puniſhment for his fault: doe
you not know, O Romans, that we haue no power ouer
the ſuddaine motions of our rage? If there bee anie
fault, I am the cauſe thereof? For as much as I conſtrained
my daughter to goe forth to meet him, without
conſidering that women are not onelie ſildome times
miſtreſſes ouer their tongues, but alſo that loue and ſorrow

can neuer be diſſembled. If you will not then ſuffer
this miſchance to be vnpuniſhed, let the puniſhment
light vpon me: To the end that the gods be not prouoked
to reuenge vpon you the wrong which you would
doe vnto him, by whoſe meanes they haue deliuered
you: For there is nothing more certaine then that the
gods haue a particular care ouer thoſe whō they make
conquerors, and doe ſo miraculouſlie preſerue in the
like dangers. Contemne not him whom the gods haue
honoured, neither yet let him die, that hath killed your
enemies, and made your lords ouer them; which if he
had not ben, would haue ben lords our you all.
               
                  The Anſwere of the Romans.
                  VVE doe not perſecute our redeemer, but wee
would execute iuſtice vpon one, who being
dronken with vaineglory, hath vniuſtlie murthered
his ſiſter, that might haue borne manie children
like vnto him, whereof he hath ſlaine one with the mother,
the better to declare that as hee had deliuered vs
frō ſome bordering contagion, ſo likewiſe he meant to
tyranniſe ouer his countrie. But what will not hee bee
bold to attempt againſt the reſt of the Cittizens, if the
murther of his ſiſter ſhould bee left vnpuniſhed? Did
not he know that euen amongſt enemies clemencie is
iudged to bee the worthieſt part of the victorie? How
much then ought the ſame to bee eſteemed amongſt
friends, but more betweene kindred, and moſt of all towards
women, who are by nature weake, and ſubiect to
their paſſions more then men? Where did he find that
it is a vice for a woman either to loue her husband, or
not to be able to diſſemble a ſorrow ſo iuſt? Seeing that

he himſelf could not, or at the leaſt would not indure a
few vnaduiſed words of his ſiſter; ought not he to conſider
that the womā is the moietie of the man? and that
the one cānot be hurt, but that the other muſt feele the
harm? It is true as you ſay, that ingratitude is odious vnto
the gods, & therfore that which he hath vſed towards
his countrie, you, and his ſiſter, condemneth him. Wee
can neuer proſper if we ſuffer ſuch a curſed man in our
Commonwealth. Seeing that he was ſo cruell as to kill
his ſiſter, it maketh vs alſo to think that he willinglie ſuffered
his brethren to bee ſlaine, either to augment his
fame, or becauſe he would be the onelie heire of his father:
for hee which had the wit in ſuch ſort to flie
from his enemies to ſnare thē one after another (which
is an incredible patience) ſhould not haue been ſo furious
againſt his ſiſter, if ambition had not blinded him.
Alaſſe, wee are in doubt whether Rome hath gained
more by his victorie, then it hath loſt by his murther, as
wel in honor as in profit; for it is no ſmal hurt to ſcandalize
a Commonwealth by an euill example: Your loſſe
dooth not deminiſh the wrong done in common to vs
al, neither is it againſt reaſon, that hauing loſt thoſe whō
you might rightlie call your children, you ſhould likewiſe
loſe him that hath not reſpected you as his father,
and hath not ſhewed the heart of a brother towards his
ſiſter: but what ſtay ſhall you haue of the murtherer of
your daughter? Thoſe on whom the gods doe beſtow
the moſt graces, ought to be more modeſt, and the leſſe
prone to abuſe their fauour; the miſchiefe which hee
hath done is a greater forwarning vnto vs, then the correction
is which we ſhal vſe therfore, for by the puniſhment
of offenders, the innocents are aſſured, and we do
thereby diuine that we ſhall hereafter haue dominion

ouer all the world; for Iuſtice is pleaſing vnto the gods,
and reward and puniſhment are the true pillers of the
Commonwealth: wherefore it is not likelie to be true,
that the zeale of the Commonwealth can induce anie
to doe ill, or to enterpriſe anie thing to the detriment
thereof. Surely, if we haue no power ouer our firſt motions,
his ſiſter was excuſable for ſaying that which ſhe
did, and the rather if that (as you ſay) ſhe was conſtrained
to goe to meet him, that came from killing the
moietie of her ſelfe: If you are culpable in that you
ſent her, wee hauing regard vnto your good meaning,
doe reſpect your age and remit your puniſhment, neither
will we ſuffer you to indure anie for your ſonnes
offence, becauſe that as it is a crueltie to puniſh the innocent,
ſo is it a follie to pardon the offence. The ſame
care as the gods haue ouer the conquerors, the ſame
care ought the conquerors to haue, not to ſhew themſelues
vnworthie of their diuine fauors; for vnto whom
much is giuē, of him alſo ſhal much be required. What
ſhall we then ſay, if he whom the gods haue honoured,
doe diſpiſe himſelfe? For he which by the fauour of the
gods hath ſlaine our enemies, ought not afterwards to
haue ſlaine his own ſiſter. If the gods haue by the force
of his armes giuen vs the dominion ouer thoſe who
would haue ruled ouer vs, the worthieſt thanks that we
can yeeld vnto their Dietie is, to ſhew by our good iuſtice
that we are not vnworthie to rule. Wherefore you
cannot doe better then to counſell your ſonne willinglie
to chuſe the yoke, or patientlie to take his death; for
making a vertue of neceſſitie, hee ſhall diminiſh the diſhonor
of his offence, and the dutie of the Commonwealth
ſhall be obſerued.
               
            
            
               
               Declamation. 89.
               
                  Of Diogenes that would not reſtore a cloke which
one had lent vnto him.
               
               
                  THe law commandeth a man to restore whatſoeuer he
hath borrowed, but thoſe things which are giuen
ought not to be required againe. Whervpon it happened
that a man named Ariſtarchus did lend a cloke
vnto Diogenes the Cinique. Within a while after the ſaid Ariſtarchus
praied him to reſtore his cloke, but Diogenes
could not heare on that eare, wherfore Ariſtarchus threatened
him by law, wherevnto Diogenes anſwered:
               I Know no other law then the law of nature, which
commandeth me not to part from that which I ſtand
in need of. If thou then haſt giuen me this cloke, why
wouldeſt thou haue it againe? Or if thou diddeſt lend
it vnto me to couer me withall, wherfore wouldſt thou
take it from mee when I haue greateſt need thereof? If
thou ſaieſt thou diddeſt lend it me vntill I had another,
I am content to reſtore it vnto thee at that time? Look
then if thou canſt find anie man that will giue or lend
me a better, and I will reſtore thee this againe.
               
                  The anſwere of Ariſtarchus.
                  AS I did willinglie lend my cloke vnto thee, ſo may I
take it from thee when I thinke good: and as the
law of nature commandeth me to haue compaſſion of
my neighbour, and to helpe him, as I haue holpen thee

as much as poſſiblie I could in lending thee this cloke,
euen ſo now it commandeth mee to take it againe becauſe
I ſtand in need thereof: for hee that is bad or vnprofitable
for himſelfe, can neuer bee good for others.
The law of nature commandeth thee not to bee vnthankfull
towards him that hath done thee a pleaſure,
much leſſe to detain by force, that which one hath lent
vnto thee friendly.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 90.
               
                  Of the three Fabij, who being ſent Embaſſadors vnto
the Gaules, did fight against them.
               
               
                  DVring the thirteenth militarie Tribuneſhip, the
Gauls came and aſſailed the cittie of Cluſa, who
ſent for aid vnto the Romancs. They ſent the
three ſonnes of Fabius Ambuſta, to perſuade
the Gauls not to hurt the Cluſians being friends
vnto the Romans Commonwealth: the Gaules anſwered that
they required nothing but dwelling places, and if the Cluſians
denied them ſome portion of their countrie, they would fight
with them in the preſence of the Embaſſadors, to the end that
they might be iudges of their valor. And herevpon after diuers
other words the battaile ioined: where the three Embaſsadors
tooke part with the Cluſians againſt the Gaules, of whom
one Embaſsador ſlew a captaine, which was the cauſe that ſuddainly
the Gaules gaue ouer the battaile, turning all their malice
againſt Rome, whether they ſent Embaſſadors, requiring
that the three Fabij might be deliuered vnto them. The iudgement
was remitted vnto the Romane people, who inſteed of
chaſtiſing them, made them militarie Tribunes, giuing them

the full power of Conſuls: wherevpon the Gauls did proteſt the
ruine of Rome, ſaying:
               IT might haue ſufficed you O Romanes, to haue ſent
your Embaſſadors to diſſuade vs from the warres enterpriſed
againſt the Cluſians, without employing the
ſaid Embaſſadors againſt vs, for you ſhall confeſſe one
of theſe three, that either you are our friends, or neauters,
or els our enemies: if friends, you ought to aid vs,
if neauters, not to hurt vs, and if enemies, to defie vs, before
you fight againſt vs. If you eſteeme vs to bee Barbarians,
in that we are ſtrangers, and becauſe we are not
like you in eloquence? Yet are we not to bee iudged altogether
void of reaſon, or ſuch as haue not the wit to
diſcerne what is right and what is wrong. Moreouer,
wee know verie well that thoſe which are ſent to perſuade
peace, ought not to kindle or increaſe warre. You
ſent Embaſſadors to perſuade vs vnto peace, who on
the other ſide not only incouraged our enemies againſt
vs, but they themſelues fought with all violence: What
Treaſon can be more great, then to faine one deed and
doe another? If you did ſend them to fight againſt vs
(as it is to bee preſumed, hauing ſent three brethren,
yoong men and valiant in arms) you cannot denie but
that you deſerue all the miſchiefe that we are able to do
vnto you? If they did fight againſt your meaning, aſſure
vs thereof by ſending them vnto vs; That we may
know who moued thē (forgetting the dutie of Embaſſſadors)
to vſe hoſtilitie againſt vs, for in doing otherwiſe,
you ſhall not onlie prouoke our anger, but the iuſt
vengeance of the gods againſt you, of whom wee ſhall
bee the cruell miniſters. And think not that for want of
power, or courage we haue left Tuſcane to come vnto

Rome, but onelie to let you know that it is not for the
Romans to command the Gaules, much leſſe to offend
them in anie ſort; but rather to fauor them in their deſeignes,
that they might haue good neighborhood and
friendſhip with ſuch a warlike people: or in doing the
contrarie, to trie what aduantage they haue in warlike
Proweſſe ouer euerie other nation: Wherefore O you
Romanes either reſolue to deliuer vnto vs the three Fabij,
or prepare you to the fight, and although your forces
are as feeble as your courages are faint (if ſuch Treaſon
be harbored amongſt you) yet faine your ſelues to
be other then you are, to the end that our victorie may
not be altogether without glorie; for we proteſt, that if
our demand bee not accompliſhed, wee will ouerrun
your cittie, race downe your houſes, lay your temples
and wals flat with the earth, in ſuch ſort that after ages
ſhall aske where Rome ſtood, when as they ſhall ſee no
memoriall thereof left: for it is the iuſt iudgement of
the gods, that vtter ruine ſhould fall vpon thoſe, who
doe offend vnder the coulor of friendſhip.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  TRue it is that wee did ſend the three Fabij for Embaſſadors
vnto you Gaules, and that they ought
not to haue fought againſt you, if for ſuch you had receiued
them: but what ſhall we ſay, ſeeing that in ſteed
of anſwering their demands, you would on the contrarie
haue made them beholders of your iniuſtice and
crueltie? For you ſaid that the Cluſians ſhould haue no
peace with you vnleſſe they would leaue part of their
countrie for your habitation: then the Embaſſadors demanding
for what reaſon, and vpon what occaſion you

did require lands in Tuſcane? You anſwered that your
reaſon conſiſted in armes, and that to ſtrong and warlike
men all things were due, yea, and that you would
foorthwith haue an anſwere of the Cluſians in the preſence
of the Romane Embaſſadors; to the intent that
they might make report at Rome how valiant in armes
the Gaules were aboue anie other nation. Wee would
know of you Gaules if one ſhould haue anſwered your
Embaſſadors in ſuch ſort, what you would haue done?
Seeing that euen thoſe which are moſt warlike, ſhould
haue tried euerie other reaſonable meanes, before they
had proceeded into armes: and yet you deſpiſing thoſe
that were the freeſt and mightieſt people of all Italie,
would command their friends and their Embaſſadors,
and contemning both the one and the other, giue a battaile
in ſteed of an anſwere. Surelie they were not ſent
to fight againſt you, but ſeeing that for anſwere, you offered
the battaile vnto their friends & neighbors, without
yeelding them anie ſufficient reaſon why, they remembring
that they were Romans, would rather proue
then behold your valour; and if you had ſlaine them in
the fight, wee would neuer haue cauelled anie further
for them: for you hauing neither receiued them as Embaſſadors,
nor giuē them no anſwer but by arms, it may
be ſaid that they were no more Embaſſadours; wherefore
wee would neuer haue required them either for
ſuch nor for anie others at your hāds, for we know that
it is a cōmon thing to kill, and to be killed: but although
they had done amiſſe, as you ſay they haue, yet ſhould
you haue firſt knowne our meaning, and haue required
ſatisfaction thereof, before you ſhould haue brought
your armed troupes vpon our territories: but you doe
verie well declare (you Gaules) that you will neither

ſend anie Embaſſadors, nor will receiue anie at all: but
truſting in your forces, you will make your wils a law,
how vniuſt ſoeuer they be. As touching your demand,
whether we be your friends, neuters, or enemies, wee
anſwere that we will be ſuch as you ſhall giue vs occaſion
to be, for it ſeemeth they can hardlie be your friends
that are neere vnto you: wherfore although we ſhould
not allow that which the Fabij haue done, yet may it
bee a queſtion whether they haue done amiſſe or no in
reſiſting the common enemies of all Italie, ſeeing that
an hundred yeares ſince, your anceſtors leauing their
naturall countrie, came firſt and occupied the countrie
of the Taurins, afterwards that of the Inſubrians, then
the limits of Tuſcane, and now without anie reaſon
you would vſurpe the territories of the Cluſians, the
which if they had granted you, what aſſurance ſhould
they haue had that afterwards you would haue beene
good friends, or peaceable neighbours vnto them; ſeeing
that you are of opinion being ſtrong men, al things
are due vnto you; and that you can yeeld no other
reaſon for your deeds then armes? What is he that can
bee aſſured of ſuch kind of people, which maketh vs
to doubt, that in time, you would if you could occupie
Rome and all Italie? If you will be our friends, 
                        •
                     ee that
you doe not onlie withdraw your army from vs, but alſo
for our ſakes ſurceaſſe your moleſting of the Cluſians,
and then knowing that our Embaſſadors haue offended
you, we ſhal make you a reaſonable ſatisfaction:
aſſuring you that wee are ſufficient to puniſh or chaſtiſe
them withot putting you vnto the paines to doe it: and
if you ſhew your ſelues (as in effect you haue begun) to
be our enemies, the Fabij cannot bee culpable▪ and it
were better to employ them againſt you, then to doe

them anie hurt at your inſtance. But what madneſſe
dooth incite you to come in ſuch ſort againſt vs? You
know well that if we had ben minded to ſend aid vnto
the Cluſians, we would not haue ſent three men onlie.
Wherefore we thinking you had ben our friends, did
ſend to intreat you not to hurt the Cluſians, but doing
contrarie to our requeſt, the Embaſſadors thought you
had ben our enemies, and ſo conſequentlie that they
were bound to aid the Cluſians. When you haue withdrawne
your armie from vs, wee will diſpute whether
they did well or ill: But ſo long as you talke thus armed,
wee may ſay that you haue no deſire to haue vs
your friends. Of a truth they fought againſt our meaning,
yet neuer imagine you that for al the ſame, we wil
deliuer them vnto thoſe which come vnto vs as enemies.
As for the anger of the gods, it ſtretcheth not to
thoſe that defend their temples as we will doe, moreouer,
we are bound to defend our countrie, our wiues,
our children, & the ſepulchers of our fathers, if you wil
offer to hurt them; therefore as you doe proteſt our ouerthrow,
ſo doe we ſweare your death, if you once aſſault
vs. For to be offended, and to offend, is all one,
and it is a moſt iuſt reaſon, that thoſe which ſeeke to vſurpe
another mans lands, ſhould loſe their owne liues.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 91.
               
                  Of a yoong youth, that made himſelfe a Nunne to enioy
one that he loued.
               
               
                  AT ſuch time as the law was not ſo ſtrict againſt thoſe
which by all the meanes they could ſought to inioy the
loue of Nunnes, a yong youth came in the habite of a

maiden into a Nunnerie, and made himſelfe a Nunne, to obtaine
his pleaſure of one whom he loued in the ſame cloiſter: after
he had obtained his deſire, and remained there ſome time in
great delight, he was at last diſcouered; wherevpon the biſhop
would haue conſtrained him to become a religious man of the
ſame order, which he had made profeſsion of in the habite of a
woman, the youth appealed from the ſame ſentence, ſaying:
               EVerie lawfull vow ought to be voluntarie, wherefore
you cannot conſtrain me to enter into religion
againſt my will. You ſay that I haue made a vow alreadie,
I referre it to your iudgement, whether being a
man, I might become a Nunne? If ſuch a vow be lawfull,
then let me bee ſtill a Nunne: If it bee not lawfull,
then is it of no force, and ſo conſequentlie I am thereof
freed, or at the moſt, to bee puniſhed in ſuch ſort as by
the law it ſhal be appointed, if there be any law that maketh
mention of the like fault: and if there bee no law
that maketh mention thereof, it is a token that whatſoeuer
I haue done is no crime, for there is ſome law appointed
for euerie fault: for as lawes are made for the
good of the Commonwealth, euē ſo thoſe that offend
them not are not puniſhable: as for me, I beleeue that I
haue in no ſort offended them, hauing charitablie relieued
her that had need of my helpe, conſidering the
fraileneſſe of my fleſh, which might haue induced her
to doe worſe then a thing incident to nature; yea, and
to the great reproch of religion, ſhee might haue found
the meanes to flie away from the Nunnerie contrarie
to her vow and promiſe: likewiſe, it is to bee conſidered,
that thoſe faults (if faults they may be called which
are through loue committed) are more excuſable then
puniſhable, becauſe they are done but for loue, and to

encreaſe humane generation▪ beſides that the moſt philoſophers
doe ſay, that louers are fooles, and others affirmed
that they are blind: what reaſon were it then to
puniſh a foole, or ſuch a one whoſe vnderſtanding is
blind? Who knoweth not that they are more worthie
of pittie then puniſhment? Nay who knowes not that
loue hath alwaies his abiding in the nobleſt hearts, and
compelleth the moſt obſtinat to follow him? Furthermore,
the diſtance of places is not able to ſeperate that
true loue which of long time hath ben imprinted in the
hearts of louers, for as he that doth loue feruentlie doth
ſildome or neuer forget it, ſo ought youth to bee excuſed
for doing but their kind: for that which in matters
of loue is lawfull for yoong men to doe, is vnlawfull for
old men to deſire; Wherfore it may be ſaid, that as vnhappie
is it for a yoong man to be without loue, as it is
for an old man to be in loue: and the more worthie the
thing beloued is, the more vehement is our deſire therof;
therfore the deſert of her whō I loue, hath brought
me to this extremitie: to counterfait a ſex inferior vnto
mine, the which I would for no other thing haue done,
but hereby it appeareth, that the louer liueth in the
thing beloued, and that he is dead in himſelfe; ſo that I
was conſtrained to find out this inuention, to approch
vnto her in whom I liue: for water farre of, doth neuer
quench fire hard at hand: the planets doe chieflie compell
vs to loue, therefore doth Venus ſhew her ſelfe to be
more ſtrong then Mars: and that which is more, no
other law then that of nature can be giuen vnto louers:
for it ſeemeth that loue is a diuine and humane eſſence
all in one ſubiect, wherby it happeneth, that true louers
are moſt apt to ſuſtaine great trauailes, for loue is no other
thing thē a contemplation of the thing beloued,

but the louer is ſuch as the thing beloued is, therefore
was I inforced to become ſuch as my miſtris was. Laſtlie,
being conſtrained by all theſe aboueſaid reaſons, I
am more then excuſable, for of all the parts in a mans
bodie, the heart is the nobleſt, and the nobleſt part of
the heart is loue: therfore it may be verie well affirmed,
that he which knoweth not how to loue well, hath a
bad heart. To conclude, it muſt be conſidered for what
intent vowes are made, as for mee I made mine to the
intent that I might bee neere vnto my beſt beloued; in
ſeeking to depriue me of this intention my vow ſhould
be broken, and if it be ſo, I will make no other: but you
cannot ſay that it is all one vow, ſeeing that there is
great difference betweene the obeying of a man, & the
ſeruing of a woman, & religious men ought to be learned,
and to haue ſuch other perfections whereof I am
not capable; whereas amongſt religious women obedience
onlie with humility is ſufficient, for which cauſe
I will not make anie other vow then that which I haue
made: but as I ſaid at the firſt, I ſubmit my ſelfe to bee
iudged according to the law, beſeeching that the gloſe
thereof may bee as farre from crueltie, as it is fitteſt for
men to vſe clemencie.
               
                  The Biſhops anſwere.
                  IF I had not aſſuredlie thought that thou wouldeſt
haue refuſed my proffer, to make thy ſelfe a religious
man, I would neuer haue offered the ſame vnto thee,
being as thou art vnworthie of ſo great a fauour: but I
intended by this meanes to manifeſt by your owne
tongue your wicked intention, to the end that you
might bee worthilie puniſhed therefore, and neuer ſay

that if no law mention of the like fault as yours is, that
therefore you ſhould remaine vnpuniſhed, for it may
be there was neuer ſuch a curſed deed heard of before,
or the lawmakers thinking that ſuch a fact could neuer
bee committed made no mention thereof: as Licurgus
made no law againſt ſuch as murthered their Parents,
imagining that none could bee ſo wicked as to commit
ſuch a crime, therefore would he not mention ſuch a
deteſtable deed: but doe you thinke that for all that the
Lacedemonions would haue left to puniſh thoſe grieuouſlie
which ſhould haue committed the ſame, & that
they would not haue inflicted a puniſhmēt as rigorous
as the fact was rare? No doubt they would: for when
offences are execrable, the puniſhments muſt bee the
more extreame, to ſtop altogether the paſſage vnto ſuch
vices; and eſpeciallie in ſuch a caſe where the accuſation
is not publicke, it were moſt expedient that the puniſhment
ſhould be ſecret, but the more ſeuere, that the
ſame being knowne of few men, the crime might bee
leſſe manifeſt, and the terror of the puniſhment more
great. For ſo during the Conſulſhip of Terentius Varo,
Lucius Cantilius Chancelor to the Biſhops hauing committed
adulterie with Florania a Veſtall Nunne, was (in
the place called Comicia, the gates being locked vp) ſo
beaten with rods by the biſhop, that hee died with the
blowes; which ought to ſerue as well for an example as
a law vnto this fellow, whoſe fault is more foule. What
puniſhment then ſhall be ſufficient for your adulterie?
Whereof you ſeeme chieflie to boaſt and to approoue
the ſame by your reaſons no leſſe friuolous then deteſtable,
by the which it ſhould ſeeme (by your ſaying)
that inceſts and adulteries ought not to bee blamed,
prouided that thereby the generation of mankind bee

encreaſed: alaſſe, how more happie were it that neither
you nor ſhe had euer been borne, then that you ſhould
be the occaſion of ſuch a ſcandale, ſeeing that it were
better that he which ſcandalizeth the leaſt of the Chriſtians
were throwne into the ſea with a milſtone about
his necke; What doe you call loue? A vild carnal concupiſcence,
As much, or more common vnto brute
beaſts, then vnto reaſonable men, who cannot vſe it
lawfullie, but onelie in marriage, to the end to bring
forth children: Wherefore Saint Paule doth verie well
ſay, That Whoredome is ſurely one of the greateſt ſins
and moſt hurtfull vnto man, ſeeing that euerie other ſin
is without him, and whoredome conſumeth both his
bodie and his ſoule, making him the one halfe of an
harlot, when he is created for no other cauſe but to bee
the Temple and dwelling place of God. Why doe you
not ſay then in ſteed of your leaſings, that an harlot is a
hell, wherein God ſuffereth thoſe which forget him to
bee drowned, and that filthineſſe is the reward for the
infidelitie of men? O wicked wretch, how dareſt thou
then looke vp into heauen, or behold the earth, the one
being the ſeat, the other the footſtoole of God? Whom
becauſe thou doeſt forget, thou art vnworthie of his fauour.
If whoredome committed with profane women
be deteſtable, what ſhall wee ſay of adulterie with ſuch
as are religious, who are conſecrated to God? Seeing
that the Romanes, when as yet they were ignorant of
the truth, did burie their Veſtall Nunnes quick, that ſuffered
themſelues to be defiled? You ſay wel, That louers
are blind of vnderſtanding; ſee then the cauſe why
thoſe are to be puniſhed which ſuffer themſelues to fall
into ſuch blindneſſe, that proceedeth of nothing but
idleneſſe & gluttonie which prouoketh luxuritie: therfore

ought you to haue ſhunned theſe two vices, but
you might haue eſcaped the third, the which as you
haue ſought it, ſo are you fallen into it. Surelie, all men
are tempted, and the greateſt temptation, is not to be
tempted at all, becauſe then we forget to be men, but
vertue appeareth in the reſiſting againſt temptation,
which you hauing neglected, you haue not only tempted,
but defiled the ſpouſe of Chriſt: What fire or torment
may expiate ſo vild and abominable wickednes?
And ſurelie you haue refuſed (as one that is vnworthy)
to doe pennance in religion, hauing firſt defiled the
ſame, making the holie vow thereof to ſerue for a cloke
vnto your filthineſſe. Let then the bull of Perillus be put
in vſe againe, and as he made the firſt experience thereof,
ſo be you the firſt that muſt bee puniſhed more rigorouſlie
then euer anie heretofore hath been, ſeeing that
your adulterie (the like whereof was neuer heard) is the
cauſe that a new law muſt bee made to terrifie ſuch as
would follow you. Laſtlie, (immitating the example
of God, which would not the death of a ſinner) I haue
called you to repentance, not without great ſuſpition
of your refuſall; in doing whereof, I take you at your
word, aud require the temporall ſword to puniſh you,
for counterfaiting your ſex, for abuſing the vow of religion,
for your vild whoredome, for refuſing to doe
pennance, and for your diueliſh obſtinacie. Conſider
worthie Iudges how manie torments ſuch a number of
hainous crimes deſerue.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 62.
               
                  Of Don Ferrand, who puniſhed the mutined Spaniards,
and afterwards is therefore accuſed.
               
               
                  
                  IN the time of the Emperour Charles
the fifth, the Spaniſh ſouldiors that were
in Scicilia, roſe in a mutenie, and committed
a thouſand miſchiefes, whereof
the leaſt deſerued the halter: wherevpon
Don Ferrand of Gonſagne, brother to
the Duke of Mantua, (who had alwaies
ben emploied by the Emperour, in chiefeſt places of command)
appeaſed them, paying them part of that which was due vnto
them: afterwards he cauſed them to be embarked to carie them
(as he ſaid) to Genoa, they being all embarked, he carried them
vnto certaine deſert Iſles, where he made them to goe aſhoare,
faining that he would there take the muſter of them, and make
an end of paying them: but when they were all in order a good
why in the Iſland, hee found the meanes to cauſe thoſe to retire
vnto the Gallies, whom he meant to ſaue, and afterwards he ſet
ſaile, and departed, leauing the reſt of the ſouldiours there, who
for the moſt part died all with hunger: for which fact Don
Ferrand was accuſed vnto the counſell of Spain as followeth:
               
                  IF diſcretion might be giuen as well as dignities
are granted, we ſhould not now need to demand
his death, who hath depriued the liues
of a number that were ſeruitors to Caeſar as well
as he, and no leſſe ſeruiceable: the which he would neuer
haue done, if he had conſidered that neither he nor
anie other could haue that honor to be Generall of an
armie if the ſouldiors did not freelie determine to ſerue
their Prince, and follow the warres, eſpeciallie, if they
would altogether with one mind refuſe ſo to doe: but
hence commeth the miſchiefe, that thoſe which haue
not firſt learned to be controlled, do neuer know rightly

lie how to commaund? Wherefore Hannon ſaid well
when Hasdruball commanded in Carthage, and Hanniball
was to be ſent into Spaine, being verie yoong; It
were better (ſaid he) that this yonker tarried here in the
cittie to learne how to obey lawes, then to teach him
ſo ſuddainlie to command in a forraine land. Likewiſe,
we are to conſider what was the end of Pompey, who
following the faction of Silla, was ſooner made a captaine
then a ſouldior: euen ſo thoſe of our time which
are noblie borne doe command, before they are able to
diſcerne peace from warres, the friend from the foe,
good from bad, and reputation from reproch; wherevpon
it chanceth, that as Hanniball was the cauſe of the
ouerthrow of Carthage, and Pompey the decay of the
Commonwealth of Rome, ſo theſe captaines made in
haſt preſuming ouermuch of their own courage, might
impaire the proſperitie of Caeſar, if his fortune together
with his vertue were not inuincible. But yet there is another
miſchiefe, which is, that Iralie (which may bee
tearmed the churchyard of Spaniſh ſouldiors) bringeth
foorth few men which are well affected to the Spaniſh
nation: who to ſay the truth, being worthie men, are
alſo ſomewhat haultie minded, the which the Italians
doe attribute vnto their pride, which is the chiefeſt
cauſe why they doe for the moſt part hate them: wee
will not be inquiſitiue whether heretofore Don Ferrand
hath been the cauſe of the death of a number of other
Spaniards, but we may well ſay that he hath made thoſe
(whom hee left in the deſert Iſland) to die the cruelleſt
death that might be imagined, without anie iudgement,
Counſell, or conſent of Caeſar, as if men were nurſed
and brought vp for nothing. Surely, it ſhould ſeeme
that he did not ſee what paines was taken in Spaine to

aſſemble ſuch a number of ſouldiors together, what ſtir
there was to embarke them, how hardlie they croſſed
the ſeas, and what time was ſpent in diſciplining them
for the warres, all which things was not done without
great charge and expence vnto the Emperour, and the
daunger of their owne perſons; and they were no ſooner
deliuered ouer to Don Ferrand, thorowlie furniſhed
and readie for the warres (as if they had ſprung forth of
the earth in one night, like vnto Muſhromes) but that
he did preſentlie thruſt them not onlie into all the greateſt
dangers that might be, when as manie times there
was no great occaſion: but alſo becauſe he would be
reuenged for the faults of ſome few of them, he hath
done them all vnto the cruelleſt death that he could inuent.
But wee would demaund of him how it could be
poſſible that they ſhould be all culpable, and whether
they were all authors of ſedition? For that is not onelie
hard, but impoſſible: had it not beene better then for
him to haue puniſhed the authors, that therby the conſenters
might haue beene terrified or chaſtiſed, and the
good cheriſhed and maintained? Or if he would needs
haue had them to die, could hee not haue ſent them
forth vpon the foe? Where reuenging their death, they
might at the leaſt haue weakened his forces. We read
indeed how the Romans tithed their mutined ſouldiours,
and vſed other like puniſhments, but it was neuer
ſeen or heard that they put them all to death; and eſpeciallie
in Spaine vnder the conduct of Scipio, where
there was not onelie a mutenie, but alſo Vmbrius Atrius,
and Calemus Albius tooke vpon them the authoritie of
Conſuls by the agreement and at the inſtance of the
ſouldiours, yet were none puniſhed but the authors
of the deed, and the reſt were paied, emploied, and

allowed for good ſouldiours, not becauſe the Romans
had not as good meanes to ſend other ſouldiours from
Rome into Spaine (and better then wee haue now to
ſend out of Spaine into Italie) but this was the reaſon:
the Generall was a Romane, and he not hating the nation,
was onlie contented to puniſh a few of the offenders,
& by the ſeueritie of that exemplarie puniſhment,
to terrifie and feare the reſt: for it is verie certaine, that
thoſe which are threatened doe liue better then thoſe
which are puniſhed, for the puniſhment being done,
the feare is paſt, and oftentimes it engendereth ſuch a
malice, as maketh them to commit farre greater faults
then the firſt; as (it may be) the effect ſhall bee ſeene by
thoſe which by ſome meanes may chance to eſcape
from thoſe Iſlands: doe but imagine if there had but a
few ben puniſhed, what dutifull men thoſe which had
ben pardoned would haue prooued, to ſhew that they
were worthie of pardon, and to cauſe their paſſed offence
to be forgotten? But yet if all this could not haue
moued him to ſpare them, yet ſhould hee haue done it
becauſe it is ſo difficult a matter to draw verie often
manie men foorth of Spaine, where there is no great
ſtore, as alſo for the great treaſure that is needfull to leuie
and conduct them, which is alwaies a great charge
both vnto the countrie and the people: but what care
haue the Italians thereof, being borne farre from Spain,
and naturall enemies to our nation becauſe they are
more valiant then anie other? for which cauſe as I haue
ſaid alreadie the Italians call them prowd, as if a great
fire could be without ſome ſmoak. And conſequently it
may appeare that although ſome Italians doe ſerue Caeſar,
yet are they neuertheleſſe mortall enemies to the
Spaniards: for they being indeed as prowd as they are

cruell, cannot abide this worthie and valiant nation: for
proofe whereof, what crueltie (ioined with pride) was
there euer more great then this of Don Ferrand, who
hath not at the leaſt ſpared thoſe, who would haue beſtowed
their liues for the ſafetie & defence of his? But
he hath likewiſe cauſed the innocent to periſh together
with the offender; he doth plainlie ſhew that he (according
to the example of Nero) would deſire that al Spain
had but one head, that he might cut it off at one blow:
therefore muſt wee for an example preuent by puniſhment,
ſuch minds no leſſe dangerous then diueliſh, to
the end that other ſtrangers being captains in the wars,
may hereafter conſider, that oftentimes ſuch a number
of men may either keepe or win a Prouince, but the
dead can fight no more; and manie times for want of
men there may ſundrie good occaſions bee loſt, to the
preiudice of Caeſars greatneſſe, and to the hinderance
of all Chriſtendome. I paſſe ouer the cauſes that captaines
doe moſt commonlie giue vnto their ſouldiours
to mutenie, one whiles becauſe they are not paied as
well as they, and otherwhiles when they detaine the
beſt part of their contributions and other booties that
ought to bee giuen vnto them; remembring not that
the ſouldiours doe with the price of their blood oftentimes
buy thoſe victories, whereof the Generals reape
the honour and profite; neither will acknowledge
how by their malice, ambition, and auarice, the victory
is oftentimes foreſlowed, or vtterly loſt, moſt commonly
to the detriment of the profit, honor, and life of the
poore ſouldiors: and therefore to conclude, I ſay that
they are right captaines who doe attaine therevnto by
degrees, and by their valor, and thoſe will beware how
they commit anie ſuch cruelties like vnto this which

                  Don Ferrand hath committed, for the which we require
that iuſtice may be executed.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  
                     THoſe places which are of dignitie and authoritie,
ought not to be beſtowed but vpon ſuch
as are knowne to be of diſcretion ſufficient to
deſerue them. As for me, I dare aduouch that
this is not the firſt time that I haue commanded in Caeſars
ſeruice, and that only by his own commandement,
who hath many times praiſed, & alwaies allowed whatſoeuer
I haue done; ſo that to iudge me indiſcreet were
as much to taxe his Maieſtie as me: and he that would
tax the actions of the Emperor, ſhould proue himſelfe
a verie Idiot; for his manifold victories and other noble
acts (being indeed worthie of his Maieſtie) will bee
a witneſſe againſt theſe no leſſe ſeuere then ignorant
Cenſors. And as it is verie euident that the iudgement
of Caeſar dooth neuer deceiue his Maieſtie, ſo is it alſo
verie certaine, that his Maieſtie would neuer haue emploied
me ſo manie times, if he had not eſteemed mee
diſcreet. And thus much further I dare affirme, that if
thoſe which are ſo deſirous to be my Iudges, were choſen
or placed in their authoritie by the doome of Caeſar,
I ſhould thinke my ſelfe happie to bee iudged by them,
although I am not bounden to render vnto them anie
account of my military actions, and eſpeciallie becauſe
the deed which I haue done was allowed by Caeſar, who
onlie might haue puniſhed me if the fact had been vniuſt:
but his Maieſtie doth verie well know that ſometimes
it is lawfull to doe a little harme, to ſhun thereby
a greater hurt: and I will further ſay, that if long before

this time ſuch ſouldiors as did mutenie had been puniſhed
very ſeuerely, I ſhould not now haue ben inforced
to execute this puniſhment, more notable then any that
heretofore hath beene performed. And although I am
not bound to iuſtifie my ſelfe for that deed, before the
Counſell of Spaine, yet will I not let to ſhew that I am
not ſo faultie, as they doe thinke me to be, for if I were,
Caeſar is ſo iuſt as I ſhould not be free from puniſhmēt:
for firſt of all the lords of the Counſell ought to conſider,
what they be that accuſe me, whether they be not
ſome of the parties, and their parents, or friends, who
doe as well ſhew their ignorance as their impudencie,
when they affirme that they were as good ſeruitors to
Caeſar as I, and that the Generall could not bee without
ſouldiours, as if they themſelues being amutined,
were not compelled to make a Generall amongſt
them. I know verie well that a number would willingly
command, yet there are but a few which know how to
doe it, neither can anie perrorme that place, but ſuch as
haue firſt learned how to obey. Whereof I may vaunt,
if Caeſar ſhould haue appointed the meaneſt of thoſe
whom I haue puniſhed to be my General, I would haue
had ſuch reſpect & ben ſo dutifull vnto him as I ought,
beleeuing that Caeſar would neuer haue authoriſed him
without deſert: neither was I euer ſo preſumptuous as
to truſt more vnto my birth thē vnto true vertue, knowing
well that Caeſar fauoureth none but the vertuous.
Likewiſe, I learned both how to obey, and alſo what
was militarie diſcipline before that euer I commanded,
and neuer doubt that the noble are more-ſeuere in
commanding, then are the comminaltie, for none is
more prowd then hee which of a baſe groome becommeth
a gentleman. God grant the Counſell be not full

of ſuch men, and that they bee not ſuch as are more
vicious then curious of the reputation of their houſes.
I will not argue whether Hanniball or Pompey did well,
but I may truly ſay that Marius, as one ignoble, made
the way for Pompey and Caeſar to ouerthrow (as you ſay)
the Romane Commonwealth: for hee and Silla were
examples vnto the two aboue rehearſed. It is well
knowne that Marius and Silla did by little and little attaine
vnto places of dignitie, being but meanly borne,
yet ceaſſed they not to be exceeding prowd, hurtfull, &
odious vnto their countrie. And a little before them
Terentius Varo who being the ſonne of a butcher, did
by degrees attaine vnto the place of Conſull, had not
he I pray you ben likely by his raſhneſſe to haue cauſed
the ouerthrow of Rome, if Hanniball after the diſcomfiture
at Cannas had purſued the victorie? Neither was
it Hanniball that cauſed the ruine of Carthage, but rather
the Senators, being no leſſe ſeuere then ambitious
and cruell, who did crucifie their Generals if the wars
proſpered not according to their minds; which was the
cauſe that after the battaile againſt Scipio was loſt, Hannibal
could not abide in ſafetie in the cittie, the which (it
may bee) hee had conſerued, if the Senators had beene
like vnto thoſe of Rome, who were alwaies mild, whoſe
example all counſellors of eſtate ought to follow; and
they would no doubt bee like vnto them if they did all
know ſo well as the Senat of Rome, thoſe occaſions
which are offered in the warres, to enforce a man to do
ſuch things as are vnuſuall. Moreouer, it cannot be ſaid,
that I (hauing ben brought vp amongſt Spaniards, and
receiuing from them all fauour and ſincere friendſhip)
ſhould be ill affected towards them: but I may rather
ſay that their courage ought to bee ſhewed againſt their

enemies, and not againſt the Emperour, who is euen amongſt
the Barbarous Almaines, called the father of
ſouldiours: you are apt to rehearſe what I haue done,
but you tell not the cauſe wherefore. It is ſufficient for
the Chirurgion to proue vnto his patient why he doth
ſometimes cut off or canteriſe a member; ſo haue I certified
Caeſar, that the mutiners ought to bee ſuppreſſed,
for feare leaſt they ſhould animate others to commit
the like Treaſon. Neither haue I cauſed them to die,
witneſſe a number that are eſcaped thence, & amongſt
others foure, who did each of them beſtow a bullet vpon
me in my lodging, but they could not touch mee
therewith, whom I haue not only pardoned for the particular
iniurie done vnto me, but alſo I haue further ſaued
their liues: whereby it is eaſily known that I am no
enemy to the Nation. Furthermore, it was not expedient
to leaue them vnto the enemies mercy, becauſe that
would haue but fortified them, and weakened the glory
and courage of the nation. Neither yet is it fit to hurt
thoſe ſecretly whom one intendeth to puniſh or chaſtiſe
for the terrifieng of others. As for the Romans, the
number of their amutined ſouldiours in Spaine was
great, therfore they could not vſe extremitie for feare of
loſing the reſt of the armie, and ſo conſequently all that
which the Romans held in Spaine, for many of the nobility
there were already reuolted. Moreouer, the Romane
ſouldiors were not accuſtomed to rebell ſo often
as the Spaniards, and at that time eſpecially they had
not done it if they had not ſuppoſed their Conſull Scipio
to be dead; and peraduenture that was the firſt
time, for ſuch was their modeſtie before that time, and
a long while after the ouerthrow of Cannas, as they
(knowing the neceſſity of their Commonwealth) the

moſt part of the ſouldiors refuſed to take pay, and they
called thoſe mercenaries which tooke the ſame, affirming
that the good ſouldiour ought to bee as well partaker
of the aduerſitie, as proſperity of the Commonwealth:
but thoſe whō I left in the Iſle was but a handfull
of men, the beſt of whom were dead before in the
warres: ſo as the remainder were more fit to loſe thoſe
fortreſſes where they ſhould be left in Gariſon, then to
keepe them, and both to corrupt the good ſouldiors by
their example, and alſo to cauſe a whole army to mutenie.
As for the wrong which therein I haue done vnto
Spain, a man may ſee (ſetting the gentlemē apart) what
ſouldiors doe come from thence, for the beſt are ruffians,
the others are vagabonds, and cutpurſes, ſuch as
were the relickes of the beadles whip, or els ſuch as had
left their eares behind them as a pawne of their honeſtie;
and generally ſuch, as al theeues, or verie little better.
So that to ſend ſouldiours forth of Spaine is rather
to purge and amend it then anie way to impaire it; for
there can neuer bee ſo manie of the aboueſaid men taken
from thence, but that the priſons are alwaies ſeene
full, and the citties are not empty of them. And you
muſt not affirm that they were not all faultie, ſeeing
that in ſuch an offence, the conſenter is as worthy to be
puniſhed as the inuenter: for they which would not be
of that faction, might ſecretly withdraw themſelues
from them, as they know well how to doe when they
flie from an aſſault or from ſome other dangerous skirmiſh,
and eſpecially when their company is appointed
to ſome toileſome Gariſon, the which is then all cloſely
diſſembled vnder the coulour of being Spaniards;
Whereas ſuch faults amongſt the Almaines are moſt
grieuouſly puniſhed: but it ſeemeth that a man ſhould

not preſume to touch the Spaniards, as if they were the
only (becauſe the lateſt) Chriſtians. Let them then endure
their mutenies, who are the cauſe therof by detaining
their pay as you affirme, as for me, I know Caeſars
liberality can inrich me, therefore I haue nothing to do
to trouble my ſelfe with a gain no leſſe vild then vnlawfull
and diſhoneſt: & it ſufficeth me, that the noble and
honourable men of Spaine doe know how well I loue
their nation: for I make as little account of the ſlander
of wicked men, as I would willinglie haue the praiſe of
the good, for euery one commendeth ſuch as himſelfe
is: and that which is more, I will not refuſe the iudgement
of ſuch of the Counſell as haue commaunded in
the warre, but from ſuch as know nothing but by reading,
I appeale vnto the others aforeſaid. During which
appeale, I will bee readie to doe all the good ſeruices
for Caeſar as poſſiblie as I may.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 93.
               
                  Of the Matrons who are accuſed for poyſoning
the Senators.
               
               
                  
                     MArcus Claudius Marcellus, and Titus
Valerius being Conſuls in Rome,
many of the chiefeſt did die, and all of
one diſeaſe. Wherevpon it happened that
a ſeruant or bondwoman aduertiſed the
Senat that many of the Noble women
of Rome were buſied in making of poyſon;
the which they gaue vnto men as occaſion ſerued them, &
amongſt others, Cornelia and Sergia both nobly borne, were

accuſed and found diſtilling the ſaid poyſons, who denying the
ſame verie firmely and ſtoutly, the ſlaue requeſted that they
might prooue their innocencie in drinking the waters diſtilled
by them, but they refuſed ſo to doe, one of them ſaying:
               GOd graunt that my deuination be not true, yet
who will not beleeue, that ſome great alteration
dooth threaten the Commonwealth, Seeing that
ſlaues (natural enemies to the Romane cōmonwealth)
are not only permitted to accuſed the Noble Matrons,
but alſo are ſuffered to iudge them according to their
owne fancie; ſaying (and that in the preſence of the
Senat) drinke of the water which you haue diſtilled if
you will not be accounted faultie? But what would inſue
then if it were ſo, (as all this wicked generation of
ſlaues haue their priuate meetings and conference together)
that they had perſuaded our ſlaues to put ſome
poyſon ſecretly into our diſtillations, ſeeing that there
muſt be ſome time to performe the ſame? In drinking
the ſame, ſhould not we therby loſe both life and honor
together? And if it ſhould otherwiſe happen, that the
water did vs no hurt at al, what could this miſcheeuous
wretch loſe, ſeeing that not ſo much as her life is her
owne, but at the will and diſcretion of him or her that
hath bought her? And yet neuertheleſſe, we ſhould not
let to be the ſpectacle and by-word of the people. For
the deſire of a vild ſlaue, our innocencie ſhall be alwaies
ſuſpected, and that chiefly amongſt the common people,
who doe ſooner conceiue an euill then a good opinion;
then being once imprinted in their braines, ſildome
or neuer is the ſame baniſhed, But who would
euer haue beleeued that the Senat could haue beene ſo
vnaduiſed as to admit the like accuſations, or to cauſe

two Noble Matrones to appeare in iudgement at the
only inſtance of a perſon vnworthie to liue? Surely any
man of good iudgement will be amaſed therat, but the
vnwiſe will euermore haue an ill opinion of vs: wherefore
(our honour ſaued) we were better die then liue, for
what may be cōmendable in a woman except her good
reputation, which ſurely is more worth vnto her then any
other riches or felicities? Behold vnto what extremitie
we are brought, as wel by this wicked woman, as
by the indiſcretion of the Senat? Who doe not conſider
that although poyſon be diſtilled, yet can it not bee
any crime; No more then it is a fault to forge a ſword,
to make a bow and arrows, or to ſpin a halter? all which
may more eaſily be the inſtruments of death then poyſon.
But ſhew mee what law forbiddeth the making or
diſtilling of poyſon? What skilleth it then if we haue
made deadly waters, to vſe them our ſelues vpon a neceſſity,
for the preſeruing of our chaſtetie, if the cittie
ſhould chance to be ſurdriſed by enemies, or by falling
into any other accident? Shal we be therefore accounted
malefactors? How many waters and other compounds
doe we make that are hurtfull to drink, as well
to preſerue and increaſe our beautie, as alſo for other
matters no leſſe ſecret then neceſſary? The which we
would not reueale for any thing▪ For euery modeſt woman
had rather die then reueale the infirmity of their
ſex. And yet neuertheleſſe it ſeemeth that we ſhould be
conſtrained publikely to reueale that which nature her
ſelfe hath concealed, to the end it ſhould he kept ſecret:
O miſerable world wherein we are borne, ſeeing that ſo
little reſpect is had of vs, and that the Senat is ſo fond,
not onlie to giue eare vnto the enemies of the Roman
Commonwealth, but alſo to giue credit vnto their ſlanderous

reports: but what if any ſlaue had accuſed Brutus
to haue beene conſenting to the practiſe of the conſpirators?
Should it haue ben beleeued, becauſe his
ſonnes were of that faction? Should not the accuſer
haue ben executed on the croſſe? And yet neuertheleſſe
it is agreed that this wicked ſlaue muſt commaund
vs: yea, and the Senat alloweth her commandement.
But what will not theſe carians preſume, to inuent againſt
their miſtreſſes? And therefore O you Senators
you ſhall at one time or another abide the penalty for
the ouergreat credit which you haue giuen vnto their
leaſings: for it is moſt reaſonable, that thoſe which fauour
the wicked, ſhould periſh by their hands. Are you
yet ignorant that ſo many ſlaues as there be, ſo many enemies
we haue in Rome: and yet the Senat permitteth
the wickeddeſt wretch of that generation to perſecute
the honour and life of the Romane Matrons, being
but of late moſt worthily fauoured and priuiledged, for
their vertue and prudence. Laſtly, there is inough ſaid
of a thing ſo vniuſt as this vild wretch is, who dooth of
her owne accord condeme her ſelfe.
               
                  The Anſwere of the Senat.
                  
                     AS is the common cuſtome of women, ſo is
your prattle tedious, and to ſmall purpoſe of
the matter in queſtion: alſo it appeareth, and is
verified in you, that the firſt aduiſe of a woman is alwaies
beſt, and that for a preſent excuſe they exceed
men, but when they would proceed, they ſpeak againſt
themſelues, and they quite forget what to ſay: euen ſo
your firſt excuſe was beſt, when you made a doubt that
the ſlaues had corrupted your diſtillations: but afterwards

it ſeemeth in your going about to proue it lawful
to make ſuch waters, you do affirme that you did make
them; if it be ſo, we are not of the opinion that you
ſhould drinke them, eſpecially if you doe ſuſpect them,
but if it be otherwiſe, you ſhould not do amiſſe by that
meanes to prooue your innocencie, and procure her
end that hath ben your accuſer: whoſe life although (as
you ſay) it be none of her owne, yet would ſhe loſe it as
vnwillingly as you would yours, the which you are no
more ſure of, then ſhe is of hers, ſeeing that we are all at
the diſcretion of fortune: wherfore it may be ſaid that
not only bondſlaues, ſicke perſons, ſailers, and condemned
men, are in danger, but alſo no man is certain to be
free from death: neither is it well ſaid, that we allow
the commandement of a ſlaue, but becauſe ſhe is likewiſe
a woman we cannot hinder the readineſſe of her
tongue, no more then of yours: and for the allowing
of her ſaying to be hurtful, we may ſay that ſhe hath preuented
what we meant to ſpeake: but you complaine
before you haue cauſe; for on the contrary we do now
demaund, (ſince you haue ſpoken ſo much) whether
you think this water be venomous or no? If you think
it is not, drinke it? If you think that your bondwomen
haue poyſoned the ſame, it muſt be known where they
had the poyſon; And conſequently wherof you diſtilled
this water? Whereby it may bee prooued whether
your drugs were able of themſelues to turne into poyſon
or no? Or what poiſon might corrupt them? And
afterwards we will know of the reſt which made of the
ſame, whether their intention was like vnto yours? For
we know that there is a great number of you which do
make the ſame, which is a great likelihood that you
are all of one league: wherfore you two ſhall ſerue for

a triall, ſeeing that you will confeſſe no more of the
matter, for the compariſon of the ſword with poyſon is
odious, becauſe the one ſerueth to ſtrike our foe, & the
other is to ſlay our friend as well as our foe. Therefore
all the reſt of your friuolous excuſes ſhall not ſaue you.
But tell vs freely whether theſe waters which you haue
made are venomous or no? For this we aſſure you, that
either you muſt determine to drinke it, or confeſſe the
truth, ſeeing that after the firſt excuſe you would proue
that it is lawfull to make it, the which is meere falſe: for
all hurtfull and ſuſpitious things are vnlawfull and criminall.
And although there were no law againſt the
ſame, yet ougt there one to be made; and neuer thinke
that here you ſhall be ſaued for your nobleneſſe and
great calling, for the more great they are which commit
ſuch hainous acts, the greater puniſhment doe they deſerue,
ſeeing they are the cauſe of greateſt ſcandale, and
eſpecially becauſe they are not conſtrained therevnto
through neceſſitie, but rather prouoked by their owne
malicious nature: the truth then ſhall appeare either
by your owne confeſſion, or by the triall which your
ſelues ſhall make in drinking of your water.
                  Here is to be noted that theſe two womē did voluntarily
drinke of their water, and died, rather then they
would confeſſe the truth, which the Senators knew alreadie:
for within a few daies after, more then two hundred
and ſeuenty women were condemned, and there
was neuer before that any accuſation of impoyſoning.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 94.
               
                  Of an Earle of Flanders, who by a wile did hang
foure gentlemen for a robbery.
               
               
                  
                  AN Earle of Flanders named Baldwin,
and ſurnamed Apquin, was a very iuſt
Prince, and kept a great court. Whervpon
it happened that certaine Merchants
being Iewellers, came to viſit him, and
they ſold him certaine Iewels, aterwards
departing from thence, they were purſued
and robbed by foure Gentlemen, in
great fauor with the Earle; who being accuſed by the ſaid Merchants,
and they not being able to denie the deed, the Earle was
in ſuch an exceeding rage, as hee ſwore that hee would not ſleepe
before he ſaw them hanged by the necke: but the goods being
reſtored vnto the merchants, many lords and ladies came to intreat
for the gentlemen being priſoners, vnto whome the Earle
after long ſute and much intreatie, gaue ſome good hope. Afterwards
before he would goe to bed, hee cauſed the priſoners to be
brought into the hall, and made foure towels to bee faſtened to a
beame, vnder the which hee commanded a table to bee ſet, then
hee ſaid vnto the priſoners, You know the oath which I haue
made, wherefore I will faſten theſe towels about your necks, then
each of you liſt or draw vp your legs in ſuch ſort, as I may ſay
that I haue ſeene you hanged: and afterwards ſetting your feet
downe againe vpon the table, you may vntie the towels, and ſay
that my oath is accompliſhed, but another time bee better aduiſed.
The priſoners did the Earles commandement, who ſeeing
them well faſtened to the towels, threw the table to the ground,
and leauing them in that ſort hanged, he ſhut the hall dore,
where, at the laſt they were ſtrangled of themſelues: but their
kinsfolke accuſed the Earle before his Soueraigne Lord the
French King, ſaying:
               
                  
                  IF your Iuſtice and mercie moſt redoubted Soueraigne,
were not equall to your greatneſſe, in
vaine ſhould we haue recourſe vnto your maieſtie,
to haue right of your vaſſall our Earle;
who conuerteth Iuſtice into crueltie, and eſpeciallie againſt
his gentlemen, who for their vertue and valor
are odious vnto him, the which hate ſpringeth of no other
cauſe, but onlie of a feare which he hath, that they
will not alwaies endure his cruelties. For cruell men are
naturallie cowards, and conſequentlie ſubiect to feare,
which proceedeth from the ſting of their owne conſcience
that doth ſecretlie and continuallie accuſe them:
now how ſarre vnbeſeeming cowardiſe and feare, is for
the nature of a French man, the taking of Rome, and
winning of ſo manie Prouinces, as well in Italie, as in
Greece, Spaine, and other countries doe witneſſe; and
the rather, becauſe this warlike Nation could neuer be
ſubdued by the Romans, nor by anie others, had it not
ben for Ciuile diſcention amongſt themſelues. So that
it ſeemeth that the men of this Nation chieflie the gentlemen,
and chiefeſt of all he which ruſeth, being neither
hardie nor couragious, degene
                     ••
                  eth frō the worthineſſe
of that Nation, and ſo conſequentlie maketh
himſelfe vnworthie, as being vild and abiect, the which
may be ſeene by our Earle (if he may be ſo called that is
an enemie of Nobilitie:) for what act can be more vild
in a great lord then to vſurpe and take vpon him to execute
the hangmans office, and with his owne hands to
hang the gentlemen of his train for a light fault, which
may rather be called a tricke of youth? In Spain a man
ſhall verie hardlie find one amongſt the theeues in priſon,
which would promiſe to be a hangman fiue years,

to ſaue his life: Nay, in euerie countrie there are none
of that office but ſuch as are murtherers or theeues.
How odious then ought that office to bee vnto a free
man; but more vnto a Nobleman, and moſt of all vnto
a Prince of a countrie? who ought to be a ſpectacle vnto
all men, and a true patern of Nobilitie? And ſo much
the more odious is this fact, becauſe thoſe that are common
hangmen, doe execute none but ſuch as are condemned,
but theſe men were hanged before they were
condemned; If our Earle will not affirme, that hee was
both accuſer, Iudge, and hangman altogether: and that
which was worſt of all, hee put them to death without
confeſſion, not ſuffering them to haue onely ſo much
leiſure as to vnburden their conſciences, but euen vnder
the coulor of ſauing them, he hath ſlain them. Flaminius
was accuſed of the Romane Cenſors, becauſe
he being Praetor in Gaule, cauſed a malefactor to be beheaded
before him whileſt he was at ſupper, and our
Earle thinketh that hee hath not done amiſſe to hang
three Gentlemen betwixt his ſupper and his bed time,
a thing far differing from the clemencie required in a
lord ſo great; for euery lord that ruleth a country ought
to take example by the Princes of the bees, who either
haue no ſting at all, or if they haue anie, yet do they not
vſe it. Finally (if it pleaſe your Maieſty) we are not alone
wronged by this fact, for your Maieſtie hath loſt foure
ſeruants, who if need had beene, would not onlie haue
imploied their wealth and their liues for your ſeruice,
but alſo might haue induced many others to doe the
like: for a valiant Gentleman draweth mens hearts after
him. The Commonwealth doth loſe therby, loſing
thoſe who either for your Maieſties ſeruice, or the
countries ſafetie, might haue ben conducters or leaders

to the reſt. Moreouer, by ſuch liberal and noble perſons
diuers men doe gaine their liuing, and others increaſe
their wealth, but alaſſe all this notwithſtanding they are
dead, not by right, but by the Earles rigor, who was afraid
leaſt Iuſtice ſhould haue ben done vnto them: but
who would not tremble in hearing it onelie repeated,
that an Earles hall hath ſerued for a priſon, his table for
a ladder, the beame for a gibbet, and he for a hangman?
And yet the ſame is happened, and hee himſelfe dooth
boaſt therof, for ſuch is the cuſtome of thoſe which reſemble
him, that of vice they make vertue, which is the
greateſt miſchiefe that can happen in a Prouince, and
chiefly when the ſame commeth from the Prince. Had
it not ben moſt reaſonable firſt to haue known whether
the fault was committed, and what was the cauſe, with
the reſt of the circumſtances therof? And then to haue
proceeded lawfully and rightlie againſt the offenders?
But it ſeemed that the Earle was afraid that hee ſhould
not haue found neither ſergeant, priſon, Iudge, hangman,
ladder, halters, nor gallowes to execute theſe gentlemen:
for which cauſe he deſired that all theſe foreſaid
miſchiefes ſhould bee found in his hall and in his
perſon. A man may ſay that I ſpeake with ſmall reſpect
vnto my lord, but we proteſt, that from henceforth we
will neuer ſo account him, and if wee cannot obtaine
from the King the hoped remedie of our due reparation,
we make a vow that we, our children, parents, kindred,
alies, friends, and whoſoeuer els dependeth vpon
vs, will rather goe dwell amongſt the Scithians or anie
other more cruell nation, then we will remain any longer
vnder the gouernment of a man ſo infamous.
               
                  
                  The earles Anſwere.
                  THe ſame Iuſtice, mercie, and Maieſtie of the King
which you imploy againſt me, ſhall yeeld mee reaſon
againſt all you, and ſhall in my behalfe puniſh you
for your no leſſe vain, then outragious and vnreuerent
ſpeeches, wherefore I doe not refuſe the iudgement of
his Maieſtie, although the matter concerneth his highnes
nothing at all, in as much as thoſe whom you ſpeak
of were no Gentlemen, but robbers and theeues, and
for ſuch haue I puniſhed them; and if anie would know
why I did it not after the vſuall manner, as there ſhall no
reaſons be wanting, ſo am I not bound to tell them vnto
anie but vnto ſuch as it ſhall pleaſe my ſelfe: therfore
I will only ſay that they being in that ſort put to death,
their ingrateful kindred towards me haue receiued leſſe
diſhonour thereby, then if they had beene made a publike
ſpectacle to the people. Likewiſe, the nobilitie of
Flanders are become ſo inſolent, as they ſtand in no aw
at all of Iuſtice, wherefore this Iuſtice no leſſe ſuddaine
then iuſt, will make them to bethinke themſelues twice,
before they will commit the like offence againe. Moreouer,
you were reſolued to ſaue them either by intreaties,
or otherwiſe; therefore I deſired to take away all
occaſion to ad vnto their death, not onlie yours, but alſo
other mens deſtructions, for he may be tearmed wiſe
and vertuous, which by one ſmal miſchiefe can eſchew
farre greater miſchances: but he that dooth neuer ſo
great good vnto the ingratefull, receiueth nothing but
hate and reproch for his reward: euen ſo hath it happened
to me herein. If you who ſay that you are noble,
did know what nobilitie is, and wherein it conſiſteth,

you would ſay that theſe robbers were no Gentlemen,
ſeeing that gentilitie cannot be grounded but only vpon
vertue, and as thereby the baſe borne attaine to nobilitie,
euen ſo he which continueth not therein, loſeth
that nobilitie which his father hath left him, to the intent
that hee ſhould bee vertuous: for nothing is more
pernicious in a Commonwealth then he who dooth
falſelie vſurpe the title of Nobility. I do demand of you
whether the ſonne of a good muſition may inherit his
fathers cunning & renoume, chieflie to be a good muſition,
without learning and thorowly exerciſing of
muſicke? It ſeemeth not, if then in an art of ſo ſmall
conſequence a man cannot attaine vnto the fame or facultie
of his father, without he be the ſame in effect, although
it ſhould not preiudice the Commonwealth in
any ſort; how then can they inherit nobility, who make
no proofe therof by vertue, by the which our anceſtors
haue gained it? If nobility came but by deſcent, it
would be no leſſe weake, then of ſmall continuance,
conſidering the multitude of thoſe that die in the wars;
but vertue which doth thereby nobilitate others, doth
ſtill maintain the ſame. I haue then cauſed theſe villains
to die ſecretly for the reſpect I had vnto their kindred,
who deſired to remaine noble in following vertue, for
thoſe which doe ſwarue from it, a man may rightly ſay
that nobility doth end in them, and they which follow
it cannot chuſe but be noble indeed: the which Cicero
knew very well how to applie when Claudius ſaid vnto
him that he was no gentleman; Truly (ſaid he) in me
doth the nobilitie of my race begin to bud, as in you
the gentrie of your ſtocke is alreadie blaſted. And ſince
that I being ſo exceedingly bound vnto vertue, as God
hath made me by birth more noble and greater then any

other of my countrie, I haue done but my dutie in
executing good, ſpeedie, and ſhort Iuſtice: for Iuſtice
ſurely is not the leaſt kind of vertue, and not to execute
Iuſtice were cruelty, wherefore I am not cruell, much
leſſe a coward, neither doe they ſpeake the truth which
doe ſay that I am an enemie to gentlemen, or that I fear
them, but I am indeed an enemie to the vicious, and I
fear leaſt they ſhould hurt the good, or that they ſhould
be corrupted by them: now haue I been their executioner
or hangman as you affirme, but they themſelues according
to their deſerts haue ben the butchers of their
owne liues; and were it otherwiſe, yet is he rather a
hangman which robbeth or killeth an honeſt man, thē
is he which executeth malefactors. This Spaniſh pittie
proceedeth of no other cauſe, but onely for that they
would not execute thoſe which are of their profeſſion,
yet to betray or murther good men they are nothing
ſcrupulous. The Prince of a countrie cannot ſhew anie
better example then in performing Iuſtice, the which I
haue done: And know you that the Iudges are not neceſſary,
but where the Prince is not preſent: for proofe
whereof, Salomon himſelfe iudged cauſes, yet no other
but the King can iudge me. As for Flaminius, he put a
condemned man to death vpon pleaſure, onely to content
an harlot, but I haue executed foure to obſerue Iuſtice.
But for any ſeruice that they might haue done for
the King, a man may as well ſay the like of all other
theeues: for ſuch people can eaſilie aſſemble a great
number of ſuch worthleſſe & lewd fellows as they are.
Likewiſe, it is not a ſmall miſchiefe that prodigalitie is
wrongfully held for liberalitie, as if the prodigall did
not commit a thouſand miſchiefes, to get wherewith to
performe their follies, as theſe foure did, who by their

prodigality became theeues. Wherefore it may be affirmed,
that they and ſuch as would maintaine them, are
thoſe that eſteeme vice to be vertue, and villaines to be
Gentlemen. As for the ſmall reſpect that you haue vſed
in ſlandering me, it is therein that I may ſhew my clemencie,
for it is true Magnanimitie to pardon great
faults, eſpecially when none is offended therby, by only
he which pardoneth the ſame, as I doe not only pardon
you, but alſo doe further beſeech the King not to
puniſh you, becauſe it may bee at your owne choice either
to remaine in your countrie or to forſake the ſame;
not for that I care for ſuch ſubiects as you are which diſdaine
me to be their lord, but becauſe I would not againſt
my cuſtome ſhew my ſelfe rigorous towards
thoſe, who being ouercome by paſſiō, do but offend me
in words, & the rather becauſe they which ſpeake more
then they ſhould, doe thereby but procure their owne
ſhame. And to conclude, there is no reaſon that you
ſhould be beleeued concerning the dead; But it may
pleaſe the Kings Maieſtie to bee better informed vpon
this matter, if it ſhall not like his highneſſe to credite
thoſe informations as are moſt true, which I doe here
preſent vnto his gratious hands, binding my ſelfe vnto
any ſatisfaction, if in ought I haue ſwarued from Iuſtice.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 95.
               
                  Of a Jew, who would for his debt haue a pound of
the fleſh of a Christian.
               
               
                  
                  A Iew vnto whom a Chriſtian Marchant ought
nine hundred crownes, would haue ſummoned
him for the ſame in Turckie: the Merchant
becauſe he would not be diſcredited, promiſed to
pay the ſaid ſumme within the tearme of three
months, and if he paied it not, he was bound to giue him a
pound of the fleſh of his bodie. The tearme being paſt ſome fifteene
daies, the Iew refuſed to take his money, and demaunded
the pound of fleſh: the ordinarie Iudge of that place appointed
him to cut a iuſt pound of the Chriſtians fleſh, and if he cut either
more or leſſe, then his owne head ſhould be ſmitten off: the
Iew appealed from this ſentence, vnto the chiefe iudge, ſaying:
               
                  IMpoſſible is it to breake the credite of trafficke
amongſt mē without great detriment vnto the
Commonwealth: wherfore no man ought to
bind himſelfe vnto ſuch couenants which hee
cannot or wil not accompliſh, for by that means ſhould
no man feare to be deceaued, and credit being maintained,
euery man might be aſſured of his owne; but ſince
deceit hath taken place, neuer wonder if obligations
are made more rigorous & ſtrict then they were wont,
ſeeing that although the bonds are made neuer ſo
ſtrong, yet can no man be very certaine that he ſhal not
be a loſer. It ſeemeth at the firſt ſight, that it is a thing no
leſſe ſtrange then cruel, to bind a man to pay a pound of
the fleſh of his bodie, for want of money: Surely, in
that it is a thing not vſuall, it appeareth to be ſomewhat
the more admirable, but there are diuers others that are
more cruell, which becauſe they are in vſe ſeeme nothing
terrible at all: as to bind al the bodie vnto a moſt
lothſome priſon, or vnto an intollerable ſlauerie, where

not only the whole bodie but alſo al the ſences and ſpirits
are tormented, the which is commonly practiſed,
not only betwixt thoſe which are either in ſect or Nation
contrary, but alſo euen amongſt thoſe that are all of
one ſect and nation, yea amongſt neighbours and kindred,
& euen amongſt Chriſtians it hath ben ſeene, that
the ſon hath impriſoned the father for monie. Likewiſe,
in the Roman Commonwealth, ſo famous for laws and
armes, it was lawfull for debt, to impriſon, beat, and afflict
with torments the free Cittizens: How manie of
them (do you thinke) would haue thought themſelues
happie, if for a ſmall debt they might haue ben excuſed
with the paiment of a pound of their fleſh? Who ought
then to maruile if a Iew requireth ſo ſmall a thing of
a Chriſtian, to diſcharge him of a good round ſumme?
A man may aske why I would not rather take ſiluer of
this man, then his fleſh: I might alleage many reaſons,
for I might ſay that none but my ſelfe can tell what
the breach of his promiſe hath coſt me, and what I haue
thereby paied for want of money vnto my creditors, of
that which I haue loſt in my credit: for the miſerie or
thoſe men which eſteeme their reputation, is ſo great,
that oftentimes they had rather indure any thing ſecretlie
then to haue their diſcredit blazed abroad, becauſe
they would not be both ſhamed and harmed. Neuertheleſſe,
I doe freely confeſſe, that I had rather loſe a
pound of my fleſh, then my credit ſhould be in any ſort
cracked: I might alſo ſay that I haue need of this fleſh
to cure a friend of mine of a certaine maladie, which is
otherwiſe incurable, or that I would haue it to terrifie
thereby the Chriſtians for euer abuſing the Iewes anie
more hereafter: but I will onelie ſay, that by his obligation
he oweth it me. It is lawfull to kill a ſouldior if he

come vnto the warres but an houre too late, and alſo to
hang a theefe though he ſteale neuer ſo little: is it then
ſuch a great matter to cauſe ſuch a one to pay a pound
of his fleſh, that hath broken his promiſe manie times,
or that putteth another in danger to loſe both credit &
reputation, yea and it may be life and al for greife? were
it not better for him to loſe that which I demand, then
his ſoule, alreadie bound by his faith? Neither am I to
take that which he oweth me, but he is to deliuer it me:
And eſpeciallie becauſe no man knoweth better then
he where the ſame may be ſpared to the leaſt hurt of his
perſon, for I might take it in ſuch a place as hee might
thereby happen to loſe his life: what a matter were it
then, if I ſhould cut of his priuie members, ſuppoſing
that the ſame would altogether weigh a iuſt pound? Or
els his head, ſhould I be ſuffered to cut it off, although
it were with the danger of mine owne life? I beleeue I
ſhould not; becauſe there were as little reaſon therein,
as there could be in the amends wherevnto I ſhould be
bound: or els if I would cut off his noſe, his lips, his
eares, and pull out his eies, to make of them altogether
a pound, ſhould I be ſuffered? Surely I thinke not, becauſe
the obligation dooth not ſpecifie that I ought either
to chuſe, cut, or take the ſame, but that he ought to
giue me a pound of his fleſh. Of euery thing that is
ſold, he which deliuereth the ſame is to make waight,
and he which receiueth, taketh heed that it be iuſt: ſeeing
then that neither the obligation, cuſtome, nor law
doth bind me to cut, or weigh, much leſſe vnto the aboue
mentioned ſatisfaction, I refuſe it all, and require
that the ſame which is due ſhould bee deliuered vnto
me.
               
                  
                  The Chriſtians Anſwere.
                  IT is no ſtrange matter to here thoſe diſpute of equitie
which are themſelues moſt vniuſt; and ſuch as haue
no faith at all, deſirous that others ſhould obſerue the
ſame inuiolable, the which were yet the more tollerable,
if ſuch men would bee contented with reaſonable
things, or at the leaſt not altogether vnreaſonable: but
what reaſon is there that one man ſhould vnto his own
preiudice deſire the hurt of another? as this Iew is content
to loſe nine hundred crownes to haue a pound of
my fleſh, whereby is manifeſtly ſeene the antient and
cruell hate which he beareth not only vnto Chriſtians,
but vnto all others which are not of his ſect: yea, euen
vnto the Turkes, who ouerkindly doe ſuffer ſuch vermine
to dwell amongſt them, ſeeing that this preſumptuous
wretch dare not onely doubt, but appeale from
the iudgement of a good and iuſt Iudge, & afterwards
he would by ſophiſticall reaſons prooue that his abhomination
is equitie: trulie I confeſſe that I haue ſuffered
fifteene daies of the tearme to paſſe, yet who can tell
whether he or I is the cauſe thereof, as for me I thinke
that by ſecret meanes he hath cauſed the money to bee
delaied, which from ſundry places ought to haue come
vnto me before the tearm which I promiſed vnto him;
Otherwiſe, I would neuer haue been ſo raſh as to bind
my ſelfe ſo ſtrictly: but although he were not the cauſe
of the fault, is it therefore ſaid, that he ought to bee ſo
impudent as to goe about to prooue it no ſtrange matter
that he ſhould be willing to be paied with mās fleſh,
which is a thing more natural for Tigres, then men, the
which alſo was neuer heard of: but this diuell in ſhape

of a man, ſeeing me oppreſſed with neceſſitie propounded
this accurſed obligation vnto me. Whereas hee alleageth
the Romanes for an example, why doth he not
as well tell on how for that crueltie in afflicting debtors
ouer greeuouſly, the Commonwealth was almoſt
ouerthrowne, and that ſhortly after it was forbidden to
impriſon men any more for debt. To breake promiſe
is, whē a man ſweareth or promiſeth a thing, the which
he hath no deſire to performe, which yet vpon an extreame
neceſſitie is ſome what excuſable; as for me, I
haue promiſed, and accompliſhed my promiſe, yet not
ſo ſoone as I would; and although I knew the danger
wherein I was to ſatisfie the crueltie of this miſcheeuous
man with the price of my fleſh and blood, yet did
I not flie away, but ſubmitted my ſelfe vnto the diſcretion
of the Iudge who hath iuſtly repreſſed his beaſtlineſſe.
Wherein then haue I falſefied my promiſe, is it
in that I would not, (like him) diſobey the iudgement
of the Iudge? Behold I will preſent a part of my bodie
vnto him, that he may pay himſelfe, according to the
contents of the iudgement, where is then my promiſe
broken? But it is no maruaile if this race be ſo obſtinat
and cruell againſt vs, for they doe it of ſet purpoſe to offend
our God whom they haue crucified: and wherefore?
Becauſe he was holie, as he is yet ſo reputed of
this worthy Turkiſh nation: but what ſhal I ſay? Their
own bible is full of their rebellion againſt God, againſt
their Prieſts, Iudges, & leaders. What did not the verie
Patriarks themſelues, from whom they haue their beginning?
They ſold their brother, and had it not been
for one amongſt them, they had ſlaine him euen for verie
enuie. How manie adulteries and abhominations
were committed amongſt thē? How manie murthers?

                     Abſalon did not he cauſe his brother to be murthered?
Did he not perſecute his father? Is it not for their iniquitie
that God hath diſperſed them, without leauing
them one onlie foot of ground? If then, when they
had newlie receiued their law from God, whē they ſaw
his wonderous works with their eies, and had yet their
Iudges amongſt them, they were ſo wicked, What may
one hope of them now, when they haue neither faith
nor law, but their rapines and vſuries? And that they
beleeue they do a charitable work, when they do ſome
great wrong vnto anie that is not a Iew? It may pleaſe
you then moſt righteous Iudge to conſider all theſe circumſtances,
hauing pittie of him who doth wholy ſubmit
himſelfe vnto your iuſt clemencie: hoping thereby
to be deliuered from this monſters crueltie.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 96.
               
                  Of Palamedes, who was accuſed by Vliſſes that he
meant to betray the Grecians.
               
               
                  AT ſuch time as the Grecians aſſembled themſelues
together to goe vnto the warres of Troy,
Vliſſes King of Ithaca becauſe he would not go
thether, fained himſelfe mad: and the better to
colour his deceit, he himſelfe held the plough tilling
of a barren peece of land, but Palamedes verie well perceiued
his ſubtiltie, and to make it knowne vnto the reſt that
were ſent, he tooke yoong Telemachus, the only ſonne of Vliſſes
and Penelope, and laied him in the way where the horſes
and plough which Vliſſes did driue ſhould paſse, who turning
the horſes aſide becauſe he would not hurt his ſonne, his diſsembling

was diſcouered, and he conſtrained to goe vnto the warres
with the reſt of the Grecian Princes. Wherefore they being at
the ſiege of Troy, Vliſſes the better to bee reuenged of him,
found the meanes to burie a certaine quantitie of gold vnder
the tent or pauillion of Palamedes, at that corner which ſtood
next vnto Troy. Within a while after he accuſed him, ſaying
that he had receiued treaſure from the Troians to betray the
Grecians. After long diſputations and much arguing, the hidden
gold was found. But yet Palamedes did ſtoutly defend
himſelfe againſt the accuſation of Vliſſes, who ſaid thus:
               O Immortall gods, O heauen, O earth, and you other
Elements, O you planets and ſtarres, true witneſſes
of my iuſt ſorrow, and you men partakers of this great
miſchiefe, (if it had not ben diſcouered) giue eare vnto
the words, which vnto my great griefe I am conſtrained
to vtter. Who would euer haue thought that anie
of the Grecian princes had had ſo vild a heart as that
he would for gold ſeeke to betray his companions, together
with their allies and ſubiects? but alaſſe contrarie
to the expectation of all, the ſame is entred into the
heart of one onlie. O gods, our conſeruors, I render vnto
you immortall thanks, for bringing me (in a manner
againſt my will) vnto theſe warres, ſeeing that I muſt
be your inſtrument to ſaue all this armie, pretending to
performe a moſt iuſt cauſe, and yet neuertheleſſe betraied
by one of the princes thereof. It is not ſaid in vain,
that thoſe which ſerue the gods, doe by their grace obtaine
wiſdome, and become familiar with them; euen
ſo I, who from my youth haue beene ſo happie as to admire,
contemplate, and honour their deities, haue receiued
this recompence therefore, as that my heart dooth
moſt commonlie foretell me what miſchiefes ſhall enſue:

therefore I was in doubt to come vnto this warre,
ſeeing that I did as it were perceiue that all the armie
ſhould be in danger to bee loſt by Treaſon: but it hath
pleaſed the gods to make me the meanes to diſcloſe the
traitor; but muſt I tel who it is? Yes ſurely, for our countries
weale is to be preferred before all friendſhip, profit,
or any other benefit: Wherefore I proteſt vnto the
gods, and before this honourable aſſemblie, that if mine
owne ſonne were partaker of this Treaſon, & none but
my ſelfe did know therof, I would not only accuſe him,
but I would alſo caſt the firſt ſtone at him to ſtone him
to death, as well for my countries ſafetie as for becauſe
he had in ſuch ſort ſtained our ſtock: neuertheleſſe noble
princes and you Grecian people, I beſeech you for
the reward of this my ſeruice, that he whom I ſhall trulie
name may ſerue for an euerlaſting example of the
Grecians clemencie by ſauing his life, the which amongſt
great princes is nothing ſo much eſteemed as
honour: for the remembrance of his fault will be a puniſhment
ſeuere inough, and the granting vnto him his
life, will inforce him to employ the ſame to achieue
ſome notable act, thereby to extinguiſh the memorie of
his paſſed lault, ſo that your pittie ſhall bring you a double
frute, that is to ſay, profit, and glorie. Grant then my
requeſt O you Grecians, whereof I am not vnworthie,
conſidering the maniefold good ſeruices which I haue
done for you, by the which I doe coniure you, as alſo
by thoſe which I may hereafter performe, if you doe
bind me by this gracious fauour which I doe intreat of
you. Alaſſe, I perceiue you are all ſilent, but I know not
whether it is becauſe you are aſtoniſhed at the ſtrangeneſſe
of the matter, or els (which the gods forbid) becauſe
none of you wil condiſcend vnto the interceſſion

which I make for him whom you doe not yet know?
If you will not whollie graunt my requeſt herein, yet at
the leaſt aſſure me that the chaſtiſement ſhall not bee equall
to the crime, but that the rigor of law ſhall be mittigated
by lenitie. You make no anſwer at all, Grecians,
wherefore I feare me leaſt this danger wil draw you vnto
ouer great rigor: ſurely the fault is great, but in pardoning
the ſame your mercie ſhall bee the more eſteemed,
for it is a common thing to pardon ſmal offences,
and it behooueth thoſe that are noble and great men to
pardon thoſe faults as are of great importance ſuch as
this is; Truſt me, if you continue your ſilence anie longer,
you will prouoke me alſo to hold my peace, for as I
would be glad to ſaue the whole armie, ſo would I bee
ſorrie to cauſe the death of anie of the princes. But I
plainlie perceiue that I muſt take your ſilence as a token
of your conſent, and ſo conſequentlie that the zeale of
the Commonwealth and the ſafetie of all you, ought to
be preferred before the aſſurance which I require: mark
then my words well without paſſion, which I feare to
bee too true: It is ſo that ſome of our ſecret friends
which are in Troy (whom I would not credite, if I did
not thorow lie know their integritie) haue aſſured mee
that Palamedes during theſe ordinarie skirmiſhes, hath
vnder the coulor of fighting with the enemies, contracted
with them to burne the Grecian Nauie, to the end
that the armie being void of all ſuccours or hope, ſhold
he laid open for the enemy, and to bring the ſame to
paſſe, he hath receaued great ſummes of gold from thē.
It behooueth you therefore (O you Grecians) to make
diligent ſearch, and to be thorowly informed whether
the accuſation be true, or that the Troians haue fained
the ſame onlie of ſet purpoſe, to weaken our forces by

the loſſe of a man ſo famous, or to ſet vs at diſcord together,
or whether Palamedes haue taken this gold for anie
other intēt, as for to deminiſh their ſtore by ſo much
or els to worke ſome other ſtratagem therby. I thought
it good to declare this openly in the preſence of al men,
to the end that ſome aſſuaging the rage of the reſt, you
might altogether with one mind endeuor to ſift out the
truth of the deed, of the which labour Palamedes might
eaſe you by confeſſing the matter, and for what intent
he hath receiued this coine, if hee will not haue vs to
ſearch his ſhip, or els where, for the ſaid gold, the which
being once found without his confeſſion, would greatlie
increaſe his crime. Wherefore aduiſe him in the way
of friendſhip not to imagine that the ſame can be hidden
from Argos, which ſignifieth no other thing then
the eies of the multitude, who doe ſee manie things,
which are ſuppoſed to be verie ſecret. O how miſerable
are thoſe that perſeuere in miſchiefe, becauſe they are
perſuaded the ſame ſhall neuer be manifeſt! For euen
when they thinke they are moſt ſafeſt, then oftentimes
either they themſelues, or els thoſe in whom they put
moſt confidence, doe bewray them▪ in ſuch ſort, as ouer
late repentance and ſuddaine puniſhment doe both fall
vpon them at once. But this is the miſchiefe, that ambition
perſuadeth thoſe which follow the ſame, that all
things how wicked ſoeuer they be, are lawfull, and that
abundance doth nothing but increaſe auarice, which of
it ſelfe is inſatiable. Doe you then Palamedes ſhew your▪
ſelfe to be free from theſe vices, and in ſhewing by effectuall
reaſons that your intent was ſound, you may free
vs from this ſuſpition, conſidering that if you do otherwiſe,
the Grecians are no leſſe readie to puniſh obſtinate
traitors, then couragious to fight againſt their Troian enamies.

And let not paſſion O you Grecians cauſe you
to forget my former words ſpoken of pure zeale, onlie
for your preſeruation.
               
                  Palamedes his anſwere.
                  O Radhamant, Minos, and Eacus, iuſt iudges of the infernall
places, O Plute, and Proſerpine, Monarks of
the darkeſome manſions, thou Nemeſis goddeſſe of reuenge,
and you helliſh hags, Alecte, Theſephone, and Megera,
tormenters of ſinfull ſoules, ceaſſe your torturing
of Tantalus, Ixion, Siſiphus, the Belides, Prometheus, and all
the other damned ſoules in perpetuall torments, to employ
your iuſtice, your power, your reuenge, and al your
extreameſt furie againſt this peruerſe wicked Traitor,
who harboreth no leſſe miſchiefe in his heart then malice
in his tongue. O immortall gods, how can you ſuffer
ſuch iniquitie? O earth why doe you not open vnder
the feet of this abominable wretch to ſwallow him
vp? O you worthie Grecians, how can you hope for
happie ſucceſſe in your moſt iuſt warre, ſo long as this
diuell in the ſhape of a man remaineth amongſt you?
Who is he, that can beware of his Treaſons? who can
euer defend himſelfe from his malicious practiſes?
Which doe worthelie perſecute me, in that I am the
cauſe that this poiſon in mans likeneſſe is come with vs
to infect the ſoules, courages, and the noble nature of
the Grecians, animating them vniuſtlie againſt thoſe,
who are both iuſt and righteous: Alaſſe, it is a true ſaieng,
that a good man is no longer in ſafety then he pleaſeth
a traitor: the which ſaieng may bee verefied by me,
who thinking that I had done well for all the Grecian
Nation, haue prouoked againſt my ſelfe the vniuſt vengeance

of this miſchieuous man, who indeuoureth to
worke my ſhamefull ouerthrow. Forbeare a while, O
you Grecians, the vniuſt rage which you haue conceaued
againſt me, by the moſt venomous tongue of Vliſſes,
vntill that I make you know what falſhood he vſeth
againſt me, wherein he hath not failed to employ all his
diueliſh ſubtiltie: Firſt I would haue you to conſider
how in the beginning of his oration, he ſeeketh to rauiſh
the minds of the hearers vnto a certaine admiration,
with a deſire ſpeedilie to vnderſtand that which he
would ſay; then ſeeing their ſoules ſo doubtfull, he ſtirreth
them vp vnto anger and fear perſuading them that
they are all in great danger; afterwards by a fained hipocriſie,
he would make them beleeue that he is familiar
with the gods, foreſeeing all future miſchiefes; but
in effect he foreſeeth none at all, but thoſe which himſelfe
intendeth to doe (as he hath cauſed this gold to be
hidden where it was found) and laſtlie he bringeth an
example ſaieng: that in ſuch a caſe he would not ſpare
his owne ſonne, by that meanes indeuouring to perſuade
thē to ſtone me; hauing once imprinted it in your
hearts, he faineth himſelf deſirous to ſaue me, knowing
verie well that all his counterfait ſpeeches tend to no other
end but onlie to animate you againſt me, neuertheleſſe
fearing leaſt he had moued you vnto ſome pittie,
he firſt ſetteth downe the chaſtiſement before hee
nameth me, & then he ſomewhat doubtfullie affirmeth
his ſaieng to be true, vrging me to confeſſe that which
neuer was: Whereof I take to witneſſe both the celeſtiall,
and infernal gods, iuſt reuengers of committed treaſons,
imploring their moſt iuſt vengeance againſt him
that did neuer before this preſent houre know that anie
gold ſent from the Troians was in our campe. But you

may beleeue (O you Grecians) that Vliſſes to be reuēged
of me for diſcouering his deceit, when he fained himſelfe
mad becauſe he would not come vnto the warres,
that he I ſay (as himſelfe affirmeth) hauing beene oftentimes
within the cittie of Troy, where he hath his intelligences,
did bring this gold from thence, and whileſt I
was in the battaile he did burie the ſame vnder my pauillion;
the which as it is not the firſt treaſon which he
hath plotted, ſo will it not be the laſt that he intendeth
to performe, if you do but ſuffer him therein, for ſure he
is one of thoſe, who in doing euill doe imagine their euill
deeds will neuer be eſpied, becauſe he hath ſo great
a confidence in his foxlike ſleights, that there is no wickedneſſe
which he dare not attempt: and the gods grant
O Grecians, that he doe not one day commit the ſame
treaſon which he falſelie obiecteth againſt me. To conclude,
I pray you worthie Grecians thorowlie to conſider
all my paſſed actions, and to beleeue that I had rather
endure the cruelleſt death that might be imagined,
then I ſhould euer haue had the thought to commit anie
Treaſon. Be you then aſſured, that what good or
hurt ſoeuer you ſhall doe vnto me, it ſhall be done vnto
ſuch a one as neuer thought vpon anie thing but what
was for the common good of our countrie, the which I
haue euermore preferred before mine own cōmoditie.
                  Notwithſtanding the deniall of Palamedes, hee was
ſtoned.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 97.
               
                  Of the Romane Dictator, who would haue put the
maſter of the horſemen to death, becauſe he fought
againſt his commandement.
               
               
                  
                  
                     LVcius Papirius Curſor, being created the two
and fortith Dictator in Rome, to make warre
againſt the Samnites, Quintus Fabius Rutilianus
was made Maiſter of the horſe, being
a yoong and valiant gentleman. It chanced after
a certaine battaile, and the taking of ſome citties, that the
Dictator went to Rome to marke the diſpoſition of the aire,
thereby to know what lucke they ſhould haue, leauing the ſaid
Maiſter of the horſe in the campe, with expreſse commaundement
that he ſhould not attempt any thing vntill his returne;
But he being departed, there was ſo faire an occaſion offered, as
Fabius gaue the battaile, and won it wholy, afterwards hauing
cauſed all the armes of the dead enemies to be burned, hee
wrot vnto the Senat of his victorie, neglecting the Dictator;
who being returned vnto the campe, hee deliuered him into
the hands of the Lictor, to bee beaten with rods, and to ſtrike off
his head, but as his apparrell was pulling off hee eſcaped, hiding
him amongſt the ſouldiours, and afterwards by night fled vnto
Rome, whether the Dictator followed him, and hauing cauſed
him to bee brought before his iudgement ſeat, hee would
haue condemned him againe, but the father of Fabius accompanying
him in mourning weeds, and hauing recommended
him vnto the people, tooke vpon him the defence of his ſonne,
ſaying.
               HOw great the miſerie of man is, may appeare by
the linage of the Fabij, who haue ben euermore
troubled for the zeale which they had vnto the
Commonwealth. Firſt, Quintus Fabius hauing done manie
worthie acts, as well at home with his Counſell, as
abroad in the wars, by his courage, died in fighting
againſt the Tuſcanes, where all the Fabians were noted
to be famous, and eſpeciallie Marcus Fabius, who cauſed

the Romane ſouldiors to ſweare not to giue ouer fighting
vnleſſe they were conquerors, and being ſeconded
by Ceſon, Fabius making head againſt his enemie,
brought the Romans backe againe, who contrarie to
their oath were readie to turne their backs, which in the
end was the cauſe of the victorie: and becauſe all that linage
was carefull to cheriſh, and heale the wounded
ſouldiors, they were eſteemed and ſuſpected to bee Plebeians.
I ceaſſe to report what they did both before and
after: but I will onelie tell how they tooke vpon them
an enterpriſe that they alone would defend Rome frō
the inſolencie of the Veians, and there iſſued forth together
three hundred and ſix kinsmen, who died all in
the ſaid defence, and there remained no more of all the
Fabians aliue but my father, that was in Rome, who alaſſe
hath ſince that time repleniſhed the world, and reſtored
vnto the Commonwealth, this no leſſe miſerable
then noble linage. How much better had it ben for
him to haue died with the reſt, if we muſt alwaies for
our good ſeruice be ſubiect to the reproches of ſome,
or to the perſecution of other, or rather ſince we are no
leſſe troubled in reſiſting the malice of the Cittizens
then wee are in fighting againſt our enemies; behold
my ſonne here who hauing vanquiſhed the enemie, is
adiudged to die by the Dictator: and wherefore? Becauſe
hee hath done that which the Commonwealth
not onlie deſired, but alſo that which it moſt ſtood in
need of: He is the conqueror, & now alas it is thought
expedient that a ſhamefull and violent death ſhould be
a reward of his conqueſt, at the wil and pleaſure of one
onlie man. The Patricians and people reioice at his victorie,
enioying the benefit thereof, the ſouldior is partaker
of the ſame, and the Dictator alone would haue

him to die, as if the Commonwealths good were his
hurt, or as if a Patricians renoume were his reproch, or
as if the glory of the maſter of the horſe did not increaſe
the worthineſſe of the Dictator▪ Surely, if the Romans
take this courſe (which the gods forbid) they need no
other enemies but themſelues. Marcus Furius Camillus,
that great protector of Rome, did not onelie ſuccour
Lucius Fuluius (who fought againſt his intention) but alſo
made him partaker of his victorie, and ſhortlie after
did chuſe him for his companion in the warres of Tuſcula,
ſuch was the magnanimitie of this great Roman,
redeemer of his countrie, to excuſe the faults which are
committed by youth: for he did verie well know, that
there was no leſſe courage in him to pardon a great offence,
then to combat and ouercome a great armie of
enemies. Doe you then noble Dictator imitate that
moſt worthie man, Diſpiſe not the whole Senat that requeſteth
you, refuſe not the Patricians, the Tribuns, &
the people alſo, that intreat you, nor yet me a miſerable
old man and father to this poore yoong man, who yet
may accompliſh manie worthie and good ſeruices for
his countrie, if together with his life, you cut not off
the courſe of his vertuous acts; conſent thē vnto ſome
of our requeſts, or els graunt vnto vs all his life that is
worthie to liue, and as you yourſelfe haue had him in
verie great eſtimatiō, making him General of the horſe,
ſo now giue him his life, and bind vs all vnto you for
the ſame▪ If not, you will conſtraine me to appeale vnto
the Tribuns, and to haue recourſe vnto the people of
Rome, who may doe more then your Dictatorſhip. I
will ſee if you wil giue place vnto ſuch an appeale, as did
the Romane King Tullius Hoſtilius? or ſince you cannot
triumph ouer the enemies, whether you will violentlie

triumph ouer the death of the conqueror? I haue ben
Dictator as well as you, but yet did I neuer offend anie
priuate ſouldiour, or other inferiour Plebeyan; for I
know how that dignitie or office is giuen to preſerue
the Romanes, and not to deſtroy or hurt anie of them;
how much leſſe then a captaine of good deſert in the
Commonwealth? A man may hereby ſee what difference
there is betwixt the modeſtie of our anceſtors,
and the pride of this preſentage, for beſides that deed
of Furius Camillus, it is knowne that Quintus Cincinatus
vſed no cruelty againſt Lucius Minutius, for freeing himſelfe
from that place where by his raſhneſſe hee was beſieged,
but left him Legat in the campe, euen then when
he went to Rome. Yea, the people who haue all authoritie
doe neuer condemne anie captaine vnto death, as
it appeareth by Virginius and Sergius, and diuers others,
who hauing loſt battailes, camps, and ſouldiours, haue
ben thereof acquited, or at the moſt but fined in a certaine
ſumme of money, where as now one that ought
as a conquerour to triumph, is threatened by the Dictator
with rods and the axe: what would hee then doe if
he had loſt the battaile? Would he not trow you condemne
all the Fabians, and al the ſouldiors which were
eſcaped from the battaile? Now when this conqueror
ought to be a ſpectacle of happineſſe vnto all the cittie,
being accompanied with his friends to render thankes
vnto the gods for his victorie, they ſtand here round about
him to bewaile his miſerie, and to beg mercie of
the Dictator to ſaue his life. O gods will you thus forſake
him, who by your fauour hath vanquiſhed the enemies
of your temples? And you Patricians can you
leaue him that is by birth ſuch as you are? And you
ſouldiors, will you abandon him that hath led you vnto

to all martiall glorie? And you people can you condemne
him that is yet in danger of his life, hauing alreadie
aduentured the ſame for the ſafetie of your houſes,
and the ſepulchres of your anceſtors? For the defence
of you, your wines, children, and whatſoeuer els
is moſt deare and acceptable vnto you? Will you ſuffer
the enemies to haue ſuch a pleaſure done them, O you
ſouldiours, as that your captaine, and he vnder whom
you haue conquered, ſhould bee puniſhed euen by his
countrimen, as the moſt pernicious Traitor that euer
was in the world? O immortall gods, let me die, before
ſo manie miſeries doe happen.
               
                  The anſwere of Papirius.
                  
                     BEleeue me Fabius I do greatlie pitty thy ſonnes
youth, and more thy age: yet all that can only
moue me to compaſſion, but not to pardon a
fault ſo vnworthie to be forgiuen; the which I
would moſt willinglie doe, if the iniurie had been offered
vnto me, but being don vnto the gods, to the Commonwealth,
to the Magiſtrat, and to martiall diſcipline,
what can I doe leſſe (ſeeing O you Romanes you haue
thought me worthie of the higheſt authoritie) then execute
condigne puniſhment therefore? Will you that
for one mans ſake alone, both the warres and the Magiſtrat
ſhould loſe, the one his authoritie, and the other
his diſcipline? Were it not better that one man alone
ſhould die, then all the reſt aboue ſaid ſhould decay▪ As
the Fabians haue in times paſt done manie worthie
facts, ſo alſo are they not free from a number of faults;
for I doubt whether it was vertue or raſhnes in them,
to vndertake alone ſuch an enterpriſe againſt the Veians,

thereby depriuing the Commonwealth at one inſtant
of ſo manie men of that worth as you eſteeme
them: it cannot be denied but their ouerweening to
encreaſe their owne reputation, did greatlie deminiſh
the Commonwealth and much aduantage the enemie
therof. But why doe you not as well ſpeake of the three
Fabians that were ſent Embaſſadors vnto the Gaules to
Cluſa? Was not their raſhneſſe the cauſe of the ruin of
Rome? As the like might haue happened by this man
here, had he not ben more fortunate then well aduiſed.
And thus much further I will ſay, that by how much
they which offend are of great birth and noble parentage,
by ſo much are they more worthie of puniſhment,
for their greatneſſe maketh the fault a long time after
more famous, and being left vnpuniſhed, they incite a
number of others to doe the like: Doe you not thinke
that Marcus Manlius would els haue forgiuē the youthfull
follie and valiant towardneſſe of his ſonne? whom
he would rather put to death then it ſhould be ſaid that
by him were loſt the ancient militarie diſcipline. In like
ſort Brutus the author of the Romane freedome, preferred
the ſame before his childrens liues, who were executed
by iuſtice. Doe you imagine Fabius, that they loned
not their children ſo well as you? Surely they did:
but it ſeemeth that you doe leſſe affect the Commonwealth
then they: for here you care not to ſee the Empire
of the Romane people wronged, which ſurelie is
inuincible, ſo long as it ſhall follow the ancient cuſtomes,
obſerue militarie diſcipline, and maintaine the
authoritie of the Dictator, a moſt high office, & the onlie
and laſt refuge, when all other remedies faile. As for
me I cannot make this authoritie perpetuall, yet I will
beware that by me it be not contaminated, as alſo I deſire

that the ſoueraigntie of the Tribuns (being of it
ſelfe inuiolable) would not indeuour by their interceſſions,
to violate the Romane Empire. I doe likewiſe intreat
the people that they would not in me ſuffer the
power of the Dictator to decay; to the end that hereafter
they doe not too late repent when they ſhall know
that by their fault the ſouldiour will no more obey the
Centurion, nor the Centurion the martiall Tribune,
nor the Tribune the Legat, nor the Legat the Conſull
nor the Maiſter of the horſe the Dictator, and that no
bodie will ſhew anie dutie at all either to men, or to the
gods. All the reſt as Lucius Fuluius, and Lucius Minutius,
were the companions of their Colleagues, wherefore it
is not ſaid in vaine, that hee which hath a companion,
hath a maiſter, they then fought not againſt the commandement,
but againſt the will of their Colleagues,
as being equall with them in authoritie. But who can
denie that I had not the power, and that I did not command
him not to fight during my abſence. The yoong
Torquatus was iudged to die by his father onelie for hazarding
his owne perſon, and you would excuſe Fabius
who by his raſhneſſe did indanger all the campe, yea,
the whole Commonwealth; for the more you priſe his
victorie, the more is the danger apparent wherevnto he
brought the Commonwealth. If ſuch faults may bee
borne withall, who will not henceforth ſticke to runne
from his Enſigne? Who will haue care to come when
he is commanded? Wherefore ſhall not the ſouldiour
fight againſt his captaines will, when the maiſter of the
horſe hath not onlie foughtē contrarie to the commandement
of the Dictator, but alſo in contempt of his authoritie
hath burned the enemies, and did not once aduertiſe
him of anie thing thereof after the deed? But

hath indeuoured to animate the ſouldiours to defend
him againſt the Dictator, and afterwards did by force
eſcape from the Lictor, and would not obey anie ſummons,
but fled vnto Rome, ſtirring vp the People, Tribunes,
and Patricians to fauour him. I know not what
els to ſay, ſauing that (manifeſt tyrannie excepted) there
could not a more hainous crime haue ben committed.
So that to conclude, I will ſay, that you may by force
ſaue him from death, but as for me, I declare and proteſt
that I neither will nor may acquite him.
                  Know that at theſe words, all the people began to
intreat the Dictator for his life, wherefore without pardoning
the fault, he frankly gaue him vnto the people.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 98.
               
                  Of the diſherited ſonne, who claimed to haue his inheritance
againe of the heires of him, vnto whom
his father had giuen them.
               
               
                  A Certaine man diſherited his ſonne vpon a iuſt
cauſe, and gaue his lands vnto another man, who
lying dead ſick, ſaid that he would haue the inheritance
which was giuen him to return to the diſherited
ſon. Whervpō ſome few daies after he died
before the notarie (which he had ſent for) was come, ſo as although
there was nothing left in writing, yet did not there want
witneſſes to teſtifie for the ſaid ſonne, who demanded his inheritance,
ſaying:
               
                  
WHo is he ſo ignorant which will beleeue that
my father would euer haue diſhērited mee in
good earneſt, but that he rather made this deceaſſed
man to promiſe that hee ſhould reſtore my land
vnto me after a certaine time; for the kindnes of fathers
doth alwaies exceed the malice of the children, becauſe
that naturall loue is more readie to deſcend then
to aſcend, as well for the inſtabilitie of youth as for the
conſtancy that remaineth in age, who knoweth & doth
well remember that hee hath done amiſſe in his youth:
and like as God naturallie loueth man farre more then
man loueth him (the which is knowne by his deuine
bountie towards vs, and our ingratitude towards him)
ſo the father may well be angrie with his ſon, but what
ſhow ſoeuer he maketh therof, yet can he not hate him,
for it ſhould be contrarie to the law of nature: who wil
then imagine that my father (being by nature mild and
courteous towards all men) could euer haue ben ſo cruell
againſt his owne ſonne? All theſe reaſons aboueſaid
are moſt manifeſt, but were it ſo that my father had
abſolutely giuen away his poſſeſſions, and mine inheritance
vnto this dead man, yet did he before his death
reſtore the ſame againe vnto me, being either in conſcience
or kindneſſe mooued therevnto: but had hee not
more reaſon and libertie to giue it to me, thē my father
had to take it from me? You ſay that nothing appeareth
in writing, for what end ſhold writings ſerue without
witneſſes? Doe we not know that the paper endureth
all things, and the parchment much more? wherefore
the word of the teſtator and the authoritie of the
witneſſes is ſufficient. What if the Notarie after he had
made the Will were dead, muſt we not then haue had

our recourſe vnto witneſſes? Wherefore ſeeing the notary
did not come time inough (it may be becauſe ſome
of you ſtaied him) ſhal not the witneſſe of ſuch perſons
as are worthie to be beleeued, ſerue the turne, who did
heare the deceaſſed man ſay that he would haue the ſaid
land to returne vnto me, and for that effect did he ſend
for the Notarie. It is at the end of the life, that a man
doth chieflie ſeek to diſcharge his conſcience, and then
or els neuer is the truth ſpoken: wherefore it is moſt euident
that this inheritance doth infalliblie appertaine
vnto me: and therefore I do demand to haue the ſame
by friendſhip, and if ſo it may not be, then muſt I requeſt
it by Iuſtice.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  YOur father is not the firſt that hath diſherited his
ſonne, it may be becauſe he was more honeſt then
you, and there is no likelihood and leſſe certaintie
that hee hath cauſed this man to reſtore vnto you the
inheritance, but if it bee ſo as you ſay, then prooue it,
for there is no reaſon to credit your words being ſuch
an one as you haue compelled your father to doe that
which you cannot beleeue; yet to prooue that this is ſo,
the effect maketh mention. Wee beleeue that your fathers
clemencie was great, which (it may be) was the
chiefeſt cauſe why hee deſired to depriue you of all
meanes to become anie more vicious, for ſome ſuch as
you are doe liue better when they are poore, then when
they are rich, wherefore you father in this was deſirous
to imitate our God, who doth all things for the beſt, although
our nature is ſo corrupt as wee cannot comprehend
the ſame. Likewiſe wee muſt conſider, that the father

is not eaſilie brought to hate his ſonne, but when
he is inforced therevnto, then is he more hard to be intreated
or reconciled then a ſtranger, & the more ſlow
men are to become angrie, the more great and terrible
is their wrath when it happ
                        •
                     eth; euen ſo hath it beene
with your father, whom you affirme to bee naturallie
mild and courteous: thinke then what violence he did
vnto himſelf, before he had taken this irreuocable reſolution
againſt you. So that your reaſons ſeeme verie friuolous,
and chieflie when you ſay that this deceaſſed
man (being prouoked by the foreſaid reaſons, or by his
owne conſcience) hath reſtored vnto you thoſe lands
and goods which your father gaue vnto him: his conſcience
could not be burdened, ſeeing that nothing can
bee more trulie gotten then that which commeth by
gift: likewiſe, therein he ſhould but alter the meaning
of your father and his benefactor, for it is verie likely
that he did giue thoſe goods vnto him and his heires,
why then ſhould he ſeeke to defraud them to giue it vnto
ſuch a one who by his owne father was iudged vnworthie
thereof? His ingratitude thereby would bee
too manifeſt: but had he therin ben ſo aduiſed, yet hath
not the effect therof inſued (whether it were Gods doing
or his owne meaning that ſo it ſhould not be.) For
men in the anguiſh of their ſickneſſe doe oftentimes
ſpeake manie things which they would not in any ſort
performe. The witneſſes may beare teſtimonie of his
words, but not of his Will, the which alſo ought to bee
of no force, ſince the patient liued but a few daies after▪
for a true and lawful teſtament ought to be made when
a man is of good diſpoſition and memorie as well in
bodie as in mind▪ Laſtlie, ſince nothing is written, there
needeth no witneſſes, but he that could haue beene a

witneſſe of that which hee would haue declared if the
Notarie had ben there preſent, ſhould perchance haue
heard him tell the reaſons why your father gaue him
thoſe goods, as alſo vnto whom he meant to leaue thē,
but hauing ſaid neither one thing nor another, they are
ours as rightfull heires: and therefore wee will defend
them by all poſſible and lawfull meanes.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 99.
               
                  Of two Citizens that were tortured, the one for demanding
a debt, the other for denying the ſame.
               
               
                  THe law commandeth, that all periured
perſons ſhould be put to death. Wherevpon
it happened that one Citizen ſummoned
another, ſaying that he ought him a
certaine ſumme of money, the which hee
ſaid he had lent him vpon his own word,
and therevpon hee tooke a ſolemne oath
before the iuſtice that his ſaying was true: the other denied that
he euer receiued any money of him, and did likewiſe ſwear that
he ought him nothing, ſo that neceſsarly one of the twaine muſt
be forſworne, and ſo conſequently guiltie and worthie of death.
Wherevpon the defendant as being moſt ſuſpected, is put vnto
the racke: but he ſtill affirmed that he ought nothing. The
plaintife was afterwards likewiſe racked, who did alſo ſtill aduouch
that he did owe it him. Neuertheleſſe, after they had
both twaine ben tortured three ſeuerall times, they were put
both together in priſon, where they agreed no more then they
did before, but each of them particularly made a requeſt, The
firſt ſaid that he was content to acquite the debt iuſtly due, that
he might be deliuered; the other ſaid that he wat content to pay

that which he neuer ought, to com forth of priſon; but the luſtice
would haue ſent them backe vnto the rack, vntill the truth
were knowne. From the which ſentence they both appealed,
ſaying:
               
                  THere ought to bee ſome difference betweene
Iuſtice and crueltie, and yet (O you Iudges)
you make no difference at all, for you vſe the
innocent as badlie as the offender; & which is
farre more worſe, you take away the credit that ought
to be amongſt Cittizens, & the vſe of ſuch entercourſe
as they are to haue one with another, for there had ben
ſome other meanes to haue executed Iuſtice, without
bringing vs into ſuch extream danger, where it may be
the innocent ſhall periſh: each of vs doe ſay that we are
innocent, neuertheles, though one muſt needs be guiltie,
yet can we not both be faultie: What then if the innocent,
as being the weakeſt ſhould yeeld, and confeſſe
the fault which he neuer committed, chuſing for the
leaſt euill rather to die once wrongfullie, then to be any
more tortured, and afterwards to liue either a maimed
cripple, or to pine away with paine, & ſo it may chance
that the guiltles ſhal ſuffer for the guilty, loſing both his
life, goods, and reputation, & on the contrary, the malefactor
ſhall haue both his life and credit ſaued, and liue
in good account to the great detriment of the Cōmonwealth;
for being accuſtomed vnto torments, who ſhall
let him to ſwear that any man is indebted vnto him, or
that he is not indebted at al, when no man dare once offer
to proue it vpon him, ſo that there ſhall bee no villany
which he dare not cōmit. If you ſay that he ſhall neuer
haue any great credit, but that he ſhall be ſtil ſuſpected,
as well amongſt the Citizens as with the Iudges,

you may ſay alſo that the innocent though hee remaine
the conqueror, yet ſhall he be likewiſe ſuſpected, & the
loſſe of his reputation ſhall be the reward for his maintaining
the ſame with ſuch exceeding torments. Wherfore
(ſauing the reuerence we owe vnto your lordſhips)
we ſuppoſe that it had beene better not to haue proceeded
vnto theſe extremities, but before you had cauſed
either of vs to ſweare particularlie, you ſhould haue demanded
whether anie of vs would haue ben content to
ſtand vnto the word or oath of his companion, ſhewing
in general what danger the offender did bring both his
body and ſoule into. Likewiſe, both the one and the other
might haue been examined touching the circumſtances
of the matter, to ſee which of thē would come
neereſt vnto the truth, & alſo you might haue been thorowly
informed what the life and reputation of either
of them had ben, that thereby you might haue ben able
to make ſome ſound coniecture of the truth. But firſt
of al the defendants oath ought to haue ben taken, who
hauing ſworn that he ought nothing, the plaintif might
haue ben adiudged to prooue his debt, or els to loſe the
ſame, but making vs both to ſwear without knowing either
the one or the other, the offender hath taken his
oath the more boldly, thinking by forſwearing himſelf
to be acquited therof, yet he hath therby brought both
himſelfe and the innocent into trouble and pain. But it
ſeemeth that this matter hath been expreſſely handeled
for this intent, which cannot bee tearmed iuſtice, but
crueltie, for as much crueltie is it to torment an innocent,
as it is iuſtice to puniſh an offēder, & it were better
to leaue a wicked man vnpuniſhed, then to torture ſuch
a one as hath not deſerued it: notwithſtanding, we ſee
that you had rather haue the good man tormēted▪ then

the malefactor ſhould eſcape vntouched, which ſhould
be yet ſomewhat tollerable, if (as I haue before ſaid) it
were not likely that (proceeding in ſuch ſort as you do)
the innocent ſhould ſuffer for the offender, although it
were far more reaſonable to pardon one bad man, then
to put a good man in danger: for Iuſtice if it muſt needs
be conſtrained to yeeld, it ought alwaies to bee rather
vnto clemencie then cruelty. Let then (you worthy iudges)
the one be pardoned, for the others ſake, becauſe
the offender hath alreadie endured ſufficiently for the
expiation of his offence, and the innocent hath ſuffered
too much for being no better aduiſed before hee
brought himſelfe into ſuch danger: and let that money
which is now in ſtrife be giuen to the poore, ſeeing that
the one offereth to pay it, and the other to forgiue it. In
ſo doing, you ſhall doe more iuſtly, then in continuing
that courſe which was vnhappily begun.
               
                  The Anſwere.
                  IT is ſaid that Charlemaine ſhifting the Saxons into
Flanders, and the Flemmings into Saxonie, made of
one deuill twaine, ſo you would perſuade vs to do the
like, by redoubling a ſcandale that hath happened in
the Commonwealth you doe feele it, and in a manner
your ſelues haue cōfeſſed it, but becauſe you haue both
twaine no deſire to be tortured any more, you will not
confeſſe the whole. Did not you your ſelues ſay, that if
the offender doe eſcape, he will be worſe then a plague
in the Commonwealth, & yet you doe openly purpoſe
to procure his deliuerance, for one of you twaine muſt
needs be the man, but why doe you not in like ſort ſay,
that if you bee both deliuered, it be hooueth all men to
take heed both of the one and the other, ſeeing that it
cannot be certainly knowne who is the lewdeſt or the

belt; our intention is to purge the Commonwealth by
cutting off a wicked wretch, and you indeuour that we
ſhould leaue twaine therein, of whom a man cannot
know which is the beſt: who then may not ſay that the
Commonwealth is corrupted? There is no examining
here either of follie or ignorance, but of capitall crime,
ſome do think the one to be the offender, and ſome do
iudge the other, ſo that although there be but one malefactor,
yet it ſeemeth that there is twaine, which is verie
vnſeemely: were it not then better if the worſt ſhould
happen, that two ſhould ſuffer, then to ſee the whole citie
a long time ſcandalized? Let him then which hath
the beſt right determine to maintaine the ſame vntill he
hath vanquiſhed the other, or els vntil he hath yeelded
the laſt gaſpe; and if you remain both conſtant vnto the
death, or at the leaſt the good be conſtant, and the bad
obſtinate, you ſhall be examples of fortitude, and your
death ſhall witnes vnto ſtrangers how much our nation
doth rather deſire to indure any other miſchiefe thē to
be diſhonored; but if you ſhould both remain aliue you
ſhould haue no honor at all, and we leſſe credit to ſuffer
two ſuch amongſt vs, of whom it is impoſſible to know
whether is the honeſt or diſhoneſt mā. It were as good
for you to confeſſe that you are both bad, as not to perceuer
in the triall who ſhall be the beſt. The agreement
which you would now make, you ſhould haue thought
vpon before the Commonwealth had ben ſcandalized
by your oaths, and then you ſhould haue giuen thoſe
good counſels, which now are as farre out of ſeaſon as
they are in vain, for you are not to preſcribe what courſe
we are to vſe with you, no more then wee are bound to
tell you wherefore we haue cauſed you to ſweare ſeuerally,
but we may tell you (and that trulie) how hee that

had yeelded vnto the oath of the other might very well
haue eſcaped the extremity of the crime, but yet the reputation
of both would haue ben alwaies doubtfull, ſo
that it were much better to know the truth if it be poſſible:
if not, it may be ſaid at the leaſt, that the fault is not
in vs. And this is the difference that we make between
iuſtice and crueltie, That the offender being known, he
may be puniſhed, and the innocent honoured. You ſay
that the one may chance to ſuffer for the other, you
know the remedy, we cannot iudge you by your owne
mouths: it is impoſſible to pardō the one for the reſpect
of the other, without great offence to the Commonwealth,
ſeeing that you both ſtill remaine alwaies ſuſpected,
and your linage thereby mightely wronged.
Since then you haue ſhewed your ſelues more thē men
in the beginning, doe not ſhew your ſelues leſſe then
women in the end. We counſell you ſo to doe for the
good of the countrie, and for your owne credit. Neuertheles,
it is in the choice of the ſoueraign iudges to pardon
your offence, but not to reſtore your former reputation:
for ſo long as the truth ſhall be doubtfull, you
ſhall be both twaine ſuſpected, yea and eſteemed vnworthy
to liue amongſt honeſt men.
               
            
            
               Declamation. 100.
               
                  Of the controuerſie betwixt Titus Quintus the Roman
Conſull, and Nabis tyrant of Sparta.
               
               
                  
                     TItus Quintus making wars againſt Philip King of
Macedon to driue him foorth of Greece, and in the
name of the Romans to ſet Greece at liberty; not being
able to make a league with Nabis Tyrant of Sparta,

receiued neuertheleſſe ſuccours from him, and made a truce betweene
the ſaid tyrant and thoſe of Achaia. Afterwards, haning
ouercome the ſaid Philip, Quintus made wars vpon Nabis
to cauſe him to reſtore the vſurped citties of Greece, ouer
which he tyranniſed: whervpon Nabis being come to a parle
with Quintus, he ſaid thus:
               IF I could imagine with my ſelfe (O Titus Quintus) and
the reſt of you here preſent vpon what reaſon you
haue proteſted or made warres vpon me, I had quietly
ſtaid to haue ſeene what end my fortune ſhould haue
had▪ but now I cannot refrain my deſire (if I ſhould periſh)
to vnderſtād firſt the reaſon why I ſhould come to
this miſchiefe: & ſurely, if you were ſuch as by ſame the
Carthaginians are, ſo as amōgſt you the faith of friendſhip
were of no certaintie or ſtabilitie, I ſhould not
greatly woonder although you made no great account
of that which you doe vnto me. But now that I behold
you, I ſee that you are Romans, ſuch I ſay, as were wont
religiouſlie to maintaine the obſeruation of diuine
things, and the faith of humane confederacie: & when
I looke vpon my ſelfe, I doe verily beleeue that I am the
ſame man, that haue beene in ancient friendſhip and
league with you as well as the reſt of the Lacedemonians;
and it is but a ſmall time ſince, that for the wars of
Philip, yea and in my name the ſame hath been particularlie
renued. But it may be I am hee that hath broken
the ſame league, becauſe I hold the citie of Argos; How
ſhall I then be able to defend my fact? Surely either by
the ſame deed, or els by the times. The deed offered me
two meanes to defend my ſelfe, becauſe I had the ſaid
cittie, being called therevnto by the Cittizens and by
their owne ſurrender: wherefore I receiued it, and did

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
haue had one whiles with the Carthaginians, another
while with the Gaules, and continuallie either with the
one or the other haue greatlie troubled vs, as thou haſt
likewiſe done in this warre of Macedon: For very vnſeemely
were it for vs (who haue vndertaken armes for
the libertie of Greece) to confederate our ſelues with a
tyrant: and with what tyrant? Surely with ſuch a one
as is the moſt cruell & moſt inhuman monſter towards
his owne ſubiects that euer was. It behooued vs in ſeeking
to free all Greece, to ſet Lacedemon alſo into her
ancient freedome (although thou haddeſt neuer taken
Argos by deceit) & to reſtore her vnto her laws: whereof
at this preſent (like a good follower of Licurgus) thou
haſt made mention. Now will we take heed ſince Philip
hath withdrawne his Garriſons from Iaſsa and Bargilles,
leaſt we ſhould ſuffer to be troden vnder thy feet, two
famous citties, Argos and Lacedemon, heretofore accounted
the two lights and beauties of Greece: which
it we ſhould leaue in bondage, it would blemiſh our
title of freeing Greece. Thou wilt ſay that the Argians
were partakers with Philip: wee will not burthen thee
that thou waſt therefore angrie with them, and tookeſt
vpon thee ſuch a quarell for our ſakes. We are ſufficiently
informed that of that innouation there were but two
or three perſons at the moſt culpable, as alſo how that
they were the onlie men that receiued thee & thy ſouldiours
into their caſtle, wherein ſurely nothing at all
was done by common Counſell. Wee know how the
Theſſalians, Phocians, and Locrenſes, did by common
conſent take Philip his part, neuertheleſſe wee did leaue
them free, hauing ſet all the reſt of Greece at libertie.
What then doeſt thou thinke wee ſhould doe with the
Argiues, who are moſt innocent, as concerning their

common Counſell? Thou ſaieſt that thou art condemned
for deliuering of captiues & deuiding of the lands
vnto the poore (which ſurely are no ſmall faults) but
what is that, or what are they to be compared to ſo manie
miſchiefes committed euerie day one after another
by thee and thine? Let a free Counſell bee aſſembled
in Argos, or Lacedemon, if thou takeſt pleaſure to hear
the truth of the offences of thy moſt prowd gouernement.
But now ſetting apart thy ancienteſt faults: how
manie murthers I pray thee hath that ſon in law of thine
Pythagoras committed of late in Argos, & that as it were
before mine owne eies? and how manie ſlaughters haſt
thou thy ſelfe acted, I being euen hard vpon the confines
of Lacedemon? Moreouer, thoſe whom thou tookeſt
whileſt they were parlying, thou didſt openlie proteſt
before all the Cittizens that thou wouldeſt keepe
them in ſafetie: Bring them therefore bound as they
were, to the end that their miſerable parents may know
them to be liuing, whom they haue bewailed for dead:
but thou wilt ſay, let vs grant that all theſe things be ſo,
What haue you Romans to doe therewith? Wilt thou
ſay thus vnto the Grecians friends? That ſeeke to free
Greece? Who to doe the ſame, haue paſſed the ſeas?
And haue made warre both by land and by ſea? Thou
wilt ſay, Yet haue I not offended you, nor broken our
league, neither violated the confederacie of the Roman
Nation. How often wilt thou haue me to prooue
vnto thy face that thou haſt violated the ſame? I will
not vſe manie words, but brieflie will I ſet downe euery
thing: Tell me then I pray thee how manie waies
friendſhip may be broken? Surely by theſe two, that is
to ſay. If thou vſeſt my friends like enemies, and conioineſt
thy ſelfe with my foes: Whether of theſe two

things haſt thou not done? Seeing that firſt thou tookeſt
Meſſena by force and armes, which was ioined vnto
vs with the ſame conditions of peace as Lacedemon
was, and receiued into our friendſhip; and yet thou being
our friend and Colleague, tookeſt a cittie that was
friend and vnited in league with vs: and with Philip our
enemie, thou not onelie kepteſt companie, but alſo by
the ſufferance of the gods thou madeſt aliance with
him by the meanes of Philocles his Lieutenant, and he
making wars vpon vs in that ſort, thou didſt both trouble
the ſeas about Malea with thy ſhips of war, and alſo
tookeſt and ſleweſt far more Romane Cittizens then euer
Philip did: and vnto the ſhips which brought victuals
vnto our armie, the riuer of Macedon was more ſafe
then was the promontarie of Malea. Ceaſſe therefore
henceforth to brag of the obſeruing of thy faith, and
the performing of thy friendſhip inuiolable,
and leaue off all ciuill maner of ſpeech,
ſpeak plainly like a tyrant, & as an
enemy ought to ſpeake.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   