
      
         
            
            
            THE
ROWSING OF
THE SLVGGARD,
IN 7. SERMONS.
            Published at the request of diuers
godlie and well affected.
            By W. B. Minister of the word of God at Reading
in Barkeshire.
            
               PROVER. 24. 30.
I passed by the field of the slouthfull, &c. to the ende
of the 32. verse.
            AT LONDON,
Printed by the Widow Orwin for
Thomas Man. 1595.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE ROWSING
of the Sluggard.
            
               The first Sermon.
               
                  PROVER. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
                  6 Goe to the Pismire or Emot, O sluggard, behold
her waies, and be wise:
                  7 For she hauing no guide, gouernor, nor ruler,
                  8 Prepareth her meate in the Summer, and
gathereth her foode in haruest.
                  9 How long wilt thou sleepe O sluggard? when
wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe?
                  10 Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleepe.
                  11 Therefore thy pouertie commeth as one
that trauaileth by the way, and thy necessitie
like an armed man.
               
               
                  IN the fiue former verses, the
holie Ghost hath condemned
hastines, and vnaduised rashnes,
as the very bane of sur
                     ••
                  iship,
and the vndoing of many
men. In these verses he proceedeth against

idlenes, and negligent slouthfulnes, or slouthfull
negligence, another extreame, contrarie
to the former, and no whit inferiour in daunger
vnto the former. And betweene both he
requireth in all the children of God, an aduised
diligence in all the waies of their calling,
to shew that the way of a Christiā is to make
an euen course betweene so many rocks and
dangers, as he is on both sides beset withall,
and alwaies to saile by the carde and compasse
of Gods word, the spirit of God sitting
as Pilote at the helme to direct the course by
the same; lest otherwise, either vpon the rocks
of rashnes & vaine glorie, or vpon the sands
of slouthfulnes and negligence, he suffer shipwracke
of bodie and soule before he neede,
or before he would.
               The matter of these verses is in generall a
disswasion from idlenes and negligence: Idlenes
for want of a calling, and negligence in a
mans calling are the principall things which
the spirite of God here dealeth against, perswading
also to faithfull diligence, by the example
of a sillie creature the Pismire. But
more particularly these poynts are in these
verses to be considered of: first, the Sluggards
Schoolemaster, and his lesson that he must
learne, in the 6. 7. 8 verses: thē the Sluggards
examination in the 9. verse: then his answere
in the 10. verse: and lastly his iudgement in
the 11. verse.
               
                  And this text may be called the rowsing of
the Sluggard, because it hath to deale with
one that is fast asleepe, and therefore commeth
to awaken him by all the meanes he can deuise,
as it were by calling, pulling, and hallowing,
and pinching, & terrifying, as if he would
not leaue him till he had awakened him, if he
will be awakened: for first, he perswadeth him
by the example of a Pismire, to shame him
withall: then he debateth the matter with him
to know how long he will sleepe, to see if that
will awake him: and then he sheweth him his
nature and propertie, to see if that will awaken
him: and then seeing he will not awake, hee
sheweth him the danger of it, and so he leaueth
him: And the same course will I take.
               But for as much as euery man consisteth of
two parts, viz. bodie and soule, both which are
in time to be prouided for, and Salomons care
was aswell for the one, as for the other: therefore
we will set downe two sorts of Sluggards
to deale withall. The Sluggard temporall, and
the Sluggard spiritual: for some are Sluggards
for the bodie, and some are Sluggards for the
soule. Of Sluggards temporall which neglect
the things of this life, wee may also set downe
two sorts, either such as liue without any calling,
or such as liue negligētly in their calling.
Of Sluggards spirituall likewise, I summon
two sorts to appeare before the Pismire: first,
those that haue no care at al to vse the meanes

of their soules health, but liue as though they
had no soules to saue: then those that vse the
meanes of their saluation but coldly, and negligently,
driuing off all to the last cast, thinke
that it is not yet time to make their prouision.
And first of the Sluggard temporall.
               
                  Goe to the Pismire, &c. The Sluggard is here
set to schoole with a very simple schoolemaster,
and yet able to teach the Sluggard wisedome,
if he will take the paines to behold her
waies, that is, to consider well of the order and
manner of her liuing, and to applie the same
vnto himselfe. Whereby wee may learne first
that idle bodies and slow bellies which liue
without a calling, or negligently in their calling,
are not so wise, and therefore neither so
profitable, as the sillie Pismire is. For she is
wise to helpe her selfe, by making readie her
prouision in time: the Sluggard hath no wisedome,
nor care to helpe himselfe, nor to saue
any thing that he hath. Now he that hath no
care to helpe himselfe, for whom will he care?
He that is vnprofitable to himselfe, to whom
will he be profitable? He that will not till his
owne ground, whose ground will he till? He
that will not labour for himselfe, for whom wil
he labour? for euery man naturally is giuen to
helpe himselfe, and to prouide for himselfe:
therefore it seemeth that Sluggards and idle
packes are vnnaturall, and monsters in nature.
And therefore ought to haue no place in nature,

that is amongst men or beasts, because
they are not so profitable as either man, or
beast, be the one neuer so simple, and the other
neuer so filthie. For the beast is still in his kind
euen to the very Pismire or Emmot, but the
Sluggard is out of kind. And therefore the Apostle
warneth the Thessalonians,2 Thess. 3. 10. that if any
amongst them were able to worke and would
not worke, they should not eate; to shew that
idle persons are not worthie to liue: his reason
is, because they be inordinate liuers, and work
not at all, but are busie bodies, that is, they liue
out of all order, intermedling with other mens
busines, but altogether neglecting their owne
dueties. Such are those wanton widowes and
pratling gossips, of whē the Apostle speaketh
in another place, which liue in pleasure, that is,
they loue not to take any paine for their liuing,
now heare the Apostles iudgement of them,
They that liue in pleasure (sayth he) are dead,
                  1. Tim. 5. 6.
                  while they liue: that is, they are vnprofitable to
men, and as good dead as aliue, and better too:
for while they liued many were the worse, no
man the better for them: but when they bee
dead, they hurt no bodie: besides that, the
wormes, or something els, doe then feed their
fill vpon their carkasse, which in their life time
fed vpon all other, but fed none themselues.
               The naturall man hath abho
                     •
                  ed idlenes for
want of a calling, although he had no light but
the light of nature: therfore when Iosephs brethren

came before Pharao, he asked them of
what trade they were:Gen. 47. 3. for it was a very vnnaturall
thing to be without a trade, that is, without
some ordinarie and lawfull kind of calling,
either in the Church, or Common-wealth,
whereby a man may be both profitable to others,
and helpfull to himselfe.
               As the naturall man condemned it, so doth
the Pismire here in our text rise vp in iudgement
against the Sluggard whatsoeuer he bee,
but especially against him that for want of a
trade, or some calling, is become a sluggard, &
leadeth an idle life: For she hauing no guide, gouernour,
nor ruler, doth gather her meate in summer,
&c. What would she do if she had a guide
and gouernour? &c. And what a shame is this
to the slouthful person (if he be not past shame)
that hath both guides, and gouernours, and rulers,
both to teach him, and keep him in order,
besides the benefite of reason and vnderstanding:
and yet for all these meanes and helpes,
which the Pismire wanteth, is carelesse of his
owne good? But hath the Pismire or Ant no
guide, nor gouernour, will some say? how is it
then that she doth alwaies keepe that wonderfull
order, and take that meruailous trauaile
for her liuing, without breaking or altering
thereof? To this we may answere, that her order
is the order of nature giuen and imprinted
in nature by God at the beginning, her guide
is God himself, and her gouernour is the euerwatching,

and euerlasting prouidence of the
Almighty, which extendeth it selfe to man and
beast, to all things in heauen, in earth, in the
sea, in hell, and in all places, and at all times, yea
to the Pismire, the flye, the haires of a mans
head, the haires of euery mans head in the
worlde, and finally taketh accompt of euery
haire vpon euery mans head.Mat. 10. 30. But as for other
helpes, and other guides, and other gouernors,
the Pismire hath none: man hath so much as
she hath, and more too by many degrees: therfore
if man shall be found more careles; nay, if
not ten thousand times more carefull & painfull
then the vnreasonable creatures, hee must
iustly be condemned: for God doth condemne
him, the naturall man doth condemne him, the
bruite beast doth condemne him, the poore
Pismire doth condemne him, and the whole
course of nature doth condemne him. Then
grieuous, and iust must that mans condemnation
bee, that is denounced and ratified by all.
Therefore in time goe to the Pismire, O sluggard,
behold her waies, and be wise: for she hauing
no guide, &c.
               
               There be some, companiōs to Atheists, which
partly through ignorance, and partly through
pride of heart, (for commonly they goe together)
that haue not stuck to finde fault with the
creating of the Pismire, the flye, the worme, &
an infinite number of creatures moe, and as it
were to quarrell with God for making of thē,

because (as they say) they cannot see to what
purpose they serue, or what good they doe in
the world. Now for an answere to these wittie
fellowes that will set God to schoole, wee
may tell them, that if these sillie creatures
(whereat they are so offended) did no more
good, nor were no more profitable in their
kinde, then idle braines and the sluggish persons
be, and such as themselues bee, which doe nothing
but finde fault with God, and his workes
in nature, like dogs which bark at the Moone;
it were no great matter if the world were rid
of them, sauing that God must be glorified in
his iudgements vpon them, if they repent not,
or in his mercie, if it please him to worke their
conuersion.
               But in the meane time, I demaund of these
cauillers, and quarrellers with God, what hurt
doth the flye, &c? It is said of Apelles the cunning
painter, that he did by arte make the picture
of a flye, sitting vpon a mans face, in such
artificiall and liuely manner, that diuers comming
to looke vpon the picture of the man,
tooke the sayd painted flye for a liuing flye indeede,
in so much that one with his handkerchefe
stroke at it, and thought to haue driuen
it away but could not, which being perceiued,
they did greatly wonder at the excellent cunning
of the painter. But what is Appelles to the
Almightie? or who gaue him that cunning
which hee had? did not God? Now, shall a

pain
                     •
                  ed flye, which is no flye, serue to set forth
the cunning and skill of a man, and shall not
men much more take occasion by seeing a liuing
flye, to praise the Lord, and to wonder at
his most excellent and vnspeakable wisdome,
and skill, and power, and glorie, which into a
thing of so small compasse, and quantitie, hath
put such varietie of ioynts and members in such
order, and comelines, with such 
                     •
                  ute of diuers
colours, such liuelines, nimblenes, and swiftnes,
as a thousand worlds are not able to match or
make the like vnto any part thereof?
               If any man would know to what vse frogs,
grashoppers, caterpillers, and lice, &c. serue, let
him aske Pharao, and his subiects of Egypt, &
they will tell him, that as there be many vses of
them, so one especiall vse is to punish wicked
men by them, and when the Lord will, they
shall be his hoste to subdue euen the pride of
the proudest, & to make the stoutest to stoope.
               But the Pismire, the Pismire, wherfore is she
good, or what profite commeth by her, wil the
sluggish Atheist say, that had neuer any leisure
yet to peruse the Prouerbes of Salomon? Oh
sayth the sluggard, we reade that she gathereth
her meate in summer and haruest, &c. But what
good doth she els? doth she nothing but gather
meate and deuoure it? Verely no. Thats
enough for thee O sluggard, to deuoure, and
helpe none: for so thou doest indeed. Or els
there is no creature but is profitable in some

measure: The sea swalloweth vp whatsoe
                     •••
                   is
cast into it, but yet it is profitable both in nourishing
of fishes, and carrying the ships for the
good of man. The fire consumeth al that is cast
into it, but yet it maketh a recompence with
his heate, which is so necessarie that no man
can be without it.Prou. 30. 16 The graue neuer saith hoe,
(sayth Salomon) but yet it is profitable in smothering
euill smels & sauours, which els would
annoy the liuing. Yea they doe receiue the
dead to their lodging, when no bodie durst abide
thē within their doores, nor within their
streetes, nor within their walkes, nor within
their fieldes, nor within their sight, nor within
their smelling: Like the earth which receiued
Abels bloud,Gen. 4. 11. when it might not bee suffered
to haue a resting place in Abels bodie.
               Now, if idlenes and slouthfulnes were but
halfe so profitable as the sea, which yet drowneth
infinite numbers: or as the fire, which
spareth neither house nor citie: or as the graue,
wherein is nothing but stinke and rottennes:
yea if they were not 1000. times more hurtful,
then any of these, they might bee more borne
withall, then now they can be, or ought to be.
               But yet the Sluggard is not answered, hee
must needes knowe wherefore the Pismire
serueth, and what she should do in the world:
And the Pismire on the other side meruaileth
what the idle Sluggard doth in the world. It
is no meruaile though the Sluggard cannot away

with the Pismire of all other things: for
many idle schollers cannot away with the
schoole, nor their schoolemaster; no more can
the Sluggard well digest the sight of the Pismire,
because he is put to schoole with her to
learne wisedome. For he counteth it as a kinde
of disgrace to his person, to be set to schoole at
an Ant-heape, or at any body els: but so it pleaseth
the Lord wee see to pull downe the pride
of men, and by the vile and base things of this
world (as S. Paul sayth) to confound the mightie.1. Cor. 1. 27
What say many now adaies? They skorne
to learne their duetie at the preachers hand, or
to bee catechised, they will not so much bee abased
and disgraced, when the Lord knoweth
they be as blind as beetles in their duetie both
to God and man. But if men be so proude, that
they will not be taught by the preacher of the
word, nor bee subiect to the ministerie of their
pastors, the Lord knoweth a way to humble
them well enough: He can turne them out into
the fielde amongst the Ants, and flyes, and
grashoppers, that they may see what manner
of schollers they are, when such tutors are set to
teach them their lesson:Dan. 4. 30. As he turned Nabuchadnezzar out of his pallace into the wildernes,
from men to beasts, vntill amongst the
beasts he had learned to know himselfe. And
thus we may see that the poore Pismire can in
no wise be wanting, if it be for nothing els, but
to teach the Sluggard wisedome.
               
                  
                  Behold her waies, and be wise. Here wee are
further taught, that wee ought to beholde the
creatures, with due consideration of their natures,
and the wonderfull workes of God in
them, and that we ought so to behold them, as
to bee the better for beholding them, and not
to bee (as most are) idle gazers vpon them, or
vaine and curious disputers of them to no purpose,
but for ostentatiō of learning or wit, &c.
It is good to be a naturall Philosopher, but it is
better to bee a christian Philosopher withall:
that is, when by beholding and learning the
natures of the creatures, we are drawne neerer
to the Creator, and taught to know our selues,
and our duetie to God better then we did. For
this is true wisedome, and true wisedome is
true Philosophie. Therefore the Sluggard being
sent to the Pismire to behold her waies, &
so to get wisedome, what els is he taught, but
to become a right Philosopher? So that a man
may learne Philosophie in the fieldes, by an
Ant-heape, if he hath the spirit of God; yea as
good as any Aristotle can teach him in the
schooles, and better too: for he goeth no further
then the causes of things, and teacheth mē
to rest there, saying: Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere causas: that is, Happines standeth in
the knowledge of naturall things, and the naturall
causes of naturall things. But Christians
haue learned out of the booke of God, to goe
one step beyond Aristotle, and all that are but

meere naturals, and that is not onely to search
out the causes and qualities of the creatures,
(wherein indeede Salomon did excell, for he
disputed of all things from the Hyssoppe that
springs out of the wall to the Cedar in Lebanus)
but then further to make vse of the same,1. King. 4. 33
and out of euery thing to learne something,
whereby they may either correct their manners,
or bee more confirmed in the prouidence
of God, or bee stirred vp to the doing of their
dutie to God and man, or to be more humbled
in themselues, or to magnifie the name of God
for his wisedome, for his power, and for his
goodnes, &c. Such a Philosopher was Dauid:
When I behold thy heauens (sayth he) euen the
workes of thy fingers,
                  Psal. 8. 3. 4. 
                  the Moone, and the Starres
which thou hast ordained, what is man, say I, that
thou art mindfull of him, or the sonne of man,
that thou visitest him?
               
               There is no creature of God in the world, but
that man may learne somewhat out of the
same, and profite by it, to the amendment of
his life. The reason is, because all the creatures
of God doe serue their Creator in that course
and kind wherein they were first created, only
men are the sinners in this world, and haue forsaken
their first estate, and are become vnkind
against their Creator. If we speake of dutifulnes
to our superiours, wee may learne it of the
oxe, and the asse: for,Esay. 1. 3. 
                  The oxe knoweth his owner,
(sayth Esay) and the asse his masters cribbe,

but Israel hath not knowne, my people hath not
vnderstand. If we speake of louingnes & kindnes
betweene man and wife, euery man may
learne it of the Hind and the Roe: for Salomon
willeth the husband and the wife, to loue together
as the louing hind and pleasant roe:
                  Prou. 5. 19. to shew
that there is not amongst all so much loue and
kindnes as they may learne of the beast. If any
man will bragge of his diligence and paine
                     •
                  
taking,Prou. 6. 6. the Pismire is more painfull then he.
Again,Pro. 30▪ 26. 27. 28. 
                  The conies are not mightie, yet they build
in rockes. The grashoppers haue no King, yet g
                        •
                     e
forth all by bands: The spider takes hold with her
hands, and is in Kings palaces. Againe, the Prophet
Ieremie sayth,Ierem. 8. 7. that the storke, the turtle, the
crane, and the swallowe are skilfull in the
                        •
                      appointed
times: but man knoweth not the indgements
of the Lord. The dogge is in his kinde
more thankfull then man is. The sea keepeth
his tides of ebbing and flowing, iust at the day
and houre appoynted, that a man may be bold
to build vpon his comming: to shame those
that promise much, but performe nothing, and
to shewe that vnconstant men of their word
may be taught by the sea. As they goe beyond
vs in glorifying their Creator, so doe they also
farre excell vs in many naturall gifts, or qualities
of the bodie, which make mē forget themselues:
The Horse in strength: The Roe in
swiftnes: The Lion in courage: The Eagle in
sight: The Dogge in winding. These and 
                     ••
                  
                  ny

moe besides these, doe excell man in the
naturall faculties and qualities of the bodie.
And therefore to conclude this poynt, what
cause is there that we should bee so proude of
our selues, or any thing that wee haue, or can
doe, seeing as all the creatures in their kinde
doe excell vs? glorifying their Creator better
then wee doe, yea and are appoynted as tutors
and schoolemasters to teach vs our dueties?
               Lastly, we may learne from hence, not to cō
                  temne,
and disdaine, but with great reuerence,
and in the feare of God to vse all the creatures
of God: both for that they serue so notably to
set forth the glorie of the Creator, and also for
that they are appointed to teach men their duties.
Of Lecturers, some reade of one thing, and
some of another, and are reuerenced for their
labour 
                     〈◊〉
                   are maintained in Cities, and V
                  
                     •
                  iuersities:
some by the Citie, some by the Vniuersitie,
some by Noblemen, & some by the
Prince, and therfore are called their Lecturers,
& are greatly reuerenced & regarded. The Pismire
here is the Sluggards reader, but maintained
at the Lords cost and charges: therfore 
                     〈◊〉
                  
may not be despised, but the work of the Lord
in her is to bee had in great reuerence. For the
works of the Lord are great,
                  Psal. 111. 2. 3. (saith the Psalmist)
and ought to bee sought out of all them that loue
them. Yea, His worke is beautiful and glorious, &
therfore greatly to be regarded. It is coūted no
small matter to bee the Philosphie Lecturer,

or the Greeke Lecturer, or the Phisicke Lecturer,
or a Reader in the Law: but to reade a Lecture
of wisedome, as the Ant doth, is more▪
because wisedome is aboue them all. That was
the cause why the Queene of the South counted
the seruants of Salomon blessed,1. King. 10. 8. because
they were in place continually to h
                     •
                  are th
                     •
                  
wisedome of Salomon. Now, when the preaching
of the word cannot be heard, which is th
                     •
                  
Lecture of all Lectures, and teacheth only 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wisdome, then the creatures are brought forth
both to humble men and to condemn
                     •
                   them.
And surely these are better Lay mens booke
                     •
                  
                  ▪
then the Popish Images, which Papists caused
to bee set vp in Churches: for they were layin
                     •
                  
vanities, and taught nothing but 
                     •
                  ollie and v
                     •
                  
                  nitie:
but the creatures of God are not so, and
they teach men the trueth indeede, and out of
euery creature the spirituall man may learn
                     •
                  
some heauenly lesson: therefore wher
                     •
                  soe
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  
he becommeth, he is at schoole, both at home
and abroade, at the Temple he learneth wis
                     •
                  
                  dome,
and in the field, and euery where he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
learning of something. Now therefore to th
                     •
                  
Sluggard againe. Thou seest thy tutor, it is th
                     •
                  
Pismire, her schoole thou knowest is in th
                     •
                  
fields, and woods, all that goe to schoole with
her must sit vpon the low four
                     •
                  e, e
                     •
                  en the very
ground, and lower they cannot 
                     〈◊〉
                  , & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
low must euery one sit that will goe to the Pismires
Lecture, for she readeth the right P
                     •
                  il
                     •
                  
                  sophie

                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   life. And some would faine be in h
                     •
                  aue
                     •
                  ,
because they are loth to endure any paine, or
trouble, or labour, especially for the trut
                     •
                   vpon
earth, and this is but the sluggards wish.
               We doe r
                     ••
                  tly reprehend the Papi
                     •
                  ts for that
Monkish life that is amongst them, to liue like
Eremites,Eremites. &c. Monkes, Friers, Nunnes, Chaunt 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Priests, Masse Priests, and Soule priests, and
hedge priests, & a companie of Cloyster 
                     •
                  reepers
besides, which was most abominable before
God and man. For first, they cast off all
cal
                     •
                  ing, and were no way profitable, eith
                     •
                  r in
the Church or Common-wealth: then 
                     •
                  ec
                     •
                  ndly
all helped them, but they helped none.
God shall not neede an armie of Doctors 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Councels to confute them, this poore 
                     〈◊〉
                  
creature the Pismire doth shamefully 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them, and most strongly confute them. Now,
as this is common amongst those Ca
                     •
                  erp
                     •
                  llers,
so we must take heede that this be not in all of
vs, for we are al too monkishly addicted. How
doe men of trades de
                     ••
                  ise with themselues how
to leaue their paines and to sit downe,Men of trade. or goe
vp and downe, being so rooted in idlenes 
                     〈◊〉
                  
slouth, that they knowe not which way to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
their hands to any honest labour? these are also
sent to the Pismire to learne wisedome.
               Next vnto them must Churchmen haue a
place on the low fourme, which fish till they
haue caught that fish that they looked for, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
then hang vp the net. And no merua
                     •••
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
their net they say hit vpon a company of od
                     •
                  e
steeples which lay in the bottome of the ri
                     •
                  er,Nonre
                        ••
                     
                     dents▪
                  
which they neuer looked for, nor thought of,
and with haling of them vp, their 
                     •
                  ettes were
so piteously rent and torne and spoyled, that
they could 
                     •
                  euer fish with them since to any
purpose. These also are here sent to the Pismire
amongst the idle sluggards, to behold her
waies, and to learne to be wise.
               
               The vnlearned Minister likewise which hath
made the Ministerie his last refuge,Ignorant Ministers. because he
would liue at ease, he must goe to the Pismire
too: for if it should be demaunded of him, as
Pharao demaunded of Iosephs brethren, What
trade, or calling haue they? What 
                     •
                  ust their answere
be? Forsooth, I was sometime a Taylor,
or a Cobler, or a Weauer, or a Glouer, or an
Ostler, or a Huntsman, or a Seruingman, or a
Player, but now I am a Minister, or a Curat, or
for fault of a better, the booke-reader of our
parish, for preacher he is none, that is too painfull:
Therefore goe to the Pismire O sluggard,
behold her waies, and be wise. That is, giue ouer
the Ministerie for which thou art so v
                     •
                  fit, and
betake thee to thy old occupation againe, and
learne of thy tutor the 
                     •
                  ismire, to take more
paines therein.
               Next, the negligent Minister must goe along
to the Pismires Lecture.Negligent Ministers. Such as at their
first entring into the ministerie had good gifts,
but afterwards liue like idle be
                     ••
                  ies, and betray

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  oules of Gods people into the hands of
the diue
                     •
                  . Against such the Prophet Esay spe
                     •
                  
                  keth,Esay. 56. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 11.
when hee sayth, Their watchmen are all
blind: they haue no knowledge: they are aldu
                        •••
                     
dogges: they cannot barke: they lie and sleepe▪
and delight in sleeping. And the Prophet 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
sayth,Iere. 48. 10. 
                  Cursed is be that doth the work of the
Lord negligently. Therefore if these sluggards
will auoyde the curse of God, they must of necessitie
goe to the Pismire, and learne of her to
be more painfull and diligent in the worke of
the Lord, there is no remedie.
               The Magistrate also aswell as the Minister
must goe to the Pismire, if he be slouthfull and
negligent in his office.Magistrates For they are called pastors,

                     •
                  nd shepheards in the scripture. And
therefore it is sayd of D
                        •
                     uid, That 
                     
                        •
                     e fed the
people of the Lord according to the simpliciti
                        •
                      of
his heart,
                  Psa. 78. 70. 71. 72. 
                  And guided them by the discretion of
his hands. The reason was, because the Lord
did choose him, and take him from the sheepfolds,
for to feed his people in Iacob, and his inheritance
in Israel: By which Magistrates may
see what they should doe. But if they be hot in
their owne matters,2. Kin. 5. 11. like Naaman, who cha
                     •
                  ed
because the Prophet would not come to him,
when he sent for him; & cold in Gods matters,
like Ely, who let his children do what they list:
then are they guiltie of no small negligence,1. Sam. 2. 23 24 &
he is here reproued by this sillie, yet diligent
creature. Therefore O sluggish Magistrate
wheresoeuer or whosoeuer, go to the Pismire.
               
                  
There be many Gentlemen also that must be
schollers to this schoolmaster:Gentlemen for it is a common
thing amongst thē to say, I can liue of my
lands, as though his lands were onely to helpe
him to liue, n
                     ••
                  king no matter how he liue: or
as though any man were borne to himselfe, &
not to the soc
                     •
                  eie and comfort of others. And
what though they be able to liue of their lāds?
yet God abhorreth this idlenes, and spending
that they haue gotten, idlie, at play, & pastime:
For when it shall bee sayd vnto them,Luk. 16. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Giue account
of thy stewardship▪
                   how hast thou spent
that which I lent thee? What will they answer?
I haue spent it in play, shall they say▪ And will
this go for pa
                     •
                  ment? God placed Adam in the
garden of Eden, not to liue idly, but to dresse it,
and till it, &c. Adam was as well to liue as any
gentlemā (for th
                     •
                   al was his) & yet he was not
permitted to liue idlie. Let no gentlemā say, he
hath no calling: for al haue a calling. If he hath
no calling, he may busie himselfe in teaching
his seruants & children to know God, as Ioshua
did: or in visiting and relieuing the poore,Iosh. 24. 15. and
distressed,Iob. 31. 8. in being an eye to the blind, a father
to the fatherles, &c. as Iob was.
               And this is also for thē that spend their daies
and reuenewes in voluptuousnes & carnal delights,
as at cards & dice, hunting & hawking,
and bowling, and dauncing, and chambering,
and wantonnes, &c. smoking it out in the excessiue
pride of apparell, and spending of other

mens labours: Surely they must needes to
schoole. Therefore goe thou noble sluggard,
or thou gentle sluggard, Goe to the Pismire, beholde
her waies, and be wise.
               
               A number of Citizens likewise must be sent
after the rest of their fellowes, for that they
haue takē pains heretofore, but now sit downe,
and studie how to liue idlie with their families:
some by vsurie, and some by brokerage,
the one is the diuell himselfe, the other the diuels
huntsman: some by promoting, & some
by extortion, and all because of a more easie
life, that it may bee sayd of them as it is sayd of
Issachar, who seeing that ease was good, & the
land pleasant,Gen. 49. 14. he became as a strong 
                        •
                     sse couching
downe betweene diuers burdens: that is, he
gaue himselfe to ease, and let all alone. So these
men perceiuing that ease is good, & the gaine
of vsurie, and iniquitie to bee pleasant, they are
become very beasts, and are content to lye
downe vnder diuers burdens: that is, to let all
their dueties be vnperformed, which they owe
to God and the Common-wealth. Now, for
that idlenes and lazines hath drawne them to
liue a monkish life, this Pismire shall stand vp
to giue iudgement against them, if they doe
not the sooner goe to her Lecture, and learne
to be wiser.
               Besides all these, the Pismire hath a great
number of schollers moe, which if they should
come altogether the schoole would not h
                     •
                  ld

thē, & they are scattered abroad in euery coū
                  trie,
some in euery shire, some in euery towne,
and in euery village, in euery faire and market
some, and in euery alehouse some, and vpon euery
hie way some: and therefore the Pismire
hath set vp her schoole in euery field, and in euery
wood, in euery pasture, in euery lane, and
in euery hie way almost through the world,
that they might not miscarrie for want of teaching.
And these bee idle Players, and Fidlers,
and Rimers, and Iesters, and Couseners, and
Alehouse-hunters, and whorehunters, and tiplers,
and tospots, and Bearewards, and walking
mates, with a number of counterfeit Souldiers,
and Pedlers, and talebearers, with a companie
of pratling gossips, & a crue of good fellowes,
besides legions of idle Seruingmen, and retainers,
that be crept into Bishops houses, Noblemens
houses, Knights houses, and Gentlemen
                     •
                  
houses, which for any great busines that many
of them haue to doe, might very well intend it
to goe to the Sluggards schoole. Now to euery
one of these is this spoken: Go to the Pismire
O sluggard, &c. that is, vp, and away to schoole.
Me thinkes▪ I heare them all called at schoole
by their names, and some bodie answering for
them to excuse their absence: Some (sayth he)
I saw on the stage at midnight, teaching youth
and seruants, and all that came how to play
the Cousener, the Lecherer, the Bawde, the
Th
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  e, the Traitor, and how to scorne and deride

the preacher, and religion, and how to
practise all kinde of impietie and wickedne
                     ••
                  e,
and all to maintaine a poore liuing. Some are
at the Alehouses set at tables, that they cannot
come yet: and besides that, they are so filled
with drinke, and so emptied of wit and reason,
that if they should be brought to schoole, (for
come alone they cannot) yet they should not
be able to learne any thing, for they would fall
fast asleep at the Antheape before the Pismire,
as they doe at Church before the preacher.
Then others were called: but answer was made
againe, that some are gone to the faire, and
some to market to cut purses, and some are
keeping the hie way to take mens purses from
them, that they might not bee robbed before
they come home: Some are at the Tauerne
drinking with their friends: some are stept aside
to diuide the spoyle, and therefore they
cannot come. Then another was called, and
one answered for him and sayd, agr
                        •
                     tat, he is
sicke of the dropsie, or layd of the new disease,
called the French disease, and so is she too, his
beloued companion. Then others were called,
and answer was made, that they would come,
but they cannot: for some of them bee in prison,
and some bee at the Barre to answere for
themselues, and some bee fast in the stockes,
some bee vpon the pillorie, some be dauncing
about the market before the whip; and therefore
cannot come yet: and some are executed

at the gallowes, and therefore neuer looke▪ for
their comming. So they were discharged▪ a
                     •
                  d
others came in their stead.
               Now these we see haue their excuses when
they are sent to schoole: like the worldling
                     •
                   in
the Gospell, who (being called to the feast of
the Gospell) could not come, because of their
farmes, or their oxen, or their plough, or their
wiues, or some what els, and therefore were
shut out when they would haue come. And
yet though they could not, that is, would not
come to the feast, the feast was furnished with
other guests: so though this crue of good fellowes
cannot, that is, will not goe to the Pismire,
yet her schoole is furnished with other
schollers. And the summe of all her reading is
this, All that thy band shall finde to doe,
                  Eccle. 9. 10. 
                  doe it
with al
                        •
                      thy power: for there is neither works, nor
inuention, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the
graue, whither thou goest.
               
            
            
               
               The Second Sermon.
               
                  AS this diligence and painfulnes
in the Pismire doth
reprooue those that liue
idlie, for want of a calling,
and negligently in
their calling: so dooth it
also speciallie and generallie
condemne all of vs for the contempt of
the Worde,Contempt of the word reproued by the Pismire. and the neglect of the glorious
meanes of our saluation, which the Lord offereth
most kindly, and graciously vnto vs. Now
is the market of our spirituall foode, and the
haruest of our soules, wherein euery one may
and ought to prouide against the time of penurie.
And that we should not thinke it a matter
of libertie, God hath commanded vs to redeeme
the time, that is,Ephes. 5. 16 to raunsome the time
that we haue lost, with some losse of pleasure,
and profite, and ease, that wee might not alwaies
be behind hand like bankeroupts in religion.
               But we sell away the time, and trueth and al,
in stead of redeeming it. And is not this worse

prophanenes then that of Esaw? for he sold his
birthright for hunger: wee sell away ours for a
winke of sleepe, or a game at bowles, or cards,
or tables, or any thing els. Nay, wee are more▪
base-minded then Iudas: for he would not sell
Christ vnder 30. pence▪ wee are content to let
him go for 30. halfepence, or three halfepence,
or a peniworth of pleasure, or profite.
               We are commanded to preach in season, and
out of season, and yet some thinke they are not
bound to heare so often, but thinke that wee
ought to wait and attend their leisure: whereas
indeed if we come at any time, they should
leaue all, and come and heare in season, & out
of season, as they account it.Exod. 16. 2
                        •
                     . 22. The Israelites
were commended for gathering Manna in the
morning, because if they tarried till the sunne
was vp it did melt. If the sunne be vp once, I
meane if hot persecution come, that wee can
not, nor dare not goe to heare the Word, and
will not heare it now while wee may in the
coole of the day: shall not the Pismire stand
vp in iudgement against vs, & condemne vs?
Our Sauiour Christ sayd, I must worke the works
of him that sent me, while it is day:
                  Ioh. 9. 4. 
                  the night
commeth when no man can worke. Then it were
best for vs to heare the word of God while it is
day: for we haue more neede then he had, that
is, while wee haue peace, for the night commeth,
it is to be feared, when no mq̄ can heare:
and as the night succeed
                     •
                  th the day, so persecution

commonly succeedeth peace, to sco
                     •
                  re
off the ruft that men gather in time of peace.
               Some vse this as a reason to hinder reformation,
and going forward in religion: for say
they, the time may come when we shall be called
to account for putting downe Images, for
desacing idolatrie and superstition, and for going
to sermons, &c. The feare of these men
that doe thus reason, is like the hope of Esaw,
if it bee not the very same: for Esaw sayd, The
daies of mourning for my father Isaac will co
                        ••
                     
shortly,
                  Gen. 27. 41. 
                  and then I will kill my brother Iacob. So
say they, the daies of mourning for Queene Elizabeth
will come one day, and then we may
be called to an account for al the idolatrie that
we haue defaced, and for all the profession that
wee haue made of the Gospell. But as Iacob
needed not feare Esaw, so long as his father Isaac
liued: so (thankes be to God) wee neede
not feare the threatnings of such ill affected
men, so long as our mother Elizabeth raigneth.
The Lord prolong her daies as the daies
of heauen, (if it be his blessed will) to the vtter
rooting out of all idolatri
                     •
                  , and impietie, and
to the further aduancement of his Gospel. And
happie are we, that haue such golden opportunitie.
As Salomon therfore builded the Temple
in his rest, so God giue vs grace to build his
Church in our peace.
               Our Sauiour, the Lord Iesus, did not teach
vs to reason so. Yet if he had been of worldlings

mindes, he would haue sayd, The night
co
                        •••
                     th when no man can work
                        •
                     : yea the night
commeth when I shall answere that which I
haue done, therefore it is best to let all a
                     ••
                  ne &
saue one. But he frameth his argument cleane
contrarie: I must doe the workes of him that s
                        ••
                     t
me, while it is day: for the night commeth when
no man can works. And if these daies should alter,
what then? Yet then shall wee hau
                     •
                   comfort
in the obedience of our faith.Pro. 15. 15. And a good
conscience (sayth Salomon) in the daies of affliction
is a continuall feast. Therefore in these
matters, let vs bee resolute with H
                        •
                     ster, who
knowing the goodnes of her cause,Hester. 4. 16. sayd If I
p
                        •
                     rish▪ I perish: so say we, If I lose, I lose▪ if I answere,
I answere, I must looke to lose more
then this, and to answere for more then this,
but I shall lose nothing by it in the end Therefore
now while wee may, let vs bee gathering
store of knowledge, and comfort, or els the
Pismire shall condemne vs: For she 
                        〈…〉
                     
go
                        •
                     ernor, nor ruler, gathereth her 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
&c. Wee haue both guides, &c. God
make vs wise to take the benefit of them whil
                     •
                  
we haue them.
               
                  Ios
                        •
                     ph being warned before hand of a dearth
that should come vpon the land of Egypt,Gen. 41. 47. 48. 54.
made prouision before the dearth came:Psalm. 105. 16. 17. so
would we doe also to saue our bodies: but the
soule which is the most precious thing▪ yea the
Ladie and mistris of the bodie, as though she

were dead, and liued not in vs, is not regarded,
no m
                     •
                  n makes any prouisiō for her: although
the Prophet Amos hath told vs that we must
look 
                     •
                  or a famme,Amos. 8. 11 and that of the word of the
Lord, in so much as men shall goe from sea to
sea, that is, from one part of the world to another,
and shall not finde it. Ioseph proui
                     •••
                  g in
time of plentie had to serue his turne, and to
comfort many moe withal in time of scarcitie,
and what did Ioseph lose by that? So if we prouide
foode for our soules now in time of plentie,
we shall haue comfort in store both for our
selues and many others when scarcitie come,
or when persecution come, or when temptations
come, or when olde age come, or whe
                     •
                  
sicknes come, or when death come, or when al
come▪ and what shall we lose by that? 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
sayd,Psam. 119. 50. 92. 
                  The word of God was his comfort in his affl
                        •
                     ction,
or els he had perished: So let vs say, (for
we may bee sure of it) if the word of God bee
not our comfort, when affliction come, or whē
sicknes, or death, or persecution come, we 
                     •
                  hal
perish, we shall despayre, and goe to hell. And
how shall it bee our comfort then, if we prouide
not store of it now while we may? Therefore
let vs prouide, and gather, and lay vp now
as much as we can, & all will be little enough,
if not too little: for as there is a time of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
so there will be a time of spending, and
we cannot gather so much doe what wee ca
                     •
                  ,
as we shall spend.
               
                  
But seeing as wee are now come to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
with the spiritual Sluggard, who hath as much
neede to bee to wsed as any other, that he may
be awakened indeed, we will take this cours
                     •
                  :
first, I wil shew what must be gathered for the
soule: secondly, when it is to be gathered.
               But what is it that wee must gather in summer,What is to be gathered.
which cannot be had in winter? The Pismire
telleth vs, it is meate, or food, that is, matter
of nourishment for the 
                     〈◊〉
                   to feed vpo
                     •
                  ,
and to prese
                     •
                  ue the life of God in the soule, and
that is another poynt to bee obserued in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Emmots Lecture to the Sluggard. Many gather,
but it is not meate 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
but not of foode for the soule: which 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the Prophet Esay found out and condemned
in his time:Esay. 55. 2. 3 
                  Wherefore doe y
                        •
                      lay out 
                        〈◊〉
                      and
not for bread? and your labour without be
                        ••
                     g satisfied?
he arken diligently vnto me, and 
                        〈…〉
                     
which is good, and let your soul
                        •
                      delight 
                        〈…〉
                     .
Encline your 
                        •
                     ares, and come vnto me: 
                        〈…〉
                     
your soules shall line. To shewe that a man may
labour and be neuer the more satisfied, he may
eate and his soule bee neuer the fatter, but lye
pining and languishing for all that in the shadowe
of death. S. Paul sheweth Titus in what
things the Minister must chiefly labour,Titus 3. 8. 9. and
the people must bee most carefull to follow
                     •
                  ,
and that is faith in God, and good workes amongst
men. His reason is, because these
things are profitable. But foolish questions,

                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
want her meate and food. There be many that
be masters in Israel, and will take vpon them to
knowe much, as the Laodicians tooke themselues
to be rich, and to haue need of nothing,
when in trueth they were poore, and blind, and
naked: & in many grounds of Christian religion,
are as grosse as Nicodemus,
                  Ioh. 3. 4. who thought
that a man could not be borne againe; except
hee went into his mothers wombe againe.
And deale with them in any of the Principles,
as of regeneration, or mortification, or sanctification,
or iustification, or faith and repentance,
or about the vse of the lawe, or the meaning
of any Commaundement, or Article of
faith, and many things more most necessarie to
be knowne and practised; and they are to seek,
yea so strange they are vnto them; that sometime
they are driuen to answer, as the Disciples
at Ephesus answered Paul,
                  Act. 19. 2. when he asked thē
if they had receiued the holie Ghost: they sayd,
We haue not so much as heard whether there be
an holy Ghost.
               
               But some have heard something, and doe
knowe more then others, and bee as it were awakened,
& a little enlightened: Like Agrippa
that was almost a Christian: and now they
thinke themselues safe enough, like Micah,
                  Iudg. 17. 13
who thought that he could not do amisse whē
he had a Leuite in his house. And then they
cast off all care of vsing holie meanes for the
encreasing of their faith, or knowledge, or

zeale, or rep
                     •
                  ntance: but giue their mindes to
toyes and 
                     •
                  anities, and to idlenes, and pleasures.
But these men doe fearefully deceiu
                     •
                  
themselues: for the house well built, will fa
                     •
                  l
to the ground, except it be continually repaired:
and the field well tilled and sowen, (if it
be not still weeded, and manured) will proue
barren: so will the soule proue ruinous & barren
in the graces of Gods spirit, if it be not continually
sed, with the solide
                     •
                   and wholesome
meate of Christian doctrine: and the talent
not vsed to encrease,Mat. 25. 28. shal be taken quite away▪
Therefore as Christ sayd,Math. 9. 23. 24. when he had reuiued
Iairus his daughter which was dead, giue her
meate:Luk. 8. 55. he sayd not▪ giue her musicke but 
                     〈◊〉
                  
her meate, least she dye againe. So, when the
Lord hath put his life into thy soule, which wa
                     •
                  
dead before, and hath in some measure quickened
thee in faith, in repentance, in loue▪ in
zeale, in patience, &c. giue thy soule meate 
                     ••
                  
                  musicke;
sound foode, not fond fancies. And
as Paul sayd to Timothie,
                  2. Tim. 1. 6. Stirre vp the gifts of
the holie Ghost in thee, least in the ende tho
                     •
                  
leese thy store, with stock and all, till thy sou
                     •
                  
proue bankeroupt in all the graces of the hol
                     •
                  
Ghost. And withall let vs know that there 
                     〈◊〉
                  
in euery one of vs a maine streame of natu
                     •••
                  
corruption: against which if we doe not 
                     〈◊〉
                  
continually, but stand at a stay, it will carri
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
away, and all our marchandize: as a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
standing loose vpon the riuer is carried bac
                     •
                  
                  ward,

if it be not rowed forward.
               Some are of minde,Seruants. that if they gather to encrease
their owne store, they haue done well:
but for their families they take no care, whether
they sinke or swim, whether they knowe
God or be ignorant of his waies, pray or pray
not, or whether their soules be clothed or goe
naked, goe to hell or to heaven, it is no matter,
they neuer remember their wants: Like Pharaohs
Butler, who thought himselfe safe when
he was out of prison, but neuer regarded the
affliction of Ioseph his fellowe prisoner. If a
man should demaund the food of knowledge
and vnderstanding at their hands for their seruants
and children, or other their friends: they
will answere as Nabal did, when Dauids seruants
requested somethin
                     •
                   of him for Dauid
and his companie when they were wearied
with trauailing,1. Sam. 25. 10. 11. 
                  Who is Dauid? and who is the
s
                        ••
                     ne of Is
                        •
                     ai? there bee many seruants now a
daies that breake away from their masters. Shall
I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh
that I ha
                        •
                     e killed for my sheerers, and giue it vnto
men, whom I know not whence they be? So say
many masters, and householders, who is my
seruant, and what is my familie? there are many
now a daies leaue their worke, and fall too
much to the scriptures. Shall I then take my

                     •
                  nowledge, and my learning, and my notes, &
giue to them? Shall I hinder my worke to feed
their humour, who
                     •
                   I know not whence they

are? or what reason there is for it? It should
seeme that if Nabal had knowne Dauid, hee
would haue giuen him some part with him. S
                     •
                  
if thou knewest who are thy seruants, and children,
or thy neighbour, or friend; or Christian
acquaintance, it may bee thou wouldest giue
them part with thee of thy gifts, and suffer thē
to worke by thy pattterne, and to light their
candles at thine. But doest thou not knowe,
who they be? Are they not thy brethren aswel
as thy seruants? Are they not fellow members
of Christ his body with thee, aswell as they are
thy seruants? Haue not they and thou all one
father, all one master, and all one Sauiour in
heauen? Hath not the Lord Iesus shed as many
drops of his precious heart bloud for them
as for thee? and d
                     •
                  est thou not knowe what
they are, that thou shouldest haue a care to
prouide meate for their soules? If thou keepest
a beast, thou wilt giue him that which is
necessarie for this life: and are those of thy familie
no better then beasts, that thou shouldest
prouide no more for them then thou doest for
thy beast? When the Disciples wished (without
all mercie) to haue fire come from heauen
vpon the Samaritanes;Luk. 9. 54. the Lord Iesus told thē
that they knewe not of what spirit they were▪
So when men (without all mercie and co
                     •
                  
                  passion)
suffer their families to runne into th
                     •
                  
fire of hell: saying, if they perish▪ they perish
what is that to me, so I haue my worke don
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                  
We may say they know not of what spirit they
are. If the Disciples were 
                     〈◊〉
                   reproued, the
                     •
                  
these are most iustly condemned: for they had
yet some 
                     •
                  loake for their desire of so seuere a
reuenge, because the Samaritanes refused 
                     •
                  ost
v
                     •
                  kindly and cōtemptuously to let their Lord
and master, the Lord Iesus our Sauiour▪ into
their citie; But for the careles crueltie, & cruell
carelesness of these men, there is no pretence:
for their seruants doe not shut them out of
their doores, as the Samaritanes shut Christ
out of the citie: but they receiue them, and labour
for them. And if they did offer thee such
vnkindnes (which God forbid) yet is it not
lawfull for thee so to be reuenged, by suffering
them to perish in their sinnes, but to pray for
them rather. The spirit of God doth not vse to
speake on that manner: for that is a spirite of
loue,1. Cor. 13. 5 and l
                        •
                     ue (sayth the Apostle) seeketh not
her owne things: that is, it is not all for it selfe:
but as it is carefull to edifie it selfe in the most
holy faith, by vsing such meanes as are appointed
by God to that purpose: so hath it also cō
                  passion
of others,Iude. 22. 23 as S. Iude saith, labouring in
all holie wisedome to pul others out of the fire.
But these are all for themselues, therefore they
haue not true loue: they haue not true loue,
therefore not true faith: for faith worketh by
loue, as Saint Paul teacheth the Galathians. If
they haue neither faith not loue, thē haue they
not the spirit of God in them▪ if they haue not

the spirit of 
                     〈◊〉
                   them, th
                     ••
                   are they 
                     〈…〉
                  
children of GOD, but hypocrites, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
themselues, and so consequently they neither
prouide for their own soules, 
                     〈…〉
                  
of other: but as they suffer their 
                     〈◊〉
                  
soules to perish for want of the meate & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
which they should haue; so doe they suffer
their owne soules likewise to perish, for want
of that which they suppose they haue, but haue
it not indeed.
               That wee may bee throughly moued with
that which hath been sayd, and touched with
compassion towards our owne soules, and the

                     •
                  oules of others that depend vpo
                     •
                   vs: it shall
not bee amisse to hearken a little vnto the piteous
moane and crie of the godlie, in behalfe
of their soules.Psal. 42. 1. 
                  Dauid 
                  
                     •
                  ayth, his soule 
                     〈◊〉
                  
after God, as the Hart braieth for the riuers o
                     •
                  
water: to shew that our soules are as it were i
                     •
                  
a continuall chase, and therefore must haue
prouided for them the liuing waters of Gods
word, or els they will perish. In another place
he sayth, that his soule thirsted after God in 
                     •
                  
drie and barren land where no water was. This
moane did Dauid make to God for his soule,
and yet he had more abundance of Gods g
                     ••
                  
                  ces
then ot hers haue: to shew, that if we had a
                     •
                  
good prouisiō for the keeping, and strengthening,
& defending, and cōforting of our poore
soules, as Dauid had, yet all is too little: for still
they lie thirsting and panting for more grace,

for more 
                     •
                  aith, for more zeale, for more repentance
for more loue, for more knowledge, and
for more vnderstanding, &c. for the temptations
and assaults of the soule are so many, so
continuall, so strong, so mightie, and so hot,
that it is not a little prouision of knowledge, or
vnderstanding, or 
                     •
                  aith, or patience, that will
serue the turne to make resistance: for the 
                     ••
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  ell
shooteth his darts thicke, and burning for
they befierie darts. But as souldiers in a ca
                     •
                  tle
besieged, must haue day 
                     •
                  e a newe supplie of
powder and sho
                     •
                  , of men, and munition, of
money and victuall, or els they will yeeld vp
the castle: so must our soules haue a daily supplie
of the graces of Gods spirit from the word
of God, or els they wil faint, and yeeld vp their
h
                     •
                  ld: For the soule fighteth aswell as the bodie.
And therfore Deborah sayd,Iudg. 5. 21. her soule had
marched valiantly: to shewe that there is a
marching, and a fighting of the soule aswell as
of the bodie: and therefore there must be good
prouision made for that as well as for the body,
or els it will not march valiantly, but fight
faintly, and yeeld most cowardly, and perish
most miserablie. Which daily and wofully appeareth
by that fearefull staggering and yeelding
of so many, when any scoffing Papist
doth but as it were breathe vpon them. And
what els doth this shewe but a great emptines
in the knowledge? there is no preseruatiue of
the word against the infection.
               
                  
Besides that, in regard of thy brethren thou
shouldest labour to store thy selfe with the co
forts and counsels of Gods word, and to bee
strong in the heauenly graces of Gods spirit▪
for such a famine of the foode of soules may
come, that one man may bee glad to seeks to
another for counsell and comfort. And if thy
house be emptie, or haue but a little, thou wilt
bee readie to say to thy neighbour, as the widowe
of Sarepta sayd to Eliyah, when he asked,
a morsell of bread of her in the great famine
that was in Israel,1. King. 17. 12. 
                  I ha
                        •
                     e not a cake but a handfull
of meale in a barrell, and a little 
                        •
                     yle in a
cruse, and beholde I am gathering of stickes
                        •
                     to
dresse it, for me and my sonne, that wee may eat
                        •
                     
thereof, and die. So if any man troubled in conscience,
come to thee for comfort and resolution
of his doubts, thou wilt say, Alas, I haue
not for you, I am no Diuine, I am troubled aswell
as you, I haue nothing but the Lordes
prayer, and the Beleefe, and the Commaundements
by heart, but I vnderstand none of thē,
and some good prayers and lessons I haue in a
booke beside: And if those will not serue my
turne when the tempte
                     •
                   commeth, I may goe
hang my selfe, or despayre, I must die, or do
                     •
                  
as it please God.
               Now what crueltie is this so carelesly to
neglect the meanes of thy soules health, who
was bred and brought vp with thee from thy
conception, and hath in thy seruice spent her

selfe, ministring strength and reliefe to thy bodie,
to euery part of thy bodie, yea to euery
member, to euery ioynt, to euery vaine and sinew
in thy bodie. And more seruice then that
too: for it hath made thee to differ from the
beast, in that it hath ministred to thee▪ both
reason, and vnderstanding, and iudgement, &
memorie, and affections, (for it is a reasonable
soule) which the beasts want: it hath taught
thee to speake, and to speake sensible, & wiselie,
and to conceiue things quicklie, and to vse
all other of Gods creatures comfortablie, and
to rule ouer them all, which the beasts cannot
doe: And wilt not thou oh sluggard finde so
much leisure as to gather heauenly meate and
foode for thy soule, that in the day of affliction
and iudgement, it may saue both it selfe, and
thy bodie too? Nay further consider, how the
Lord hath shut it vp in thy breast, that it might
bee alwaies in a readines to supplie thy wants,
and wilt not thou be readie againe to supplie
her wants? If it should depart from thee but a
foote, for a minute of an houre, it were present
death vnto thee, how canst thou then misse
her? nay, how canst thou not in pi
                     •
                  ie & compassion
prouide for her safetie? Nay further,
that it might be alwaies readie to minister vnto
thee, the Lord hath made her which is immortall,
and diuine, and spirituall, and heauenly,
and the most principall commander of all,
nay all in all, and all in euery part of thee, to be

enclosed within thee, as thy close prisoner, and
art not thou then bound to looke vnto her as
her keeper? Say not as Cain sayd, Am I my
brothers keeper? So, am I my soules keeper? for
thy soule is thy prisoner, therefore thou art her
keeper: & if thou either driue her out of thee▪
or suffer her to perish within thee, for want of
good keeping, her bloud shall be required at
thy hands. Take pitie then, O sluggard, vpon
thy poore prisoner: which maketh as pitifull a
crie for her prouision, if it bee wanting, as any
prisoners in the world. In London, and other
such places, it would moue a stonie heart to
heare one crying vp and downe the streetes.
Bread and meate, Bread and meate for the
poore prisoners of Newgate, for Christ Iesus
sake, & the prisoners crying out of their grates
and holes, one penie or halfepenie, for Christ
his sake, to buy some bread, to buy some bread▪
But thy poore soule lyeth in a worse prison thē
Newgate, there is no Gatehouse, nor Colehouse,
no Bocardo, no Little ease, no Dungeō,
no channell, nor Duckpit is so vile a prison for
thy bodie, as thy bodie is for thy soule: for it is
neither lightsome nor beautifull, but darke, and
most dirtie, disquiet and 
                     •
                  ustie, fraile, and filled
vp with much venome, and venemous vipers,
I meane it concerning our affections. By reason
whereof the soules of Gods children haue
been constrained to crye, lament, and bewaile
their long being in it. Oh (sayth Dauid) ha
                        •
                     
                     
long shall I lye in this prison?Rom. 7. 24. Oh wretch that I
am (sayth Paul) who shall deliuer me out of this
bodie of sinne? Oh that I were dissolued,
                  Philip 1. 23 
                  and had
out of this earthly and fraile tabernacle.
                  Luk. 2. 29. 
                  Now
let thy seruant depart in peace, sayth Simeon.
Take me vnto thee, (sayth Dauid againe) and
bring my soule out of this prison, that it may giue
thankes unto thee O Lord. For so long as it is in
this bodie it cannot see the Lord, yea it is an
heauy habitation, and presseth downe s
                     •
                  re the
spirit from that familiaritie, which els it should

                     〈◊〉
                   with God.
               Now al this while there are none that go about
to gather for these poore prisoners, but as
the preachers crye out to men to remember
their soules: but oftentimes they speake but to
the bellie which hath no eares. Oh that thy
poore soule had but a grate to looke out at▪ and
leaue to speake for her selfe to those that passe
by thee, then would it appeare how thou hast
kept her, nay how thou hast starued her, oppressed
her, and robbed her of her spiritual exercises,
her heauenly comforts, and christian
conference with her godly friends & acquaintance:
nay, that she hath not been allowed a
good meale in a yeare, but now and then a few
colde, idle, sluggish prayers, or a little blowen
milke from the breasts of an old Homely: and
when any good matter was in hand indeede,
thy poore soule was so oppressed with surfeting
& ryot, that it was not able to receiue any

comfort: And yet thou wilt say, thou hast as
good a soule to Godward as any bodie. But
thy soule may say to thee, as Queene Elizabeth
sayd to Sir Henry Bennifield her layler (as she
called him) from such a keeper good Lord delitier
me.
            
            
               The third Sermon.
               
                  BVt yet some will say (for
all that hath been sayd) if
there bee no remedie but
the soule must haue prouision
made for her, they
will looke out for it: but
it shall be hereafter when
they are olde,Of the time to gather. or sicke, or troubled, or imprisoned,
or persecuted, it is time enough then: and
it is not good to bee too holie, or too religious
betimes, for feare of young saints wee proue
old diuels? Now all this is the diuels counsell,
and who would thinke it that he should bee so
carefull of men that they proue not diuels
Now the effect of his coūsell is but thus much:
Be not too hastie in these matters, it is enough

if thou bee a Protesta
                     •
                  e at large, and play the
good fellow, and make prouision for thy soule
when thou art full of paine, when thy sences be
gone, when thy body is dead, and thy soule bee
in hell: and then thou maiest crie for water to
coole thy heate, then father Abraham, father
Abraham, as the rich glutton in hell cryed:
and then thy friends shall sing a Masse of Requ
                        •
                     em
for thy soule, say the Papists, and then by
thy good workes, and prayers of holy Church
(if thou pay well for them) thou shalt bee redeemed
out of hell well enough. But (to let
this popish trash goe) what is this but to shut
the doore when the horse is stolen? or to fetch
the Phisition when the partie is dead? or to
seeke for oyle to thy lampes when the Bridegrome
is past, as the foolish Virgins did? and
to seek for the blessing with teares, when there
is no place to repent,Hebr. 12. as prophane Esaw did?
and to crye for thy goods when they be lost, at
fooles doe? Is this the wisedome of a Christian?
Then what is that wisedome that sayth,
Remember thy maker in the daies of thy youth?
                  Eccl. 12. 1. 2
If he were a wiseman that sayd so, then are they
but fooles that 
                     •
                  ay▪ In youth it is too soone. If
thou be no wiser then so, goe thou sluggard to
the Pismire, behold her waies and be wise▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
she in summer, and haruest, gathereth her food
against winter time: to reach thee what a foole
thou art if thou let passe the golde opportunitie,
& doest not prouide for thy soule in time.
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
want nothing: as husbandmen in the field to
till it, and weede it: as planters and waterers to
set it, and dresse it: as pillars of brasse in Salomons
temple, that are mightie to vphold thee:
as Elisha with his staffe readie to reuiue thee:
as guides with their lights readie to conduct
thee: and for thy safetie, and all their safetie,
behold the Lord & his Angels attending vpon
thee, and them too, seruing them which serue
thee, and defending them which defend thee,
and guiding them which guide thee: & therefore
doth he serue, and defend, and guide thē,
that they in him, and by him, may serue thee,
and defend thee, and guide thee. And as the
Lord from heauen prouided for Ioseph, that Ioseph
from Egypt might prouide for his father
and his brethren in Chanaan: So doth the
Lord still frō heauen minister to our Princes,
& to our Magistrates, & to our Preachers, and
to our Captaines, and to al the friends & maintainers
of his Gospell, that they in their places
may prouide both for their owne soules, and
thine too. So that now thou needest not goe
in feare, nor heare in feare, nor reade in feare,
nor pray in feare, as they did in Queene Maries
daies, when they could not reade a good
book, but still they must be looking who came
to see them: like the sillie Hare and Conie, that
at euery bit she taketh is still pricking vp her
eares to heare if the dogges come: or rather
like the Iewes which were faine to builde the

wall of Ierusalem with their trowelles in one
hand, and their swords in the other hand, for
feare of their enemies. But now, if thou be not
too sluggish, and fearefull of thy owne shadowe,
thou maiest gather the food of thy soule
in peace & security, & worke with both hands,
because the Lord himselfe fighteth for thee, &
watcheth for thee, & keepeth thee while thou
doest worke, and that thou maiest gather: As
Salomon sayth, Hee preserueth the state of the
righteous:
                  Prou. 2. 7. 8 
                  he is a shield to them that walke vprightly,
that they may keeps &c. Thou seest
what blessed meanes and helps thou hast now
for thy soules health. Now consider with thy
selfe (O sluggard) what monsterous and intollerable
ingratitude thou committest, if thou
giue the Lord leaue thus to waite and attende
vpon thee, with all his seruants, in heauen and
earth, and with all his blessings ready for thee,
and thou in the meane time lye downe and
sleepe, and say with thy selfe, It is not yet time
to goe, and gather. Besides that, consider further
how hard a thing it will be for thee (if not
impossible) to make prouision for thy soule,
when all these meanes are gone, and this summer
turned into winter. If thou wilt not plie
it for thy soule in time of health & peace, what
canst thou doe when thou are beset with troubles,
and sicknes, and paine? when al thy mind
shalbe of thy paine, and all thy wits and sences
shall be taken vp, and gathered together to deuise

some remedie against thy disease, and to
preuent, or to sustaine the pangs of death: yea
nothing will be so fearfull vnto thee then (thou
sluggard) as the remembrance of death, and
all thy studie will be how to liue still, for feare
of going to hell, if thou dye.
               Remember againe the prouerbe, When the
bellie is full the 
                     •
                  ones would be at rest, not at
worke. Now if the minde hath no list to work
when thy bellie is full of meate and drinke, &
ease, I pray thee consider what mind thy soule
shall haue of heauenely things, when thy bodie
is full of paine, and griefe, and torment, if thou
doest not prouide before hand spirituall and
heauenly comfort? Therefore, Goe to the Pismire,
O sluggard, behold her waies, and be wise:
for she gathereth her meate in summer, and prouideth
her food
                        •
                      in haruest.
               
               But some will for all this still put off the euill
day, and say as the euill seruant sayd in the
Gospell, Tush,Luke. 12. 45. my master will not come yet:
so the sluggard sayth, Tush, winter will not
come yet, wee are yet but young, sayth the
young sluggard. And the olde sluggard sayth,
What neede wee care for persecution, or feare
our enemies, so long as Queene Elizabeth liueth.
And both of these, if they were sure that
the winter time of persecution, and trouble: or
that the stormes and tempests of sicknesses &
common calamities were at hand, they would
perhaps awake and get them to worke, that

they might not bee without prouision at th
                     ••
                  
time. But alas poore soules, what charter hath
the former of his life: or the latter of his peace?
doe we not see young dye aswell as olde? and
many both young and old die suddenly, when
they thought to haue liued long? Some dropping
downe in the streetes: some at boarde:
some in bed: some at sea: some at worke:
some at play: and some cut off by murther in
frayes: some by theeues murthered in trauailing
by the way: & some sitting at table, are
murthered with the meate in their mouthes.
Woe worth the time, and the trees that euer
brought forth such fruites of sauage crueltie,
and brutish barbarisme in the peaceable gouernment
of England, vnder the Gospell of
Christ. And yet for al this, and many moe such
like, thou are not warned, but thinkest thou
shalt liue still: as though thou heldest thy life
by Letters Patents from the Lord: and still
thou forgettest: [Thou foole this night shal thy
soule be fetched away from thee:] And wherefore
hath the Lord left vs certain of our death,
and vncertaine of the time of our death, but
that we should be alwaies readie for the comming
of death?
               And as for this summer time of peace and
plentie, which vnder the gouernment of our
soueraigne Queene, the Lords handmaide, we
enioy now, it cannot bee denied but it hath
been, and is great, and wonderfull. And therefore

great and fearefull will be the Sluggards
iudgement, when the winter of trouble and
penurie shall come, with the famine of the
Worde into the land, because he hath not gathered
any riches for his soule, but is bare, and
barren in all the heauenly graces of Gods spirit,
yea in all this time, wherein any man might
haue stored himselfe for many winters, and all
weathers. And when that time commeth,
thou shalt lye and thinke vpon the time past,
yea and burst thy heart with griefe, when thou
shalt thinke how many golden occasions thou
hast omitted: how many sweete sermons thou
hast lost for a little sleepe, or one vanitie or another.
And the burden of thy dolefull and woful
song will be then, the fooles Had I wist.
               But if we speake of Poperie and persecution,
or alteration of religion, or comming of enemies,
&c. some make a iest of that, as they doe
of all the iudgements of God: No, no, say the
secure sluggards, we shal neuer see those daies:
and if they should come, thousands and thousans
would dye before they would turne: and
as for the Spanyard, let him come when hee
will, or when he durst, he shall be met withall
I warrant him: oh one Englishman will be too
hard for ten Spanyards: and if we all be ture amognst
our selues and hold together, we need
not care how many, or how mightie they bee.
Thus we see how foolishly foolish men talke,
and how vaine their confidence and hope is,

which is builded onely vpon ifs, and ands. As if
one should say, If it doth not raine, it will hold
vp: But is he sure it shall not raine? so, are they
sure the enemies shall not come? or if they
come, are they sure that al wil be true amongst
our selues? or is it likely? And what reason
haue any man to stande so much vpon the
strength and valour of an Englishman, as that
one should be too hard for ten outlandish mē?
seeing God giueth strength, and victory where
it pleaseth him, and sometime armeth his enemies
against his church, yea and the very flyes,
and lice, and frogges, and caterpillers, & grashoppers,
and all his creatures he can arme whē
he pleaseth, to humble proud flesh, and to subdue
the pride and power of Kings and kingdomes.
               Oh but God will neuer suffer them to preuaile
so farre against vs (say some) they are
most wicked Idolaters, and wee professe his
Gospell, &c. As if the Lord were more bound
to vs, then to them: or as though it were for
our goodnes sake that the Lord had preserued
vs hetherto, and not for his owne name sake,
because it was his pleasure to make vs his 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Dauid was once of that minde,
                     
                        •
                     . Sam. 12. 22. that th
                     •
                  
Lord had made his hill so strong, that it should
neuer bee moued: but that was Dauids error.
So we thinke that the Lord hath made our hill
so strong, that it shall neuer bee moued: but
that is our error. And pride was the mother of

it both in Dauid, and in vs. But Dauid was moued,
and his kingdome sorely shaken as strong
as he was: so we may bee moued, and shaken
too, as strong as we are. But seeing as the sluggard
hath sealed himselfe a quittance, and
thereupon hath promised vnto himselfe a continuall
peace: we will consider a little of these
two poynts.Two points very necessarie. First, whether it be a thing likely
or no, that after this long and blessed possessiō
of the glorious Gospell of Christ, a winter time
of trouble may come, or not come. Secondly,
if it proue a thing likely, how wee may knowe
whether it be farre off, or nigh at hand. And by
that time, it may be the sluggard will awake. I
dispute not of Gods power, and what he is able
to doe, for he is almightie: nor of his mercie,
and how he may renew it with vs still: for he
is infinite in mercie, and his mercie is ouer all
his workes: but what his iustice requireth to
bee done, which is no way disanulled by his
mercie. And now the question is, what is likely
to ensue, by all circumstances, and probable
coniectures, in respect of the manifolde and
wonderfull blessings which the Lord hath so
long heaped vpon our nation with his Gospel;
and the manifolde vnkindnesses, and daily rebellions
which his maiestie hath receiued continually
at our hands for the same: And if his
spirite should still striue with man, to put our
sinnes out of his remembrance: or for Noahs
sake a while longer to spare the world: or for

some Lots sake to saue the citie from burning▪
and to draw out the thred of our peace & happines
yet longer: it is no more then his maiestie
may doe, and can doe if it please him, and
(that it may so please him) we doe all most instantly
beseech his diuine maiestie, for his mercies
sake: which if he graunt, shall bee no lesse
wonder, then to command the Sunne to stand
still, and the Moone to goe backe againe, as in
the daies of Amaleke: or to diuide the sea againe,
as in the daies of Pharaoh: or to forbid
the fire to burne againe, as in the daies of Nabuchadnezzar. But this is not likely, and therefore
it shall be no part of wisedome for vs to
presume vpon it.
               Now then let vs come to the poynt, and see
why it is not likelie. We vse to saie, that after a
great time of heate, there will come a cooler,
and it is so for the most part. And as it is in the
state of times and seasons, so is it also in the
state of the Church: and therefore it is not vnlikely,
that after this long time of peace and
ease, there may come a cooler: for so it hath
been commonly seene from the beginning,
and not without cause: for if nature should not
sometimes be corrected, it would in time bee
wholly corrupted: the standing water that is
neuer troubled, we knowe by experience doth
breede the most filth. And if the ayre shoulde
still bee calme, and neuer bee clensed by the
windes, by thunder, and lightning, it would

proue infectious: the bodie that is not exercised,
aboundeth most in ill humours, and the
yron that is not scoured still gathereth rust,
and the childe that is continually fed, and hath
whatsoeuer he craueth, and cryeth for, at last
playeth with his meate, and casteth it to the
dogges: and therefore it is necessarie that
sometime he should be abridged and pinched.
And so doth the Lord also (by interrupting the
peace and ease of his Church) purge the ill humours
of pride and contempt growing in the
bodie of his Church: so doth he vse to scoure
off the rust of impatience, and distrustfulnes
which growe vpon our yron hearts with the
graces of Gods spirite. So doth he by stormes
and tempests, by thunderings, & lightnings of
troubles and persecutions, clense the corrupt
ayre of his Church, least the good graces of
faith and of repentance, and of loue, and of
zeale, and of patience, and of charitie, should
through continuall calmenes be infected with
infidelitie, or impenitenc
                     •
                  e, or hardnes of heart,
or profanenes, or pride, or vaineglorie, or selfe-loue,
or coldenes, or Apostasie, or with one spirituall
disease or another: and so dooth the
Lord vse to pinch, and abridge his Church of
the foode of his heauenly worde, now and
then, and sometime for a long time, when it is
loathed, and plaied withall, and trode vnder
foote, and all this the Lord dooth in singular
wisdome, because the worth of benefites is not

so well knowne, as by the want of them. That
our hearts and soules are cankred and rustie it is
most euident, and therefore a scouring is to be
thought vpon at the least: that there are many
ill humours of vnthankfulnes, of pride, of contempt,
of crueltie, and oppression, of swearing
and forswearing, of whordomes, and drunkennes,
of al kind of profanenes and abominations
abounding in the bodie of the Church, it is not
to be denied. And therefore a time of purging
and exercise is to be thought vpon. That Manna
is loathed, and the pure preaching of Gods
most holy word despised, and the faithfull Prophets
of the Lord hated, and molested, for doing
the Lords message, and the feete of the
                     •
                  
which bring glad tidings counted most soule,
which should bee esteemed as most beautifull,
all this is too visible, and palpable, and therefore
Amos his famine is to be thought vpon,Amos 8. 11., if
not to be looked for. When the Lord had planted
a vine in Israel,Esay. 5. 1. 2. &c. and watered it, and hedged
it, and dressed it, hee looked for grapes b
                     ••
                  
found none, but the wilde grapes of oppression
and iniquitie. But what then? Then hee purposed
to take away the hedge thereof, to breake
downe the wall thereof, and to laye it waste▪
that it might be deuoured of wilde beastes:vers. 3. 4. 5. 6 but
first hee tolde them that hee would deale th
                     ••
                  
with them, and themselues should bee iudg
                     ••
                  
whether hee did them any wrong or no. Th
                     ••
                  
the Lord hath done as much for his vineyard

in England, as euer he did for his vineyard in
Israel, (if not a great deale more) no indifferent
bodie will denie: that the grapes of Englands
vine bee as wilde, and as sower, as euer
were the grapes of Israels vine (if not much
worse) the branches themselues can testifie.
But what then? And is not now a breaking
downe of the wall, a plucking vp of the hedge,
and a laying waste of the vine in England to
be thought vpon (O sluggard) if not to be looked
for? Hath not the Lord tolde vs of his purpose
and determination herein, againe, and againe?
And are we not rather worse then better
for all that? Now if these things come to
passe, wee our selues shall bee iudges whether
the Lord hath done vs any wrong or no. Now
consider further with thy selfe (O sluggard)
what priueledge hath England more then Israel
had? How much is the Lord beholding to
vs, more then to them? surely neither to them
nor to vs, nor to any was euer the Lord beholding,
for if a man be righteous, he is righteous
for himself, saith Iob. But what promise or warrant
haue wee more then they had,Iob. 35. 7. or any
Church from the beginning of the world?
Hath there not been in nature a continuall intercourse
and change of winter and sommer,
of night and of daye, of fayre weather, and of

                     •
                  owle wether, of colde and of heate, of the
spring and the fall? And hast thou not obserued
the like in the state of grace? Surely if thou

haddest not closed vp thy eyes of purpose
(O thou sluggard) thou couldest not ch
                     •
                  se
but see the Lordes worke therein. Well,
yet thou canst not denye, but that there
haue beene many alterations, and sundry
changes in the worlde, and thy selfe sometime
(betweene waking and sleeping, but
without any feeling) wilt sitte and tell of
them, and what thou hast seene in thy time,
which shall bee sufficient to condemne thee:
for it is more then a dreame that thou speakest
of. But if thou wilt now (besides thy
owne drousie experience) a little listen vnto the
word of God, and praye vnto God that hee
may open thy eyes, thou shalt see that which
yet thou diddest neuer so much as dreame of▪
like the seruant of Elisha, which sawe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
mountaines couered with heauenly souldiers,
when the Lord opened his eyes, which before
hee sawe not. Marke it well I saye, and
thou shalt see, both how often the Lorde hath
turned, and as it were wheeled about his
Church, and the cause thereof to be still the
Churches iniquitie.Note that well. And thou shalt see, if not
confesse, that the continuall starting of men
from GOD, hath broken the course of his
grace, which otherwise had been continual
                     ••
                  
The truth whereof may appeare almost from
the beginning of the world. For first, when
the true worship of God was in the cursed of
spring of Caine almost vtterly decayed,Gen. 4. 26. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Lord restored it againe in the dayes of Seth,
and his sonne Enos, that it might thriue and
florish in the world. Now it was summer
time with them: but how long did it last?
Surely not long, for scarce eight generations
were passed, when all the posteritie of them
whom God had separated for his owne children,Gen. 5. 2.
did mingle themselues with the sonnes
and daughters of men at their pleasure without
the feare of GOD, throwing themselues
in such wise into all manner of wickednes,
that (hauing defiled themselues, and the
whole world with their abhominations) the
Lorde brought a floud vppon them,Noah. to destroye
them all, that they which had drowned
themselues in sinne, might bee also drowned
in water: and so they were twise drowned;
and now was winter come. When the
Church was brought to eyght persons, it seemed
then so purged, that the little seede
which remained, should of it selfe bring forth
nothing but pure holines: and yet anon after
it diminished almost by the fourth parte.
Afterwarde the Lorde renewed his couenant
with Abraham
                  Abraham. and his seede, for whome
hee wrought many wonderfull thinges: for
first, with a mightie hand and stretched out
arme, hee brought them out of Aegypt:
then hee led them through the red sea: then
hee fed them with breade from heauen: then
hee destroyed many Kinges for their sakes,

and made their very name famous and fear
                     •
                  full
full whatsoeuer it came, and thus they we
                     ••
                  
going towards the land of promise: now, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
would not of such happie beginnings 
                     〈◊〉
                  
iudged that there should haue ensued a co
                     •••
                  
nuance of a happie state? Notwithstanding
the very same people, (in whose deliueranc
                     •
                  
the Lord had shewed so manifest a proofe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
his power and mercie) did not cease contin
                     •
                  
                  ally
to prouoke the Lord with their impati
                     •••
                  
murmurings, and vnkinde rebellions, vntill by
fearefull, and horrible iudgements they were
all destroyed in the wildernes.1. Cor. 10. 5. At length the
children of them tooke possession of the said
                     •
                  
land, but yet such a possession as well neere in
600. yeares after, had no stabilitie, because they
themselues through their owne falsenes, and
inconstancie did continually trouble it: and
still (by shaking off the yoke of God) they procured
new mischiefes to thēselues. Moses had
tolde them before, how it would come to
passe,Deut. 8. 10. 11. that when they were fatte and full, they
would lift vp the heele, and forget the Lord▪
And what dooth the storie of the Iudges rehearse,
but continuall backslidings? When 
                     〈◊〉
                  
kingdome of Dauid was erected, there seemed
a more certaine and grounded state of a church
to haue bin established, for a long continuance.
But that lamentable slaughter of the pestilēce,2. Sam. 24. 15.
which for three daies space raged most mo
                     •
                  
                  sterously
in the worlde, did greatly abate 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
felicitie. When Salomon came to the Crowne,
summer came againe to the Church: for God
gaue him great peace on euery side, and in his
rest he builded the Temple of the Lord in Ierusalem.1. King. 4. 24.
But by and by, after the death of Salomon,
the bodie of the realme was diuided, and
the torne members ceased not afterward to
bite one another. And both the kingdomes, I
meane of Israel, and Iudah,Esay. 9. 20. 21. were miserably turmoyled
by forraine warres. Shall wee say that
this came vnto them by fortune and chaunce?
Nay rather they themselues, through their sins
enforced, & hastened the vengeance of God:
for euen when they seemed most innocent,
namely, while Dauid goeth through with nū
                  bring
of them, because it was the peculiar fault
of one man: yet the holie storie sayth plainlie,
that God was wroth with them all.2. Sam. 24. 1. At length
followed that great euersion, little differing
from vtter destruction, when al the whole nation
was led captiue to Babilon: but after 70.
yeres they were restored home againe: which
ioyfull returne was vnto them another birth.
Notwithstanding, so soone as they were returned
home, straight waies forgetting so great a
benefite, they degenerated againe into sundrie
kinds of naughtines: Some defiled themselues
with heathen mariages: some defrauded the
Lord of his tenths, and first fruites: othersome
neglecting the building of the Temple,Mal. 3. 8. were
whollie occupied in making of braue houses,Hag. 1. 2. 4.
                  
and bestowed excessiue cost thereon: whi
                     ••
                  
                  
                     •
                  oule vnthankfulnes of theirs was such, as euerie
man must confesse (the Sluggard and all)
that it ought not to escape vnpunished. Neither
did it escape: for after that, the Lorde
brought them in subiection to the Romanes,
who burned their Temple, and made hauock
                     •
                  
of all.
               When Christ,Christ. the Prince of peace, and author
of all good things, shewed himselfe to the
world, men might sensiblie haue felt how certaine
and well grounded the felicitie of his eternall
kingdome is, if they would haue suffered
him to rest among them: but the worlde
was neuer shaken with more cruell tempe
                     ••
                  
of warre, nor neuer drowned in so deep a sinke
of manifolde euils. But what was the cause?
Surely when Christ was borne, there was singular
peace and quietnes euery where. Abo
                     ••
                  
40. yeares after his Gospell was spred throug
                     •
                  
diuers costes of the world: After it was published
farre and neere, suddenly things began
to be on a turmoyle euery where. And whereof
came so sudden alteration, but that God 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the contempt and refusall of his Gospell, wa
                     •
                  
now bent to be reuenged of so great vnthankfulnes?
and that most iustly. For when Kings
and their people had despised the peace which
God offered them,Note that. was it not right and reaso
                     •
                  
that they should bee set together by the eares,
that one of them might wound another to th
                     •
                  
                  
death? And what can continue in order amongst
them, who refuse to submit themselues
to God? I speake not onely of the open
enemies, which haue wilfully striuen against
the wholesome doctrine of godlines, but also
of them that haue professed themselues Christians.
For how coldly, and disdainfully haue
many of them, how falsely, and dissemblingly
(like Iudas) haue othersome kissed Christ? It
is not vnknowne that IerusalemIerusalem. was once the
fountaine from whence saluation flowed into
the vttermost bounds of the earth: but at the
comming of Christ, it retained scarce a thinne
shadowe of the ancient worthines: and within
a while after, it not onely lost that that remained,
but was vtterly cast downe also, and
made a waste wildernesse: which made the
Lord Iesus shed teares when he looked vpon
the citie. What is the reason that no man trauaileth
in seeking out the cause of so monsterous
a ruine: but that the desperate wickednes
of that nation doth openly crye out that the
same was the cause thereof?
               RomeRome. was neuer plagued with so manie
cruell slaughters in so short a time, as it hath
beene since the Gospell came thither. But
what was the cause thereof? Open thy eyes
(sluggard) and thou shalt see the cause plaine
enough, that when God brought the medicine
of his Gospel thither, as the vttermost remedie
against so many deadly diseases of lawles lust,

wicked partakings, and intollerable tyrannie
which raigned in that citie, they (like persons
that had sworne their own destruction) proudly
reiected it, and ceased not to fall from worse
to worse.
               The very selfe same thing wee may obserue
in this our age, both in the kingdom of France,
and elsewhere: For when the Church was as
it were newe borne againe, and had a glorious
beginning, like the rising of the Sunne, it hath
been seene soone after to slide downe and carried
backe againe. And yet before the Lorde
layde those fearefull punishments vpon them,
of ciuill dissentions, and of bloudie massacres,
accompanied with many horrible mischiefes
moe, the Gospell was seene diuers and sundry
waies euery where filthilie abused: in so much
that the sudden turning vp of things that happened,
is not so greatly to bee wondered at, as
Gods long sufferance, in bearing with the
prodigious wickednes of our time.
               And in England, amongst so many thousands
as to outward appearāce had very gladlie
denied the Pope, and professed themselues
Gospellers: how fewe (I pray you) doe fall to
amendment of their vices? Nay rather, what
do the greater part pretend, but that when the
yoke of superstition was shakē off, they might
more licentiously giue themselues to all carnall
libertie? And albeit they confesse the doctrine
of the Gospell to bee true, yet where is

there one among many that submitteth his
necke vnto the yoke and discipline thereof?
That Christ shall be abased for their aduancement,
they are content: That he shall be pinched
with pouertie and penurie to make them
rich, they are content: That Christ shall bee
betrayed for them, if not by them too, they are
also content: That Christ shall be whipped for
them, and imprisoned for them, and buffered
for them, and mocked at for them, and crucified
for them, they are very well content, and
like it well: but that Christ shall be the King
of their soules, and rule them, and cēsure them,
and order them, by his owne lawes and ordinances,
they will none of that; because that is
against our pleasure▪ and against our profite,
and against our honours, and dignities: Like
the young man in the Gospell, that would doe
any thing that Christ bad him,Mat. 19. 22. sauing selling
away his goods for the vse of the poore: but
that he could not abide, because he was rich;
and it was not for his profite.
               Now then what is to be looked for, or likely
to ensue, but a most sharpe punishment answerable
to such wicked, & wilfull contempts?
And if any thing be to be wondered at, here is
the wonder, that (considering our great vnthankfulnes)
any part of the worke remaineth
which God hath begun. And (to conclude this
poynt) wee see how the Lord hath tossed and
turned his Church from time to time: how he

hath from the beginning of the worlde both
summered it, and wintered it, eased it, and pinched
it, pardoned
                     •
                   it, and plagued it, for the abuse
of his grace, and contempt of his worde
                     •
                  
wee see the print of his steppes in all pla
                     ••••
                  
before the floud, and since the floud: in Israel,
and in Iudah, and in Ierusalem, and in Rome,
and in Chanaan, which is now Turkey, and in
France, and in Scotland, and in Germanie, and
in England too, which hath been ouerrunne
sometime by the Danes, and sometime by the
Normanes, and somtime by the Britaines, and
now inhabited with Englishmen, that can
scarce tel of whom, or whence they came. And
in England we knowe what changes and alterations
haue happened: one while Poperie,
another while the Gospell: now peace, and ano
                     •
                  
persecution: and like the sea, our peace
still ebbing and flowing, but neuer certaine,
and now more enuied, and threatned, then 
                     •
                  
                  uer
it was. This we see, I say, and this may the
sluggard see if he will awake. And seeing 
                     •
                  his
course which God hath continually thus taken,
what reason hath the sluggard to lye still
snorting and sleeping in his sinnes, as he doth,
both in the Court and countrey, in the cities
& villages, and in euery place els, as he doth?
And what reason hast thou (oh sluggard) to
dreame still of a drie summer, as it is in the Prouerbe,
and not to thinke of a winter aswell as
of a summer? What charter hast thou 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
then thy fellowes that are gone before thee?

                     〈◊〉
                   thou better then they? I tell thee, nay the
Lord Iesus tels thee, thou art not better whatsoeuer
thou art, but worse: Except thou repent

                     〈◊〉
                   shalt likewise perish. Thinke no longer
therefore with thy selfe, that thou shalt neuer
be awakened: for by all likelihoods and probable
coniectures, a winter will come, with
such stormes and tempests, that shall awake
thee, and pinch thee, & starue thee too, if thou
prouide not in time for thy safetie. And take
this withall, that the longer it be in comming,
she sharper will it bee when it commeth: because,
to whom much is giuen, of him much
shall bee required. Therefore, Goe to the Pismire,
O sluggard, b
                        •
                     hold her waits and be wise:
for she &c.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Whether this winter bee neere,
hand, or farre off and how wee
may know it.
               
               The fourth Sermon.
               
                  BVt all this will no awake
the Sluggard. 
                     〈…〉
                  
with himselfe, 
                     〈…〉
                  
for though it 
                     〈…〉
                  
winter may come, yet
now it is summer, & winter
will not come yet: Like the euill seruant in
the Gospel that said, My master will not come
yet and so fell to beating of his fellowes still, as
the sluggard falleth to sleepe still, and still puts
off the day of his turning to God. And it seemeth
that this is no news deuise of the sluggard:
for he hath learned it of the scornefull
men of Ierusalem, and it is a common answere
of all sluggards that meane to dwell still in
their sinnes: It will not come yet▪
                  Esa. 28. 15. When the
Lord by his Prophet sent worde to Ierusalem
that a scourge was comming vpon them for

their sinnes, they cared not for it: for they had
made a couenant with death, and were at agreement
with hell, that is, they had a shift for
euery thing. And admit, say they, that a scourge
do come, and runne ouer vs, and passe through
vs, yet it shall not come at vs: for We haue
made falsehood our refuge, and vnder vanitie
are wee hid. A goodly refuge, and a couering
sutable, and best beseeming the scornfull sluggard.
And what other refuge, or couering haue
all the sluggards of our time, but a refuge of
falsehood, and a couering of vanitie? that is a
falfe refuge, and a vaine couering, which is as
good as none at all. But because the sluggard
is at that poynt, to thinke that it is yet a great
way off: like the foole in the Gospell, who told
his soule of pulling downe his old barnes,Luk. 12. 20. and
building bigger, and of liuing many yeares, euen
that night whē his soule was to be fetched
away from him: wee will now goe a little further,
and as wee haue proued it a thing very
likely to 
                     〈◊〉
                   a winter come after this fune-shine
summer of the Gospell: so wee will also
proue, by the grace of God, that it is not farre
off, but very likely to come shortly vpon vs. I
set neither houre, nor day, nor moneth, nor
yeare: but would haue the sluggard to knowe
that it is at hand, and nor so farre off as he doth
imagine. And let not this caueat be to dismay,
or terrifie any man, except it bee the drowsie
sluggard, whom nothing will awake: but as a

voyce going before the Bridegromes shoute,Matth. 25. 6
that they which now want oile for their lamps,
may in time prouide against his comming.
But how shall wee knowe that the winter
stormes of trouble and persecution are approching,
that we may make our prouisiō? Surely,
as Christ taught his Disciples to knowe when
summer is at hand: so by the same rule wee
may learne to knowe when winter is at hand
And by the figge tree both may bee learned:Mat. 24. 32.
                  Learne the parable of the fig tree (sayth Christ)
when her bough is yet tender, and it bringeth
foorth leaues, ye knowe that summer is neere:
Therefore by the rule of contraries, when the
figge trees bough hath lost her tendernes, and
cast her leaues, we may knowe that winter is
neere. The figge tree shall be the Church of
England, the boughes the members of the
Church, or professors of the Gospell; the tendernes
of the boughes, the loue of the Gosped;
the leaues, the profession of the Gospell; the
fruites of the tree, the fruites of the Gospell; as
loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gētlenes, goodnes,
meeknes, temperance, godlines, patience,
charitie, sobrietie, faith, repentance, mortification
of fleshly lusts,Gal. 5. 22. and such like, which are
called in Scripture the fruites of the spirite:
which should bee in all the true professors of
the Gospell, because they are led by that spirit
which is a spirite of loue, and of ioy, and of vnderstanding,Esay. 1. 12.
and of counsell, and of courage▪
                  
and of the feare of the Lord, as Esay sheweth:
The hardnes of the boughes may shewe the
cōtempt of the Gospell, which argueth (where
it is) a departing of the grace of God: the fall
of the leafe may resemble the falling away
from the sincericie of the Gospell: which Saint
Paul calleth a departing from the faith: which
he prophecied of to come in the latter ende of
the world: which also argueth, that the end of
the world is at hand. Now, to know whether
the fig tree hath any fruite, or be casting off of
her fruite, leaues and all, great search need not
to bee made with a candle, as if it were a thing
hidden in darknesse: for it is so euident that a
man may see it a farre off. When Ieremie was
set to make search in Ierusalem for one righteous
man, that it might be spared: he was not
willed to stand stil in euery place that he came
at, and narrowly to looke into euery corner, as
though he should els haue wanted matter: but
to runne to and fro in the streetes,Iere. 5. 1. and it was enough:
for their wickednes was so openly professed,
that a man might see it as he ranne. So
a man neede not stand prying into euery corner
of England, and leisurely to take a narrow
view of euery mans life, that were too much:
but let him runne to and fro in the streetes, and
open places of the land, and it is enough: so
openly is wickednesse professed, and so manifestly
is our filthie nakednes laid open. Ieremi
                        •
                     
                  
ranne through the streetes of Ierusalem, but he

could not finde one that executed iudgement,
and that sought the trueth: So they that execute
iudgement iustly, and seeke the trueth vnsainedly
in the Church of England, are least in
sight, and must not doe it openly, least they be
noted for Puritanes. Many say, the Lord liueth,
yet sweare falsely: there was swearing,
and false swearing, and common swearing in
the streets, and in the houses, and in the shops,
and in the markets, and in the courts of Ierusalem:
and the same is to bee 
                     •
                  eene in England,
and all vnder the cloake of religion too. And
for these things the Lord hath striken vs, but
we haue not sorrowed: and some hath he euen
consumed to the terror of others: but neither
they, nor others haue returned to the Lord. If
we goe along with Ieremie from the common
people to the great men, what shall we finde?
Surely they should know the way of the Lord,
and the iudgement of their God should not be
hidden from them. But alas, none more ignorant
then many of them, they haue altogether
broken the yoke of discipline, and burst the
bandes of godlines. If a man looke into the
Court, is not there also the fall of the leafe?
for how els is the time spent? but (as the Apostle
sayd of our forefathers) in sitting down
to eate, and drinke, and rising againe to play,
studying who shall exceede and excell others
in vanicie; pride, and brauerie, in flattering, and
dissembling, in 
                     •••
                  hing, and scoffing, in chambering,

and wantonnes: but alas, there is no
leisure to looke vpon the booke of God. If Amos
the rough h
                     •
                  wen heardman come thither
to preach, there is no place for him, he must go
againe to Bethel, what should such a fellowe
doe there to awake the sluggard, and trouble
the diuel in his sleepe? As for the often preaching
of the Word, which was wont to be there,
how is it eclipsed, and abridged? and that
which remaineth, alas what is it for the most
part, but a swee
                     •
                  e pleasing song, to rocke them
fast asleepe in their 
                     •
                  innes, which were asleepe
before? and happie were it for England if that
kinde of preaching were not made a patterne
for the most preachers in the land to followe.
But how els s
                     •
                  ould the people (when winter
commeth) bee found frozen vp in their dr
                     •
                  gs
(as the Prophe
                     •
                   speaketh?) how els shoulde

                     •
                  hey bee 
                     •
                  ardenedhin their sinnes, and haue
their condemnation sealed vp unto them? As
for the Prelate, and great men of the Church,
haue not their figge tree also lost her tender
                     •
                  es,
and cast her leaues aswell as others? Verily
it is to manifest, that it cannot be denied: or

                     〈◊〉
                   what is become of that ancient diligence
and painfulnes in preaching, of that zeale and
faithfulnes in professing, of that courage and
boldnes in reprouing, and of that louingnes

                     〈◊〉
                   lowlines in entertaining that was in many
of them before they were exalted?
               Before 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   was King of Aram, the Prophet

                  Elisha looked earnestly vpon him, an
                     •
                  
wept: & being asked of Hazael why he wept,
he told him the cause,2. King. 8. 12 and that was because
Hazael comming once to the kingdome,
should doe much euill to Israel, and tolde him
that he should burne their cities with fire, that
hee should slaye their young men with the
sworde, that hee should dashe their infants again
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   stones, and rent in peeces their women
with childe: which Hazael then tooke in
such ill part, that hee asked the Prophet if hee
thought him to be a dogge, that he should doe
such vile things. But yet when he was promoted
to the kingdome he did it. So if Elisha had
come to some when they were students in the
vniuersities, and afterwards zealous preache
                     •
                  
else where in King Edwards day
                     •
                  s, and perhaps
in our time too, and tolde them that they being
then 
                     〈◊〉
                   should lose their fatnes, that
they should proue colde and negligent in preaching
the word, that they should denye that
which they then maintained, that they should
silence, and trouble their brethren, and strengthen
the hands of the wicked, would they not
haue been offended as Hazael was? but haue
not promotion and preferment made i
                     •
                   prou
                     •
                  
too true? Looke into the state of the Churche,
and beholde her ministers and watchmen, ar
                     •
                  
they not for a great part of them, either blinde
and ignorant, of negligent, or vnfaithfull, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
fearefull or rash and h
                     •
                  ady and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or

vngodly, and profane? And if any be otherwise,
and approued for their learning, and painefulnes,
and wisdome, and courage, and godlines:
is there be some such, and (thankes be to God
many such) yet how are they hated, and molested
and made wonderments to those that are
rounde aboute them? If we come to the auncient
prosessors of the Gospel, such as in Queene
Maries dayes were zealous, and in the beginning
of our Queenes raigne were forward to
set vp the Gospel of Christ, what shall we finde
but in the most of them through the land, a generall
numbnes, and Apostasie, hauing put off
the shoes of preparation for the Gospell, and
put on the shoes of preparation for all kinde
of vanitie, preferring playes before preachings,
tables and cardes before the olde and new Testament,
resoluing to be iust of the Kings religion,
and to stand to nothing for feare of alteration.
These men haue been made so drunken
with prosperitie and ease, that they are fallen
fast a sleepe, not caring who standeth and
laugheth at their nakednes, hauing nothing
left but their beardes, and their budges, signes
of gra
                     •
                  itie, like an Iuie bush at a Tauerne
dore, where there is no wine: but as for their
loue, and zeale, and charitie, and pietie, and religiousnes,
&c. the date of them is out long agoe,
and their coppies altered. And if these
things bee any where, are they not generallie
resting in the younger sorte? Others there bee

which of late yeares haue al
                     •
                  o made a glo
                     ••
                  
                  ous
showe of zeale to the worde, and o
                     •
                   lo
                     ••
                  
to the ministers there of, which are also 
                     〈◊〉
                  
aside like a broken bowe: for as vntimely fruite
they were 
                     •
                  oone ripe, and soone rotten. At
the first so far in loue with the preachers, that
they would builde their saluation vpon them.
But by degrees (God cursing their pride, and
preposterous zeale) they fell quite away, insolently
condemning the church, for no church
the min
                     •
                  stery for no ministery, the Sacraments
for no Sacraments, but all to bee worse then
naught, like the Barbarians, who one while
tooke Paul for a murtherer,Act. 28. 4. 6. and another while
esteemed him as a God. And with their preposterous
proceedings, haue both hurt themselues,
and hindered the whole Church of many
good things, which otherwise might haue
been obtained, the Lorde laye it not to their
charge. Other some at the first comming of
their pastors amongst them, haue (in shew) giuen
forth good, testimonies of loue to the truth
who afterward haue also lost their tendernes,
& cast their leaues, (but fruit they neuer bare)
To these men the preaching of the worde hath
been acceptable at the first: and as a flashe of
lightning did a little dazle their eyes for the
present time, but after a while, when it began
to rubbe vpon their beloued sinnes, and the
mockes of the wicked began to encounter
them, they gaue ouer: and with Demas betooke

thēsēues to the world againe, like men
that repented thē of their bargaines. And not
staying there, haue proued the 
                     •
                  orest and sharpest
enemies to their power that might be against
their ministers, and the holesome doctrine
of the Gospel, in whō is fulfilled that fearfull
saying in the Gospell:Luk. 8. 18. 
                  From him that hath
not, shall be taken away, euen that which he seemeth
to haue. I say nothing all this while of the
infinite swarmes of Papists, & of Atheists, and
of Neuters, and of Libertines, and of Epicures,
and of Machiuels, and of Hypocrites, & timeseruers,
and false brethren, and scoffers at Religion,
& Protestants at large, & Schismatikes,
and worldlings, and priury whisperers, & backbiters,
and ruffians, and couseners, & cutters,
and many moe of that crue, besides whoremō
                  gers
and baudes, and theeues, and rogues, & a
companie of rakehels which cannot be numbred,
all which are permitted and suffered for
money, & briberie, by baseminded vnder officers
to iet it, & braue it vp & down in the land,
yea, with countenance & credite too, perhaps
more then shall be aforded to better men. And
where is he that dare speak almost against thē,
much lesse bridle them: for feare of many displeasures,
and dangers? And is it not come to
passe, that a man may with more saftie & credite
commit sinne then control sinne, which is
most lamentable? It was once said of Rome, (so
far was it degenerate frō all grace & goodnes)

that Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bon
                        ••
                     . 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
was lawfull to bee any bodie, and to doe any
thing in Rome, but not to bee a good man.
And is it not almost come to that passe in some
places of England, that it is more tollerable
for a man to bee what hee will, sauing a good
man indeede? For that can hardly bee without
some trouble. Doest thou see now how the
poore Church of GOD is pestered, and ou
                     ••
                  
                  runne
with weedes and wildernes? And 
                     〈◊〉
                  
thou not maruaile that the Lorde hath let it 
                     •
                  
                  lone
so long? When thou seest the Church of
God thus pained, (though in respect of others
of her sisters very blessed) imagine thou seest
Iob aliue againe, sitting downe vpon his ashe
heape and breaking out with botches & sores,
from the top to the toe,Iob. 2. 7. 8. 13. and his griefe encreasing
so, that his friends begin to sit aloofe from
him, being so grieued with the sight, that they
know no
                     •
                   well what to say to his comfort. And
what doth all this foreshew, but that the Lorde
is hard at hand to visite the land with scourges,
and to feede his people with the breade of affliction?
               And further, it is to be obserued, how the enemies
of the Gospell, and the Churche of
Christ doe encrease, how bolde they growe,
how disguisedly they goe, and how they can
fitte themselues to the present time, and frame
themselues to euery companie, hauing change
of sutes, and visards wherein they maske it at

the
                     ••
                   pleasure, that the Church of Christ hath

                     〈◊〉
                   a doe to 
                     〈◊〉
                   her friends and foes as
                     ••
                  der:
neither doth she know with whom to

                     〈◊〉
                   for pietie, or whom to tr
                     •
                  st for safetie.
All our comfort (vnder God, whose 
                     〈◊〉
                  
still watcheth ouer the righteous) 
                     •
                  s, that our
Mother is yet liuing, I meane her 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
on whose lappe the poore Church of the
Lorde Iesus may lay her head, whose tender
loue and care doth still 
                     •
                  euiue the fainting spirits
of Christs little 
                     ••
                  ocke, which otherwise
were euen readi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   yeeld vp the ghost: but
that their trust is in their great shepheard▪ who
will both keepe and defende them that they
miscarrie not: No not o
                     •
                  e of his will 
                     〈◊〉
                   lose.
This is some comfort yet, (God make vs truely
thankfull for it to his diuine Maiestis) This
is some comfort yet, I say, that our tender Mother
is yet liuing amongst vs, and Lord, for thy
mercies sake▪ long prolong her daies 
                     •
                  o the cō
                  fort
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Church. But yet in this bless
                     •
                  d comfort
there appeareth s
                     •
                  fficient matter to hūble
vs, and to make the sluggard looke about him:
For is not the Church now very sick, & weake?
Is not her Mother, our gracious Soueraigne, in
continuall danger of 
                     〈◊〉
                   hangbies; and
bloudie traytors? Are not hollow hearted, and
false hearted subiects a
                     •
                  mitted to her gracious

                     •••
                  sence many times▪ more then she or her
friends knowe of? But that the Lord hath still

                     〈◊〉
                   them, as cunni
                     •
                  gly as they masked it,

(blessed be his name.) And doe not the bloudie
Papists (for that is their brand) stād be 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the cloth as it were, with their swords draw
                     ••
                  ,
readie euery houre to steppe vpon the stage &
to play their parts? doe they not onely waite
for a day, like Esaw who purposed to kill his
brother when his father was gone? Well, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Lord is in heauen & laugheth them to scorne,
and knoweth how to dispose of their purposes
and intents wel enough, and can preuent them
if it please his Maiestie (as he hath done): but
this may greatly humble vs, and awake vs. Againe,
as we haue obserued in the preaching of
the Word where it is, a great defect in respect
of the manner which is too pleasing: so also
may we obserue (if our eyes be in our head
                     •
                  )
some corruption in respect of the matter in
many places, though not so general as the former.
And that is not lightly to be passed ouer,
but wee should learne in the feare of God to
make some vse thereof. And let the sluggard
consider well of it, that when any shall now in
so great and cleere a light of the Gospell, popishly
maintaine the 7. deadly sins: or call in
question our iustification by faith in Christ alone:
or denie to the Church the assura
                     •
                  c
                     •
                   of
her saluation by Christ: or discourage men 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the reading of the scriptures: we are to 
                     〈…〉
                  
of these things. Last of all (to conclude 
                     〈◊〉
                  
poynt) when any shall teach that we must beleeue
as the Church beleeueth, without examining

the doctrine by the word: and if any
man be deceiued, that it is sufficient for him to
say before the Lord, that the Church deceiued
him: as if it had been sufficient for, Adam to
say, his wife deceiued him, and the serpent deceiued
her. When thou Hearest (I say) of these
things day them to heart, & take them as prognostications
of further matters, and forerunners
of greater euils to ensue: especially seeing
the people are as greedie to drinke, as othe
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   broach whatsoeuer it be. Therfore
the 
                     〈…〉
                   his rich mercie open our sluggish
ey
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of our 
                     〈…〉
                   curitie.
And as Christ sayd,Mat. 24. 1
                        •
                     . When you see the abomination
of desolation stande in the holie
place, let him that readeth consider: So I say,
whē you see the corruption of sound doctrine,
and the abomination of popish filth stand in
the holie place, let him that heareth consider:
for it is Gods doing, though it bee the diuels
suggestion, and that iustly▪ for our sinnes.
               Thus haue wee runne about the streetes, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Ieremie did, and in casting our eyes here and
there, wee haue found that which you see:
much more is behind that we see not. But this
is suffici
                     •
                  n
                     •
                   to proue vnto the sluggards face,
that as a winter is likely 
                     〈◊〉
                   come: so (if God
bee not exceeding mercifull) by all signes and

                     •
                  okens it is hard at hande: for the figge tree
hath lost her tendernes, and there is generally
a fall of the leafe in all places: and wh
                     •
                  n wee

see that, we may know for a certaine that winter
is neere. Therefore (O Sluggard) put off the
time no longer: but while it is yet summer
prouide against winter, least thou repent it too
la
                     •
                  e. By this time the Sluggard might haue
been awakened, but he sleepeth still▪ and therfore
now let vs heare the. Lord calling 
                     〈◊〉
                   him,
and what answere hee will make when hee is
called.
            
            
               The fift Sermon.
               
                  9 How long wilt thou sleepe, O sluggard wh
                        ••
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      thou arise out of thy sleepe
                  10 Yet a little sleepe, &c.
               
               
                  THis question demau
                     •
                  ded of the
Sluggard, doth most 
                     〈…〉
                   set
foorth his nature, which 
                     ••
                  lighteth
in sleeping long, which loueth
ease and idlenes, which hat
                     •
                  th
labour and diligence, and yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   al

                     〈…〉
                   little though he hath been long idle
                     •
                   and
finally▪ is so farre stom amendme
                     ••
                  , being admonished,
that he resolueth still to 
                     〈…〉
                  
he began, excusing it by a little, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Whereby we may see, that whatsoeuer 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
sayd to the Sluggard, that wanteth the spirit of
God to quicken him, is but as so much water
powred on a Blackamoore, the water is spilt,
and the Blackamoore is neuer the whiter.
               In this demaund to the Sluggard, the Lord
expostulateth the matter with all of vs for our
dueties, & rowseth vs vp out of our dead sleep,
to shewe that we are all too careles in our dueties
commaunded of God: So loth is the Lord
to leaue vs vnto our selues, that when he hath
called once, he calleth againe, and debateth
with vs for our carelesnes, as he did with Israel
his owne people for their vnkindnes and wilfulnes,
in refusing the meanes of their saluatiō:
saying, Why will you die O house of Iacob,
                  Ezec. 18
                        •
                     1 
                  why
will you die? That both they and we might see
the great goodnes of the Lord towards vs, and
that the Lord might be iustified when wee are
iudged,Psal. 51. 4. and cleered when we are condemned:
because our destruction is of our selues, which
sleepe on still when wee are called, and yet
count all but a little. And this may serue as a
notable patterne of loue for Christians to followe,
in reclaiming their brethren that goe astray:
whereby we are taught not to giue them
ouer at the first: but when wee haue taught, to
teach againe, and though we haue called once
and often, yet to call againe, and not to leaue
teaching, and instructing, and calling, and expostulating
with them till they heare, and returne,
if there bee any sparke of hope left vnto

vs: like those that blowe at a coale till it hath
set al the wood a burning. And in dealing thus
with our brethren, let vs but imagine that wee
are labouring to fetch one againe that is fall
                     ••
                  
into a swoune, who with often rubbing and
chafing, with much pinching, boxing; and
wringing, may bee recouered againe, or els
not.
               The former patterne of diligence in the Pismire
was sufficient to cōtroll vs all, and to
humble vs, for our slouthfulnes in our calling,
(if we were wise indeede, for a word to a wise
man is sufficient) and very effectuall is that
doctrine which the Lord hath taught vs by it:
yet it pleaseth God to goe on still in expostulating
and debating the matter with vs (as we
see) whereby we may learne, what a hard matter
it is to awaken our sluggish nature, & when
we are awake, as hard it is to keepe vs awake:
for our eyes are no sooner open, but wee fall to
nodding againe: Like the Disciples of Christ,
who slept on still, though their master called
them, though he called them lowd, and often,
though the tempter were neere, and they in
daunger of falling into the pit of temptations;
yet coulde they not watch so much as one
houre, so heauie were they: And so is it with vs,
if we bee as good as Christs disciples. Now if
the best bee so heauie and sleepie, what are the
worst? The experience hereof we haue daily:
Let vs goe but to the Temple where the word

is preached, and there we shall see men no sooner
set downe, but fast asleepe. And the like we
finde at home in perfourming our spiritual exercises,
whether it bee of prayer, or reading, or
singing Psalmes, or instructing our families,
though Gods spirite doth sometime touch vs,
and awake vs, yet are we soone forgetfull, and
sleepe creepeth on againe. Therefore the Lord
giueth vs to vnderstand, that we haue neede of
many words to rowse vs, and all little enough.
For sinne is stubborne, like a monster whose
face is of brasse, whose necke is of yron, and his
heart as hard as an Adamant. And therefore
when the Prophets had to deale with the stubborne
Iewes, the Lord told them they should
deale with a stiffenecked people, whose necks
had finewes of yron,Eze. 3. 7. 8. 9 and therefore would not
easily bowe to the yoke, and their faces were
of brasse, and therefore would not blush at any
thing, and their hearts were harder then the
flint stone, and therefore would not easilie relent.
They were euen such as the preachers
now adaies speake vnto.Philip. 3. 18. 
                  Paul sayth he spake
often against belligods, which are enemies to
the crosse of Christ, telling them that their glorie
would be their shame, and their end damnation,
if they repented not: and yet they continued
stil in their sinne, as if it had neuer been
touched, and Paul continued still in beating
vpon them for it, as if hee had neuer touched
them: to teach vs, that it is not enough to

glaunce at sinne a farre off, (as the manner of
many is) and to touch it lightly and away, a
                     •
                  
some would haue it: but to hammer him, and
neuer to leaue beating and calling vpon him,
til he made either to yeeld, or to flee: which
cannot be done with glancing, and touching:
for he hath a thicke skinne, and hard scales, vnder
which he lieth fast asleepe. And this the
seruants of God haue well vnderstood: therefore
Dauid (being guiltie of his owne slouthfulnes
in the seruice of God) made vowes, and
bound himselfe by band as it were, to a more
constant course in the seruice of God:Psalm. 119. 106. 
                  I ha
                        ••
                     
swor
                        •
                     e (saith he in one place) and will perfor
                        ••
                     
it, that I will keepe thy righteous iudgements. I
                     •
                  
another place, the Church prayeth God to 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     member
Dauid: that is, his couenant made
with Dauid,
                  Psalm. 132. 1. 2. 3. and al his troubles: And amongst
other speciall vertues that he is described by▪
this is one, that he swore vnto the Lorde, and
vowed vnto the mightie God of Iacob, saying,
and vowing, that he would not enter into the
tabernacle of his house, nor come vpon his p
                     •
                  
                  lace,
or bed, nor suffer his eyes to sleepe, not
his eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of hi
                     •
                  
head to take any rest vntil he found out a place
for the Lord, and an habitation for the mightie
God of Iacob. Thus that holie man (perceiuing
his zeale to faint) would binde himselfe
in many obligations. And thus also in the exercise
of prayer, the feruants of God doe vse

many words, not because they delight in many
words, and vaine babling, (as Pharisles and
Papists, which labour it with their lips, thinking
to be heard the sooner for their lip-labour)
but thereby labouring to amplifie their griefe:
and because they doe not yet sufficientlie see
the wants that be in themselues, therefore they
vse many words, as bellowes to blow vp their
mindes, and to kindle their fainting spirits in
zeale, and feruencie. And for this cause likewise
the seruants of God haue set themselues
to their taske of reading, and praying, and studying,
that so much they will reade (if God
will) euery day, and so often they will pray euery
day,Dan. 6. 10. as Dauid and Daniel set themselues
to pray three times a day at the least. And thus
Isay in these and all other things belonging
both to their calling, and to their profession,
they haue still tasked themselues, and applied
their taske through the grace of God, which
(as S. Paul sayth) worketh and laboureth in
them, fearing least otherwise they should doe
but little or nothing. And in the doing of their
taskes, it is a wonder to see how sluggish they
are, and what a number of lets, and lions lye in
their way (as the Prouerbe sayth) that they bee
constrained to pricke themselues forward, and
then they dragge their legges after them too.
               In this demand we are (as we see) accused,
and indited of making great delaies of those
dueties which we owe to God. A matter surely

very worthie to be expostulated:Note that. for it is a
true token of a soule that feareth not God, to
driue off so long the doing of that which the
Lord by his word requireth to be done: for if
they feared God, they would be more diligēt,
knowing that God is able euery minute to cast
them downe to hell, and to presse them with
his iudgements. Some goe on (for all this) and
say, the time of their calling is not yet, they are
not called yet: although they heare the word,
and knowe in their owne conscience that they
doe euill, yet they goe on like desperate wretches,
making a mock at the iudgements of the
Lord, and say they are not called yet, whē they
are most euidently conuicted in themselues, &
by themselues. And being tolde of it, they tell
vs, that they must pray to God to be mercifull
to them in that, and so they continue still in
their rebellion, bathing and rotting in their
sinnes, like Naaman the Assyrian, who said, God
be mercifull to me in this: for though he knewe
it to bee a sinne to goe into his Rimmon, yet he
must goe in and do as his master did, and God
must dispense with him in that. Many such
Naamans there are still, which haue one Rimmon
or other that they knowe of, and yet they
sleepe on still in their beloued sinnes: some in
vsurie, some in whoring, some in stealing, some
in swearing, some in oppressing the poore,
some in deceiuing both poore and rich, some
in scoffing at Religion, some in prophaning

the Lordes sabbath, some in persecuting their
brethen, some in their ambitious and vaineglorious
attempts, and some in one sinne, and
some in another, euery one hath his Rimmon.
And thinketh in his base conceite, that the
Lord is as negligent in punishing of their presumptuous
rebellions, as they are in obeying
his holy commaundements: but let them take
heed of dallying too long with his Maiestie,
for hee will not bee mocked, though they bee
deceiued.
               The Children of God are commended (in
the word) for their diligence in obeying the
will of God, when once they know what was
his pleasure:Gen. 17. 23. When Abraham was commanded
to circumcise himselfe, and all the male
that were in his familie, he might haue sought
many toyes to driue off the time, as that he had
many soules in his house, himselfe was 99. yeres
olde, but he circumcised them al presently that
selfe same daye.Gen. 21. 12. 13. 14. So when he was commanded
to cast out his sonne Ismael ouer night, hee
gate vp early in the morning, and did it, as hee
was commaunded, which might bee a hooke
to pull out his very bowels: to cast out his
sonne was grieuous vnto him (as the storie
sheweth) yet hee did neither deny, nor delaye
the dooing of it. So in the 22. of Genesis we
reade, that when he was commaunded to offer
vp in sacrifice his onely sonne Isack, (which
might haue cut his heart strings in peeces) yet

hee delayed not the time, but rose vp early in
the morning, and went speedily about it: I
am perswaded that Abraham loued his
sonnes, (and he had cause so to doe) as dearely
as wee loue our sinnes, and yet when God
commaunded him to cast out one, and to kill
the other, he was readie to doe both: how ready
then should we be to obeie the Lord when
hee commaundeth vs to cast out, not our children,
but our iniquities, and to sacrifice not ou
                     •
                  
sonnes, but our sinnes, which else will cast vs
out of Gods fauour, and sacrifice vs in the valley
of Gehinnom, that is, in the pitte of hell fire?
Surely, if wee beleeued the promises of God,
and feared the iudgements of God as Abraham
did, we would no more sticke at the matter
then he did. Many haue receiued as good
a warrant from God and her Maiestie, both of
Magistrates, and Prelates, and Pastors, and
people, for the casting out of many abuses and
corruptions, both in the Church & commonwealth,
and in their priuate families, as Abraham
had for that which hee did, but they are
not yet halfe so forward as Abraham was, nay
would to GOD they were not backeward:
which sheweth, that though Abraham were
the father of the faithfull, yet he is not their father,
because they are vnfaithfull.
               If men cannot like that duetie which commeth
slowly from vs, much lesse is it acceptable
to God. We must first serue our selues, and

then obeye GOD, as he that would first goe
home and burie his father,Matt. 8. 21. and then come and
followe Christ. But this obedience loseth the
fauour of GOD, therefore what rewarde can

                     •
                  hey looke for, which haue a purpose indeede
to leaue their sinne, but not till their sinne
leaue them? That will serue, God, but that is
when for want of abilitie, or occasion they can
serue the di
                     •
                  ell no longer? That will measure
out the Lorde a parte, but yet with a false ballance?
That will giue the Lord the cuppe, but
it shall be whe
                     •
                   the diuell hath drunke the best
of it, and nothing is left but the dregges of old
age in the bottome? Oh let vs consider what

                     〈◊〉
                   praie when we say: Thy will be done in earth
by vs, 
                        〈…〉
                      A
                        •
                     gles doe it in heauen. The Angels
neuer 
                     〈◊〉
                   their busines, but doe it 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and therefore the scripture doth gi
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   note their swiftnes: now if wee
say
                     •
                   his: 
                     〈◊〉
                   and doe not 
                     〈◊〉
                   God 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,

                     •
                  hat doe wee else 
                     〈…〉
                   with his

                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  How long wilt thou sleepe O Sluggard? How
long shall God daunce attendance vpon thee? As
the Lord in this demaund doth charge vs with
delayes in his seruice, so in the same wordes he
doth likew
                     ••
                  e teach a way to redresse the same▪
And that is to consider how long wee haue
slept, or 
                     •
                  ow long wee haue made the Lorde
to waite our leisure in euery thing. And in the
Scripture wee shall finde that by this meanes

the children of God haue been much stirred 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to doe their duetie. In the 119. Psalme 
                     〈◊〉
                  
60. Dauid saith, He considered his wai
                     ••
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  
then made haste to keepe the Comma
                     ••••
                  ments
of GOD, which hee did not befo
                     ••
                  
he considered his waies, that is before he considered
how long he had gone out of the rig
                     ••
                  
waie, and wandred in his owne crooked 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to shew that the cause why we put off the k
                     ••
                  
                  ping
of Gods commandements is, because we
consider not how long wee haue dwelt in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
sinnes. But if we doe consider how long God
hath forborne vs, and swallowed vp our si
                     •
                  nes
in his mercies, this woulde make our 
                     〈◊〉
                  
hearts to relent, except we were past all goodnes.
To consider (I say) how long the Lor
                     ••
                  
hath spared vs when he might often most 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue punished vs: how hee hath euery 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  
                  ning
renewed his mercies with vs, when 
                     〈◊〉
                  
might haue consumed vs in our sinnes: & how
long wee haue disobeyed him, and pro
                     •
                  oked
his maiestie to wrath, except wee were desp
                     •
                  
                  rate,
and giuen vp to a reprobate minde, these
things would wring bitter teares from 
                     〈◊〉
                  
eyes. He hath wooed vs, and besought vs this
36. yeares, by his worde, to bee 
                     ••
                  conciled 
                     ••
                  
                  to
him, and still we prouoke him. Then let the
sluggish Magistrates consider of this: How
long will they neglect the glorie of God to set
vp their owne? How long by their euill examples
shall the people stumble and fall into 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
How long shall the poore crye out for iustice?
How long will they continue in discountenauncing
of good men and good causes, and
many fowle faultes moe would be considered
of them, how long they haue continued? This
is also for the slouthfull minister to thinke vpon:
How long will they keepe the doore of
Heauen shut? For if they had preached diligently
and faithfullie, it had been impossible
for poperie to haue crept into so many mindes
as it hath done. How long will they betraye
Gods cause, and let the people perish for want
of instruction? So to the Adulterer also, how
long shall the Lorde beare thy filthines, and
how long wilt thou abuse thy body and thy

                     •
                  oule in his sight as thou doest? And how long
will the Vsurer eate vp the Lordes people, as
o
                     •
                  e eateth bread, and grinde the faces of the
poore like a milstone? This must also come to
the quarreller, and malicious person to be considered
of: how long will they 
                     〈◊〉
                   in their
hatred, byting one of another? is there no end
of their malice? will their rash iudging, and
condemning one of another neuer come to an
ende? This is also spoken to Parents: how
long shall the Lord call vpon you to bring vp
your children in the feare of his name? How
long will you suffer them to liue so wantonly,
and so loosely as yee doe? How long shall
they goe vp and downe the streetes with such
filthie songes, othes and ribaldies in their

mouthes to bewraie their filthie educatio
                     •
                  
withall? Consider of this question also, yo
                     •
                  
that bee seruants, How long shall the worlde
complaine of your idle and vnfaithfull seruice?
When will you begin to adorne the doct
                     •
                  in
                     •
                  
of the Gospell, with your good conuersation?
This is also for vnthriftie gentlemē, that spe
                     ••
                  
their da
                     •
                  es in play, and 
                     •
                  iotting: How long
will you bee vnfaithfull 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? how long
shall the Lord waite for your conuersion? Thi
                     •
                  
is also to occupiers, which liue by false othes,
by false waights, and false lights, & false 
                     〈◊〉
                  
how long shall the Lord daunce your at
                     ••
                  ndance
for the reformation of these abomin
                     •
                  
                  tions?
There be many mo
                     •
                   that are also to cō
                  sider
of this poynt: but that which the Lord
speaketh to one, he speaketh to euery one, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
long wilt thou sleepe O sluggard? Though 
                     〈◊〉
                  
woman of Samaria dallied and iested long 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the words of the Lord Iesus▪ yet at the last,Ioh. 4. 29. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
Christ tolde her what she did, and she per
                     ••
                  iued
him to be the Messias indeede, she beleeued,
and ranne into the citie, and called her
neighbours to come and see. Christ hath tolde
vs all that we haue done, and al that we ought
to doe, and yet we beleeue not his words: but
put them off with scoffes and iest
                     •
                  : and those
that would goe to Christ wee doe not further
them, but hinder them. Now, if wee continue
at this stay, shall not the woman of Samari
                     •
                  
condemne vs? In the 18. of Luke the 4. and 5.

verses, we reade of a wicked Iudge, which feared
neither God nor man: yet when a poore
woman was importunate with him, at the last
he heard her. The Lord by his ministers (poore
men I confesse) hath been importunate with
vs to heare his suite, and to reforme our selues
by his word, which is not for his good, but for
our owne, as he sayth in Deut.Deut. 5. 29. 
                  Oh that there
were such a heart in my people to heare me, and obey
me, that it might goe well with them, & their
children. But yet we heare him not. Now, if we
still shall giue him the deafe eare, hardening
our hearts when wee should heare his voyce,
shall wee not showe our selues worse then he
that feared neither God, nor man? When
Christ forbad the diuell to torment and vexe a
man, he trembled at his word, and obeyed his
commandement. There be many that deuise
with themselues how to molest and vexe the
children and seruants of God, for professing
the truth, and discharging a good conscience:
The Lord Iesus hath often forbidden them,
crying to them as he did to Saul:
                  Act. 9. 
                  Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? thou doest but kicke against
the pricke: and yet they still persist in
their purpose. By which it should seeme that
they haue lesse 
                     •
                  eare of God in them then the
diuell himselfe: and if they still continue so,
shall not the veri
                     •
                   diuels of hell condenme
them?
               When the Lord spake the word, the flyes,Psal. 105. 31
                  
and the lice came, and were obedient to his
commaundement. GOD hath spoken many
words to vs, and yet wee obey not: therefore
they also shal condemne vs. When God spake,
the grashoppers came, and caterpillers innumerable
vpon the land of Egypt, and when he
spake the worde, they went away too. There
bee many caterpillers come amongst vs, before
they were called, and all the wordes in
the world will not driue them away againe:
therefore the caterpillers of Egypt shall condemne
the caterpillers of England, in the day
of iudgement. Though Peter did three times
denie his master:Luk. 22. 61 yet at the last, when Christ
looked vpon him he remembred himselfe, and
went out and wept bitterly. Wee haue oftner
then three times denied our master, Christ
hath both looked vpon vs, and spoken vnto vs,
but yet we remember not our selues: nay, we
are so farre from weeping and grieuing at the
matter, that we rather reioyce & laugh it out.
Therefore if we stil so continue, what weeping
and wailing will there bee at the last? For it is
sayd in the Gospell,Luk. 6. 25. 
                  Woe be to them that laugh
and reioyce now: for they shall weepe and lament.
When God had both warned Pharaoh to let
Israel goe, and plagued him for detayning of
them still: at length he asked him this questiō,Exod. 10. 3.
                  How long wilt thou refuse to humble thy selfe before
me? So the Lord hath warned vs often to
let our sinnes goe, and hath also in some measure

plagued vs for keeping them still. Now he
asketh vs also the same question, How long
will you refuse to humble your selues before
the Lord? which argueth that we are growne
as hard & as desperate as Pharaoh was, which
is also a signe of greater plagues yet to ensue.
Now this is fearefull and grieuous, when the
Lord commeth vpon vs with such questions:
for that sheweth that he doth not onel
                     •
                   note
our sinnes, but the long time that wee haue
prouoked him by them, and that he is euen
wearie in bearing them any longer, and mindeth
to vnburthen himselfe of them, and to
beare no longer. And commonly we may obserue
in the scriptures, that when the Lord cō
                  meth
with (How long? and how often?) there
is some great iudgement following: as in the
14. of Numbers the 11. verse, The Lord sayd t
                        •
                     
Moses, How long will this people prouoke me, and
how long will it be, ye
                        •
                      they beleeue me, for all the
signes which I haue shewed amongst them? Then
marke what followeth in the next verse, I will
smite them with the pestilence, and destroy them,
&c. to shewe, that though the Lord beareth
long, yet hee will not beare alwaies. When
Christ sayd, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, how often
would I haue gathered thee, as a henne g
                        •
                     thereth
her young ones, and thou wouldest not? So great
was his griefe conceiued with the remembrance
of those mischiefes that were to come
vpon Ierusalem, that hee could not vtter his

speech without shedding of teares. Therefore
when the Lord commeth, expostulating the
matter with vs in this sort, with How long, and
how often, &c. then let vs beware, if euer wee
beware, whether it be spoken in generall to al,
or in particular to any one man, that hath been
often warned by the hand of God vpon him.
               Had not Moses prayed for the Israelites,Exod. 32. 10 11.
they had perished oftentimes in their sinnes:
so if some did not pray for vs, (whom yet wee
can as hardly abide, as they could abide Moses
when they would haue stoned him) surelie
wee had perished yet this time. When the
Lord sware in his wrath that the Iewes should
not enter into his rest, he set them downe the
causes which moued him thereunto, and those
were in number fiue: They tempted him, to
trie what he could doe: then they prouoked
him by their often murmurings, &c. then they
grieued him with their continuall vnkindnesses
and rebellions: then their hearts were filled
with error. And how could it be otherwise?
for they cared not for the knowledge of his
waies. And to aggrauate the matter, & make
their sinne appeare in his full ripenes, he sets
downe the time how long they had continued
at that stay, saying, Fortie yeares long haue I
been grieued with this generation, &c. Fortie
houres had been much to grieue the Lord, but
fortie yeares was intolerable. Now the same
sinnes are we also to be endited for: and if no

Iurie will finde the inditement, our owne
consciences will crie guiltie. And how long
haue wee grieued, and tempted, and prouoked
the Lord? Hath it not been euer since the Gospell
came among vs? waxing euery day worse
and worse? And what doth that now lacke of
fortie yeares long, haue I been grieued with
this generation? surely but a little. Thus the
Lord we see marketh wel enough euery thing,
not onely what we doe, and how we liue, and
how we sinne: but how long we haue sinned,
and how often we haue been warned, & how
long we haue refused to returne, & to humble
our selues: yea the Lord marketh how many
yeres, how many moneths, how many weeks,
how many houres, how many sermons, & how
many sentēces in euery sermon we haue passed
ouer in careles cōtempt, without trembling at
the word of the Lord, or profiting by his corrections.
And according to the time of his lōg
suffering & patience, & of our stubbornnes &
disobedience, shall his iudgements be powred
vpon vs, if wee doe not preuent them by true
and speedie repentance. Long did the olde
worlde sleepe in their sinnes: long did Noah
preach against their sins, and at last the floud
came and awakened them to their cost. Long
did Sodom and Gomorrha sleepe, and long
did they vexe the soule of righteous Lot amongst
them, & at last the fire of Gods wrath
awakened them. Long slept Ierusalem in securitie,

but at the last their enemies awaked
them. So Nabuchadnezzar heard his dreame
as a dreame, and Daniel told him what would
come of it long before it came, but he fell a
sleepe againe: and at last the Lord turned him
out amongst the beast, and then he remembred
himselfe: but he was seuen yeares first in
learning his lesson.
               And this is most certaine, The longer the
blow be in fetching, the heauier will the woūd
be when it commeth: And the deeper the arrowe
bee drawne in the bowe, the deeper it
pearceth when it is let flie. Now in trueth, all
this time the Lord hath forborne vs, he is but
bending of his bowe, and whetting of his
sword, and aiming at the marke: and because
he doth not yet let goe at vs, wee thinke there
is no such matter. But we deale with the Lord
(oh miserable wretches that wee are) as birds
play with a skare-crowe standing in a corne
field with a bowe and arrowe in his hands, as
though he would shoote, but doth not: and
therefore they euen waxe bolde by little and
little, and at last euen flie to him, and sit downe
vpon him, and picke vpon him. In all holie reuerence
of Gods vnspeakeable maiestie be this
comparison made, which serueth onely to declare
the base, and brutish conceipt that the
wicked haue of God, and his long suffering of
them. But who knoweth the force of the Lords
wrath?Psal. 90. 11. (sayth the Psalmist) for after as a man

feareth, so shal his wrath be: and when it commeth,
it shall burne like mountaines of fire,
which no sea of water shall be able to quench,
if once his wrath be kindled, yea but a little.
               And on the other side, (for the comfort of
the godly and faithful, which haue a sanctified
desire to awake out of their sleep, and to serue
the Lord at the last in all holie obedience, and
careful diligence) though we haue long tempted
the Lord, and tried him: yet if now at the
last we awake in trueth, we shall finde, that as
he hath been long in suffering, so he will bee as
rich in mercie. The prodigall childe was long
absent, and at last (returning truely humbled)
was welcome to his father, and ioyfully receiued:
and so shall we be to our heauenly father,
if wee make such a returne, and that betimes.
Therefore let none be so desperatly minded as
to continue still his old course, as though there
were no hope of grace at his returne. And let
none be so discouraged with the remembrāce
of his long sleepe, as to runne quite away from
the Lord: for God will finde vs out wheresoeuer
we become, as he did Adam when he had
hidden himselfe (as hee thought) among the
trees of the garden. The diuell indeed will be
readie to shewe thee what a great way thou
hast to goe backe againe, what a number of
dueties neglected thou hast to repent of while
thou didst lie asleepe, and how hard a thing, &
impossible it is for thee to performe all this;

and all to discourage thee, and to keepe thee
still fast asleep, but beleeue him not: for wherefore
doth the Lord els put thee in mind of the
same things, but to haue thee awake and bee
diligent in doing thy duetie hereafter? And
wherfore els doth he thus reach forth the hand
of his grace vnto thee, but to helpe thee vp,
which canst not help vp thy selfe? Therefore
giue ouer now at the last, & be resolute in the
worke of the Lord, and the Lord hath promised,
that all that is past shall be forgotten. Let
vs therefore in the feare of God, leaue our delaying,
and descanting, and lay this doctrine
to our hearts, that it may appeare in our liues,
that wee be truely awakened, and all will bee
well: if not, but our purpose bee to sleepe still,
then the Lord by his Apostle doth giue vs to
vnderstand, that custome of sinne will bree
                     •
                  e
hardnes of heart, and hardnes of heart will
bring forth impenitencie in the end, that thou
shalt not bee able to repent if thou wouldest.
And thus haue wee heard the Lord calling to
the Sluggard, and expostulating with him for
his long sleeping. Now wee will heare what
answer the Sluggard maketh vnto the Lord.
            
            
               
               
                  The Sluggards answer.
               
               The sixt Sermon.
               
                  10. Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleepe.
               
               
                  IN this answer the spirite
of God doth so liuelie describe
the condition of
the Sluggard, that he may
know he is in his bosome,
to shewe vs that hee can
painte out our sinnes as
plainely as we doe commit them: for hee is in
our hearts, and waiteth vpon vs, and can tell
what we doe, and though the wicked cannot
see them, because the diuell hath blinded their
eyes, yet Gods spirite doth search them out,
because all things are open in his sight, bee
they in respect of men neuer so secret.
               Now the Lorde in causing the Sluggard to
speake for himselfe, doth make it knowne to
all the world, that hee hath no wrong offered
him, because his owne mouth hath testified against

himselfe, and openly shamed himselfe,
and therefore his condemnation must needes
bee when it commeth both great, and iust.
For wheras other sinners being called to their
answers, were both afraide of God and ash
                     •
                  
                  med
of themselues, the Sluggard cleane contrarie
as a beast that is past all feare of God,
and shame of the world, resolueth still to continue
in his olde course, counting all but a little.
When Adam and Eue sawe their nakednes
they blushed, and feared, and ran away for
feare, thus wrought their pride and disobedience:
when Caine sawe his wickednes, hee
knew not what to doe, except despayre, but
wished it vndone againe, and thus did murther
bestirre himselfe, when hee was awakened:
when Dauid was roused for his adulterie and
murther, he said that he had offended: when
Paul was called to his answer for persecuting
Christ, hee fell to the grounde astonied, and
tooke a new course: when Peter was awakened
for denying his Master, hee went out and
wept. And thus wee see that when pride and
disobedience haue been called, they haue feared
the iudge, and when murther and adulterie
were called, they feared the iudge, when
persecution and treason were called, they feared
the iudge: And all other sinnes being roused
out of their holes, haue startled at the call,
seeking either how to yeelde, or how to flie.
And being conuicted, haue all cryed like the

prisoner at the barre, O my Lord be good vnto
me now, and I will neuer do the like againe.
But when slouth and negligence were called,
and endited by the name of careles his children,
they (in stead of submitting themselues
to the mercie of the iudge,) stand to the defense
of their faulte, and like beastes both careles,
shameles, and graceles, in stead of saying,
pardon O Lorde that which is past, and wee
will take a new course, they crye out to the
wonder of all the world, and the vtter shame
of themselues, Yet a little more sleepe, and a little
slumber, &c. We haue not enough yet, and
all is but a little, so that shamefull was pride,
and rebellion, and murther, and whoredome,
and persecution, and treason, and all other
sinnes, but shameles is the Sluggard, and passeth
them all in wickednes.
               Here then wee are taught to make a reckoning
of our sluggishnes: and it argueth that
we count all too little, to giue vnto sinne and
Sathan: as though they were two such deare
friendes of ours, that wee coulde not doe too
much for them. And the diuell on the other
side who hath taken vp his lodging in the
wicked, and gotten like a fawne ghest into the
mindes of the godly, hee crieth still, a little
more, a little longer, and though we haue suffered
him with his impes to lye sleeping in our
Churches, in our common wealths, and in our
shoppes, and markets, in our houses, and families,

and in our soules almost fortie yeares,
and in some twise fortie yeares: yet hee hath
taught vs to say, yet a little, and a little, and still
he must haue a little more, like Achsah in 15.
of Ioshua:
                  Iosh. 15. who when she had begged of her
Father an inheritance of the South countries,
then she must haue certaine grounds with wels
and springs. Such a shameles begger is sinne,
and Sathan, that they neuer leaue begging,
like hungrie courtiers, and couetous worldlings,
which will not sticke to beg their owne
brethren for fooles, to haue their lands: and
not rest there neither, but would beg the garment
from the Kings backe, and the King himselfe
too, with a good will, if they thought they
might haue them for the begging; & yet count
all but a little. So plaieth the diuell too, he will
still haue a little, and a little, and neuer leaue till
by little and a little he getteth both body and
soule into hell. And so sweete hath he made s
                     •
                  n
to the tast of the wicked, that they crie still
a little more of it, and finde no fault with it: but
that there is too little, and they cannot haue enough
of it; like little children which knowe
not what is good for them: if they beginne to
tast hony once, they will not leaue eating by
their good wils, till they bee sicke with eating.
And so greedie of sleepe is the Sluggard, that as
Esau would sell his birthright for a messe of
pottage; so hee will sell his soules right for a
messe of sleepe, and a little more of sinne.
               
                  
But as for religion, and things pertaining to
the worship and seruice of God: as the knowledge
of the waies of God, and the graces of the
spirite of God: they thinke that of such things
they haue enough, when they haue nothing,
like the luke-warme Laodiceans,Apoc. 3. 17. who thought
they were rich, and increased with goods, and
had neede of nothing: when they were wretched,
& miserable, & poore, & blind, & naked.
And here now appeareth the difference betweene
the wicked and the godly: for the seruants
of God hauing a little mortified themselues
through the grace of God, they are come
to this point: that all they can doe is too little
for the seruice of God, but are desirous still to
serue him more, & better, & still to bring more
and more knowledge, more faith, and more repentance,
and more loue, and more zeale, and
more holines, and more courage, and more
good workes, to the glorifying of their heauenly
father, So free hearted are the true children
of God,Ioh. 8. 36. whome the sonne of God hath
made free indeede, that they thinke they can
neuer doe enough, like the free hearted Iewes,
which still brought either golde or siluer, or
silke, or haire, or one thing or another to the
building of the tabernacle, and as they left not
bringing till they were stayed by proclamation:
So in building the spirituall tabernacle of
the Lorde the children of God leaue not comming,
and going, to the 
                     ••
                  ercises of religion,

preaching and reading, and hearing, and meditating,
and practising till they bee stayed by
death: for proclamations, and lawes, and statutes,
haue been made; but all that could not
staye them: nay it hath made them more diligent,
and painefull like the Pismire, because
they perceiued winter to approach: yea they
doe also encourage their owne soules, and
their brethren with them, saying as Elia
                        •
                     
                   said
to1. King. 18. 41. 
                  Achab, Get thee vp, eate and drinke, for there
is a sound of much raine: so say they one to another,
get thee vp, reade and studie, preach and
praye, and lose no time, for there is a sounde
of much trouble: and all their feare is that they
shall be stopped and stayed by the waie, when
troubles arise, as Eliah feared least he and Achab
should bee stayed by the raine. They can
scarcely haue any rest in their hearts, but are
still panting with Dauid for breath,Psal. 42. 1. like the
Harte in continuall chase. They thinke they
haue done nothing, they can see nothing but
their sinnes and wickednes, their rebellious
motions, and corrupt cogitations of their own
false hearts, doe still appeare vnto them, and afright
them: they suspect all their dooings like
Iob that holy man, who feared all his waies.
And when they haue done the best they can,
they still condemne themselues for vnprofitable
seruants, still crying out to their soules, as
Christ saide to the young man that was so forward
in the Gospell▪ yet one thing is wanting:

so they say, yet my soule, either for the matter,
or for the manner something is wanting. It is
not then with the godly christian, as it is with
the superstitious Papists, which thinke they
may serue God enough, by their owne deuises,
and stintes of mattens & their euen songes, and
their Orisons, and their Kyrileysons, and their
Masses, and their Ladies psalters, and their Iesus
psalters, and their often belabouring the
name of Iesus, and their pattering of beades,
besides their pipings, and singing, and perfuming,
and aboundance of draffe more to fil vp
the tubbe withall, that let the hogges come
home neuer so hungry, yet there is meate enough
for them, and some to spare for their
friendes that will giue any thing for it, which
they cal works of supererogation. Now when
their t
                     •
                  skes are done, all must be set vpon the
sco
                     ••
                  , and the Lorde must bee beholding to
them for their deuotions, and Heauen they
must haue of dutie not of fauour: like the meritmongers
of Ierusalem, who going to Christ
in the behalfe of the Centurions seruant that
laye sicke,Luk. 7. 4. 5. tolde him that hee had deserued to
be healed at his hands, because the Centurion
had b
                     •
                  ilded them a sinagogue. And not much
vnlike is the seruice of Atheists and Protestants
at large, liuing vnder the Gospell, though they
defie poperie with open mouth, and wide
throates, yet they are too popish in this poynt:
for doe they not think that God is well serued

of them, if they goe to Church when 
                     〈◊〉
                  
comes, and heare a few cold prayers read, and
after dinner spend the time at Cardes, or Tables,
or Bowles, or Church alings, or in one 
                     ••
                  
                  nitie
or other: but if they haue been at Church
in the forenoone, though it were but to sleepe
at the sermon, the Lord is much beholding to
them. But to come at the beginning, and continue
waking, & attentiue to the ending, both
forenoone and afternoone, that they thinke
may serue for a great while: but to haue preaching
euery Sabboth day, and in the weeke
too, that is counted an vnreasonable seruing of
God. But the godly thinke they haue neuer enough
of the seruice of God, and his worship:
and for this cause haue they desired to liu
                     •
                   stil,
Esa. 38. 18. 19. not for feare of death, which indeede is a vantage
vnto them: but for that they haue not s
                     ••
                  
                  ued
God enough, and in the graue they ca
                     •
                  not
praise his name.Psal. 118. 17 So Dauid desired to liue still,
that he might declare the workes of the Lord.
And in the 119. Psal. he saith,Psalm. 119. 175. 
                  Let my soule li
                        ••
                     
& it shall praise thee. This he craued, because he
had not praised God enough. And vpon this
Paul discussed this question in his heart, For my
selfe (sayth hee) it is better to dye:
                  Philip. 1. 22. 23. 
                  but for 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
(meaning the Church) it is better that I liue
still: to shewe, that if we haue any desire to liue
longer, it must be that the Church of God may
bee the better for vs: for the godly are of that
minde that they cannot doe enough for the

good of the Church of God▪ They are like Abraham,
who when 
                     〈◊〉
                   began to speake with
God, would haue still one question more: And
like the Disciples, who when they heard Christ
commend the bread of life,I
                        •
                      h. 6. 34. said Lord euermore
giue 
                        •
                     s of this bread. Now if this be the affection
of the godlie, all too little: then what shal
we say to the wicked, which coūt all too much
that is giuen to God? like I
                        •
                     das that grudged
at the cost that was bestowed vpon Christ,
coūting is more then needed. But this was because
I
                        •
                     das had the bagge and was a theefe to
Christ: and so the wicked haue the bags, and
would fill their bags with the spoyles of Christ
and his Church. They say, they haue heard a
sermon once in a yere: what so many say they?
heare one and follow that well, &c. This is the
voyce of a wicked heart, that knoweth not
what he oweth to God: If he knewe that he oweth
him all his life, he would not speake in
that sort. Concerning the things of the world,
they play the Horseleach that lye sucking still,
and neuer cryeth ho. And they are of Achabs
humor, when he had a kingdome, yet he wanted
a vineyard, and a little was still wanting. So
wordling professors of the Gospell, when they
haue much, and that which they desired, yet
they must haue a little more, another house, or
another lease, or another Benefice: but as for
the Lords part he shal haue the offall, or refuse
of their crooked old age, when they can serue

the diuell no longer: but then the Lord will
none, except he giue them great repentance.
Therefore, seeing as the Lord is the beginner,
and continuer, and ender of our life: let vs offer
him al for a sacrifice, and yet say, we are 
                     •
                  nprofitable
seruants, and haue done but 
                     〈◊〉
                  
duetie.
               Againe, here we are to note further the cunning
of the diuell: for he bringeth men by degrees
to the top of sinne: yet a little, and a little,
sayth he, and al is but a little: yet al these littles
being layd together make a great deale. And
as a couetous man gathereth his fart
                     •
                  ings and
his halfepenies together, till they come to a
pound, and so becommeth rich in the world:
so the diuell teacheth the wicked, to gathe
                     •
                  
now a little and then a little, till at last they become
rich in sinne, but bankerout in the grace
of God: for there is neuer a sinne that is let in
to the soule, but it lette
                     •
                  n out many graces of
Gods spirit. It is no dallying with the Lord: for
in Rom. 2. 5. the Apostle sayth, They that abuse
the long suffering of God, doe in the hardnes
of their heart heape vp vnto themselues wrath
against the day of wrath. Therefore let vs take
heede of this little: for by little and little the
diuell creepeth vpon vs. The wicked goe scoffing
at the children of God: oh there goe Puritanes,
and Precisians, &c. And, what? are you
so precise? Why? this is but a little oth, a littl
                     •
                  
meriment, a little of the fashion, & a little must

bee borne withall, and still they goe on powring
out themselues to all kinde of wickednes,
till they bee so drunken with sinne, that they
knowe not what they doe, nor where they
bee.
               The diuell playeth the labourer that riueth
wood, who hauing a great peece to cleaue,
hath also diuers wedges for the purpose, and euery
one bigger thē another, and entreth with
the least first, and that maketh way for a bigger,
and that againe for the biggest of all, and
so by little and little the great tree is split in
many small peeces, and made fit for the fire. So

                     〈◊〉
                   Sathan purposeth to make a spoyle of
the graces of God in the soule, he hath diuers
deuises for the purpose, and euery one of them
differing from another: for the lier he hath a
packe 
                     ••
                  ll of lyes: for the swearer he hath a
packe full of others: and for the scoffer he hath
a packe full of frumpes and floutes: and so for
others: but he will enter with a little one in
shew, as first to teach men to sweare by their
faith and troth, or by cock and pie, or by some
other counterfeit o
                     ••
                  e, and tels them that it is
nothing: and after, by little and little, when it
is growne into a custome with thē, they come
euen to blaspheme the most holie name of
God, like diuels incarnate, not being able to
leaue it though they would. So doth 
                     〈◊〉
                   draw

                     〈◊〉
                   to adulterie, and so to m
                     ••
                  ther, and to 
                     •
                  o
drunkennes, by 
                     〈◊〉
                   and a little: first, by circumstances

a farre off, as of dalliance, and 
                     ••
                  
                  sting,
& quarrelling, and carowsing, and at last
they grow to the very substance of the matt
                     ••
                  .
And so by little and little doth he drawe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
quite from hearing of the word, to schisme, &
Apostasie: first, he breedeth in them a misliking
of the preacher, for his plainnes, 
                     〈…〉
                  
roughnes, or his tediousnes, or his li
                     ••
                  , or one
thing or other, and then there is way made 
                     〈◊〉
                  
a loathing of the doctrine, and at last they fall
quite away from that sinceritie which they
professed at the first, especially by meanes of
such companie as the diuell can fit them withall
for the purpose. And if one sinne creep
                     •••
                  
into our conscience, it wil not leaue till it hath
made a hole for the entring, and a place for the
lodging of horrible and outragious sinnes.
               Then let vs say, that is great, which 
                     •
                  hey call
little, and aggrauate our 
                     •
                  innes now, a
                     •
                  d condemne
thē now, that they bee not made great,
and condemned of the Lord at the last day.
The diuell is contented with a little, and a little
will please him: he will (if he can) bring thee
to all sinne: but when he cannot doe so, he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
play at small game rather then sit our▪ As if
thou be a Protestant, and traua
                     ••
                  est beyond the
seas amongst Idolators and Massemongers, i
                     •
                  
is sufficient for him if thou doe but salute the
crosse as it is carried through the streetes, or
bow the knee to Baal, though thou doest 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them in thy hart. So, if thou be a Papist in England,

and goe to Church according to lawe, it
is no matter, so thy heart be at Rome, and thou
keep thy conscience to thy selfe, thats enough
for the diuell, and pleaseth him very well: for
by the outward gesture of the one, and by the
inwarde affection of the other, he doth (as it
were by the ring of the doore) take possession
of the whole house, knowing that if hee hath
the bodie, the soule will come too: for God
will haue all or els none. Worldly men will
say now adaies, If they bee not notorious offenders,
they are not Sathans prisoners: which
is all one, as if a malefactor, being fastened
with a chaine but by the foote to a poste in the
street, should bragge that he is not the Iaylors
priso
                     •
                  er, because all his bodie is at libertie sauing
his foote. Alas poore soules, how wise
wee are to deceiue our owne soules. Though
we can see nothing but great beames, yet that
is not the way to bee discharged. The Papists
can see none but 7. deadly sinnes that will hurt
them: but Dauid prayeth both against presumptuous
sinnes,Psal. 19. 13.
and secret sinnes, which
would proue presumptuous in time.
               The Papists haue a question which cannot
be answered, as they thinke: Shew vs the time
(say they) when Poperie came in, and when
we sell away, if wee bee fallen from the trueth.
Alas poore soules, they are not acquainted
with the custome of Sathan: for he commeth
in by little and little. If then a Papist would

know how Papistrie came in, I will say by 
                     〈◊〉
                  
custome of the diuell▪ by little and little: for th
                     •
                  
diuell will not get all at once. The Apost
                     ••
                  
                  Paul sayth,2. Thes. 2. 7 The mysterie of iniquitie began 
                     〈◊〉
                  
work in his daies, & to creepe into the Church
by little and little: So for worshipping of Angels,Colos. 2 18.
the Apostle sayth, they worshipped Angels
then, and thought it to be a part of insti
                     ••
                  
                  cation▪
Also for will worship, and humane traditions,
as taste not, touch not, eate not, and
beating of the flesh, Paul spake of it in his time,
and called it voluntarie religion,vers. 20, 21, 22, 23. which had a
shewe of wisedome and humblenes of mind
                     •
                  ,
but indeed were to no purpose. And the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
part of Poperie, namely, merits, and satisfactiō
by our owne workes, began when Antichrist
was borne: for Paul spake of it, and against it
in his Epistles to the Romanes, and the Galathians,
and almost in all his Epistles. So for fasting
on their Saints 
                     ••
                  ues, as they call them,
their Ember daies, and their popish Lent
                     ••
                  
fast, they haue made it a painted garment, and
very 
                     ••••
                  itorious, and so by little and little they
haue made vp this monster of many coto
                     ••
                  .
So came in Idolatrie at the first into the
Church: first, the images of the godly were o
                     •
                  
a good intent brought into the Temples, and
afterwards superstition crept in like a Ringworms,
and men fell to worship them, as in
time the Israelites worshipped the brasen S
                     •
                  rpent
in the wildernes. Then the supposed pictures

of Christ were worshipped, wher of there
grew to be very many, and neuer any one like
another, but euen as it pleased master Painter:
And then the Crosse by the hie waies side, and
then the very letters of the name of Iesus: and
whē the painter had made a picture like some
foule Mawkine, or some foolish gameplayer
in disguised colours, and set it vp in a glasse
windowe, or some stone wall, and a toy tooke
ignorant men in the head (for strong is imagination)
that must bee our Ladie forsooth, and
so to be worshipped. Then further, when men
began to neglect the most sacred scriptures of
God, which are the onely pillar and ground of
all trueth, they began to build vpon Councels,
and Fathers, and Doctors, and the interpretation
of the Church, without any tri
                     •
                  ll of the
same to be made by the scriptures: and at last
the worde of God (which should haue sit as
Iudge) was brought down, and set at the barre
to be iudged by men, yea by his enemies too.
And by little and little it came to this paste,
that the Church could not erre in any thing:
and that the Church of Rome must be that only
priuiledged Church which could not erre.
And then they thrust vpon vs what they listed,
as the Philistims made Sampson doe what they
would, when they had put out his eyes. But
this was done by degrees: for first, the Bishops
and teachers waxed rich and wealthie: then
they grew to be proud and lordly: then couetous

and greedie▪ then idle and lazie: and then
cruell and bloudie, as also subtill and craftie, to
couer all withall. And when the starres thus
began to fall from heauen,(that is, from the
heauenly doctrine, and from heauenly conuersation,
to become so carnall and earthlie
minded) the sunne of righteousnes also the
Lord Iesus Christ himselfe, that true light began
to be darkened, and his Gospell to be depraued,
& then the Moone (that is) his Church
must needes lose her light: for shee hath no
light but from the sunne: and then (as the Prophet
Ioel speaketh)Ioel. 2. 31. was the Church also turned
into bloud: for vpon these things grewe
most horrible persecutions in the Church,
through the malice & crueltie of the Prelates,
so that she failed both in light and life together.
And so it is to bee feared, that (for our
sinnes) it may fall out againe: for as by little &
little the candle goeth out: so by little & little
darknes commeth in. And after the same manner
came in such monsterous abuses in apparell,
both in men and women, such excesse and
riot in eating and drinking, such idlenes and
prophanenes, as is euery where to be seene: &
so grewe tumults and rebellions in the common
people: so groweth stubbornnes in seruants,
and disobedience in children, through
sufferance and too much foolish cock
                     •
                  ring,
till by little and little many of them come to
shame and confusion. And thus haue all ill

customes growne vp from time to time, both
in the Church, and in the Common-wealth, &
all by the custome of the diuell, that is, by little
and by little: yea, and that so softly and slilie
he creepethinto men, that they can hardly either
see him, or feele him when he commeth:
As wee see the weedes growe vp amongst the
corne while men sleepe, but so softly that no
man can perceiue how they growe, or how
much they growe at once: but that they doe
growe, and in time (if they be not plucked vp)
ouergrow the corne, euery man may see that:
Or as the Iuie by little and little creepeth vpon
the oke, till at last he doth ouergrowe and destroy
the oke: So doth sinne by little and little
get vp, and get the strongest and the mightiest
men sometimes vnder him: as it did Salomon,
and Dauid, and Peter, and diuers others, for all
their wisedome, and learning, and iudgement,
and experience, which they had both of themselues,
& of the world. Now, to saue our selues
from this vsurping and encroching enemie, it
shall bee our best course still to pray vnto our
God, for the helpe of his grace, and holie spirit,
and stil to perswade our soules and our friends
by the word of God, to make resistance at the
verie first entrie, and continually to withstand
the beginnings and first motions of Sathan vnto
any sinne, lest by little and little now a stone
and then a stone, now a basket full, and then a
basketfull, he cast vp his mount, and fortifie

himselfe against vs, vntill he hath battered and
spoyled all the good things that were in our
soules. And that the daunger of these same
littles may the better appeare vnto vs, let vs remember
that sinne is like leauen, a little wherof
will sower the whole lumpe of dowe: It is
like fire, whereof but one sparke is sufficient to
kindle a great fire, and to burne down a whole
citie: It is like a tree, whose stubbes remaining
in the ground are enough to giue one a fall: It
is like Iezabel that painted harlot, whose verie
remnants, as the skul of her head, & the palmes
of her hands, must be buried, least they infect
the ayre. A mote in the Sunne is but a little
thing, and yet enough to hinder the sight, to
paine the eye, and to trouble the whole bodie.
A haire is but a little thing, yet enough to stiffle
a mā. The 
                     •
                  lies of Egypt were but little things,
yet none of the least plagues. The lice were
lesse then the flies, yet one of the greatest
plagues that came vnto Egypt. And such be
our sinnes, which wee call little sinnes, and the
Papists call them veniall sinnes, that may bee
washed away with a little holie water, &c. we
count them little and nothing, and not to bee
stood vpon, nor once to bee touched: but in
time wee may proue them to bee the greatest
plagues that will trouble vs, if securely & rashly
we venture vpon them. For though the occasions
and motions perhaps bee but small in
respect of grosse sinnes, and hainous crimes,

yet there is a hidden corruption in our nature,
(whose very froth doth continually annoy the
children of God) and that may threaten some
hainous downfal in time to come: which hath
made euen men of very good report and conuersation
to hang downe their heads, still fearing
their secret hypocrisie, as that which may
breake forth to the shame of all the former in
time to come. In regard whereof, Gods children
haue such a ielousie, that they tremble at
the very first motions, and the least occasion to
sinne that can be. And the rather too, because
they see many excellent men in gifts, and constant
in profession, for a long time, whose ende
hath not answered their beginnings. And this
is very true, whether wee looke into the word,

                     〈◊〉
                  o the world, & is a thing that may much
humble vs. For though wee may remember
what we haue been, and what we are, yet who
can tell what may come to him hereafter, especially
if they yeeld to a little and a little.
               But alas there be some too venturous, which
thinke it no masterie to offer themselues to
ma
                     •
                  king, and minstrelsie, and dauncing, and
wanton companie, nor to runne into quarrels,
and brawles, and contentions, as though they
had their ear
                     •
                  s, and their eyes, and their hands
at command
                     •
                  ment: But Gods children are afrayd
of these occasions, as knowing that their
eyes may bee p
                     •
                  ouoked to lust, their eares may
quickly listen
                     •
                   to vnchast delights, and their

handes may sodainly strike a deadly blo
                     •••
                  
&c. Therefore both men and women are 
                     〈◊〉
                  
beware howe they venture vpon such small
occasions, for though thou meanest no su
                     ••
                  
matter, yet for thy venturing without warr
                     •••
                  
thou mayest be ouer thy shoes before thou b
                     •
                  
aware.
               And yet because vice is so neare vnto vertue,
wee must also beware of superstition, fo
                     •
                  
the enemie still laboureth either to make 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too hardie and venturous, or else to feare it to
                     •
                  
superstitiously. And to these temptations our
nature is very pliable. First to presumption,
and ouer much hardines, as may appear
                     •
                  hy
our common speech. Tush the preacher i
                     •
                  
but a man as I am, hee hath his infirmities as
well as others: we are no Angels, our nature
is corrupt, we are but men, and I am sure you
will not make vs Gods, a little is not so much,
and if God were so hard as you would make
him, that were hard indeede, &c. Thus Satha
                     •
                  
commeth to tempt men vnto presumption:
but when hee would driue men to despayre▪
then he apparelleth himselfe in another sute,
and then of a flie he maketh an Elephant, and
of a moate a mountaine. If hee cannot bring
men to make conscience where they should▪
he will labour to bring them to make conscience
where they should not. As wee see the
                     •
                  
maner of manie is either to be profane in thei
                     •
                  
mirth, or to allow no mirth at all, either too

gawish & new
                     •
                  angled in their attire, or to allow
no ornament at all, and so in many things

                     •
                  ce: he careth not, whether thou be remisse,
or superstitious, so thou bee one. Gods children
therefore must labour for a measure, and
that must bee sought for in the worde, which
will guide them in the narrow way: shewing

                     ••
                  eu
                     •
                  ry thing what is the vertue, and what is
the vice; what is the meane, and what is the
extreame on either hand. In these extremi
                  
                     •
                  ies,
if any man hath beene ouertaken by
little, and a little, (as who hath not) let him
imagine himselfe to be sicke, either of a spirituall
consumption, or a spirituall burning fe
                  
                     •
                  er:
and let him from henceforth keepe that
diet which is prescribed vnto him in the word,
and carefully abstaine from such occasions
hereafter: and by the grace of God he shall redouer
himselfe againe, though not by and by,
but by little and little, like the man that hath
been very sicke, who first feeleth a stomacke
to meate, and then hath some tast of his meat
                     •
                  
which before was vnsauorie vnto him: and
then he beginneth to sit vp in his bed, then to
rise out of his bed, and then to walke in his
chamber: and after that abroad by a staffe, and
by little and little, (through the blessing of
God) commeth to his full strength againe.
Neither let any willing mind be discouraged,
by the hardnes of his hart, which he now feel
                     •
                  th
wrought by the custome of Sathan: but

let him plie the meanes appointed by God
and he shall see, that as the water droppeth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the flint vntill it be worne hollowe, so the w
                     ••
                  ter
of Gods grace shall be still dropping vpo
                     •
                  
thy hard hart, vntill thou be recouered. And
thus wee haue seene the custome of Sathan,
and how it may be broken.
               Another note is this: That the wicked doe
still extenuate, and lessen their sinnes, crying:
Yet a little, and it is but a little: but the children
of God do say their sinnes are great, and
cannot aggrauate them enough. And this is
their griefe, that they cannot lay out their sins
enough:lob. 1. 5. 
                  lob setteth blasphemie vpon the sins
of his children, when they were banquetting
together: and it might bee some idle word
                     •
                  
or vnsauorie iesting might passe their lipp
                     ••
                  
when they were set to bee merrie: but lob g
                     ••
                  ueth
it no lesse name thē blaspheming of God.
Christians in their feastinges and meeting
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
powre out riuers of idle words: and if a ma
                     •
                  
call them rebellion or blasphemie: what? th
                     ••
                  
is too full mouth, wee must seeke some 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wordes to colour them withall: like the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
which will not say they stole it, but they tooke
it. If the Preacher shall labour to lay out the
ouglesomenes of sinne, hee is called a rayl
                     ••
                  
for his labour. Paul called himselfe a blasphemer,
a persecuter, and the chiefe of sinner
                     •
                  ;
though hee were not so indeede, yet thus 
                     〈◊〉
                  
laboureth to beate downe himselfe, and to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
humbled with true repentance, and hee had
the spirite of God. Therefore they that will
not be launced, and haue sinne touched, it is a
signe that they haue not the spirite of GOD.
The world calleth couetousnes good husbandrie:
but the worde calles it idolatrie,Col. 3. 5. and the

                     •
                  ote of all euill.1. Pet. 5. 5. The world calleth pride clenlines
and handsomnes, but the worde calles it
fighting against God: the world calleth their
painting of faces, the frisling of hayre, the wearing
of false hayre, and other such disguisinged
deformities, and ougly inuentions, both
seemely and comelie ornaments: the worde
cals them whotish attire.2. Kin. 9. 30. The worlde calleth
malice and hatred,1. loh. 3. 15. manhood: the word cals it
manslaughter. The worlde calleth excessiue
eating and drinking, and ryoting and idlenes,
and chambring, good fellowship: the worde
calleth them the sinnes of Sodome,Ezc. 16. 49. and Gomorrha:
the worlde saith that fornication is
but a tricke of youth, and a common infirmitie:
the word saith it is to make the members
of Christ, the members of a harlot: the world
calleth that honest recreation, which the
worde saithe,Ephef. 5. 6. bringeth the wrath of GOD
vppon the children of disobedience. The
worlde saithe they take but their fees, when
the worde saith they play the theeues: the
world calleth that dutie, which the word calleth
robberie. And so it is in many things moe.
But as the worde speaketh of sinne, so doth

the godly speake of sinne; for they speake 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the spirite of God, which is not contrarie 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the worde of God, And thus we soe how very
foule sinnes hauing gotten a liuerie of the
                     ••
                  
Master the diuell, and stolen the cloake of
vertue, doe i
                     •
                  tte it, and braue i
                     •
                   vp 
                     〈◊〉
                  
downe, like fidlers, and players, vndernoble
mens coates: which (when their coates are
taken away) are butrogues by statute: and the
other when their coloured cloaks are taken 
                     〈◊〉
                  
way, are most foule, and ougly diuels by the
worde of God: yet no man must say so, but
at his perill. For the diuell when hee hath
brought vp a fashion, will followe the fashion
himselfe: and the fashion is amongst hunters,
that if any body doe call a hound or a spaniell
by the name of a dogge, he must be punished,
because the hauke hath no taile, but a traine,
as if she were some state: and two bee not a
couple, but a cast, and a brase, and I knowe
not what: So, if a man come when the diuell
is at hunting, and call the wicked his dogges,
by the name of hell hounds; as they are indeede,
he must be punished: for they are neither
dogs nor hel hounds, but good fellowes:
and their hunting of vertue and godlines, is
good fellowship: And hereupon a common
harlot is commonly called a good fellowe.
And still the diuell followeth the fashion:
for amōgst men of trade, & manuel occupations,
they haue words of art belonging to euery

toole and instrument in their shops: and if
a man come into their shoppes, and doe but
touch any of them, or call them by other
names then the occupation doth call them by,
(as to cal a spade a spade a spade) is a forfeit called for
by and by. So if a man come into the diuels
warehouse, and doe but touch a piece, except
it be to buy it; and doe but call his tooles and
implements by other names then hee and the
occupation doth call them: as to cal a knaue a
knaue, you shal straightway haue one or other
at you for a forfet, which doe serue for nothing
els, but to watch for such booties: and are as
glad of them too as sumners are of citations:
or as quiristers in Cathedrall Churches, when
they see a man come into the quire with his
spurres on his heeles: because then they hope
to get something to encrease their commons,
by a law of their owne, such as Christ was put
to death by, But that 
                     •
                  oule that lieth so wide
open that he cannot see his sinnes, but maketh
great sinnes small, and calleth sower sweete,
and darknes light, as Esay speaketh, Woe bee
vnto them saith the same Prophet: They shall
one day feele the greatnes of their sinnes to
their cost and paine: for it is a true 
                     •
                  aying of
Christ in the 5. of Mathew, Hee that breaketh
the least of Gods Commandements, and teacheth
men so to doe; shall bee the least in the kingdome
of heauen: that is, he shall haue no place at all
there: for Christ speaketh of it, but according

to that opinion▪ which men had of it. Thus
haue wee spied the diuels craft in minsing of
sinne, now let vs learne to make some vse of it.
The Magistrate may learne hereby to take
heede, that he yeeld not so much as a little to
the wicked, because they watch at an inch for
the least aduantage that can bee: like the seruants
of Benhadad King of Aram, when they
were parling with Achab the King of Isra
                     •
                  ll
about their master: of whome it is said in the
holy historie, that they tooke diligent heede,
if they could catch any thing of him: & when
they heard Achab but call their master his
brother, they made hast, and said thy brother
Benhadad: to shewe how the Magistrate is
watched: & if the wicked perceiue any coldnes,
or fearefulnes, or negligence in him, or
heare but a word of comfort from his mouth
that makes for them, they worke vpon that,
like the stream against a bācke, if there be but
a little hole made through it. Hereby the Minister
also is taught to take heed how he straineth
his conscience against the trueth in any
thing, though neuer so small, lest in time hee
swallow downe camels, as some doe steeples,
and make shipwracke of all: like Demas, and
Hermogenes, with their fellowe Phygellus, of
whom Paul speaketh: and like Diotrephes, against
whom Saint Iohn giu
                     •
                  th euidence. It is
the policie of the world to lay baits and snares
for the Ministers of Christ: it must bee therefore

their wisedome to hould out the world at
the swords point. For couetousnes is like aquaf
                        •
                     rtis
vpon steele, and if it take the hart once,
it will not leaue till it hath eaten out the spirit
of GOD there, and all goodnes there. And
therefore the Apostle doothe well call it the
roote of all euill: for so it is, for wheresoeuer
it taketh roote, it rooteth out all goodnes,
causing to erre from the faith & pearceth the

                     •
                  oule through with many sorrowes: so doth
she reward her master for giuing her lodging,
like the viper that eateth out her mothers bellie,
and so getteth his owne being with the destruction of another.
               Here also may parents learne not to feede
their childrens humours too much, nor to suffer
them ouer long, as the manner of many is
to doe, nor to inure them to such wantonnes,
nicenes, and pride, as we see in many: for they
will grow to such things fast enough without
teaching: and by little and little it may turne
them to shame, and their parents to smart and
griefe, as too wofull experience dooth daily
teach. As Absalom being suffered a little, first
killed his brother Amnon: then abused his fathers
concubines: then stole a way the hearts
of his fathers subiects, and at last rose vp in
armes, and droue his father out of his owne
kingdome: and this came by little and little.
And if the twigge bee suffered to grow crooked,

it will be crooked when it is come to bea

                     ••
                  ee, and then it will sooner bee broken then

                     •
                  owed. To some parents and masters it is a
pastime to see their childrē and seruants runne
colting about the streetes with open mouth,
like a kennell of hounds: but to the godly and
wise it is both a griefe, and a shame, because
they know that by little and a little, they may
proue impudent, and shameles, and theeues,
and harlots: for then doe such seede take deepest
rooting. Hence may wo
                     •
                  ldlings also take
warning, and learne to come to the word preached
when they are called, least if they listen
but a little vnto the enchantments of worldly
commoditie, they fall quite away: like the vnworthie
guests in the Gospell, who trifled away
the time so long with excuses, that at
length they were quite excluded. And in the
hearing of the word, take we heede how wee
heare: for then by little and by little the diuell
will robbe vs of al, or fill our heads with so many
toyes and by-matters, that we shall bee neuer
the better, but the worse. And lastly, he
                     •
                  
let all Christians learne not to feede vpon v
                     •
                  
kindnesses, least by little and little it grow to 
                     •
                  
mortall hatred, and an vtter mislike one of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
other, without any likelihood of sound reconciliation
for euer. And this that teacheth some,
may teach all to beware of the diuels dangerous
custome. But whosoeuer taketh warning

the Sluggard will take none: for he crieth still,
Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, and a little folding
of the hands to sleepe: therefore now let
him hearken vnto his iudgement.
            
            
               
                  The Sluggards iudgment.
               
               The seuenth Sermon.
               
                  11 Therefore thy pouertie commeth as one
that tra
                        •••
                     leth by the way▪ and thy necessitie
like an armed man.
               
               
                  HEre is now the Sluggards
iudgement, and the fruite
of idlenes, and negligence.
The wicked man (sayth
Dauid) trauelleth of mischiefe,
and bringeth forth
a lye. And the Sluggard
(sayth Salomon) trauelleth of idlenes, & bringeth
forth pouertie, and necessitie: two twinnes
borne both at a burden, but such ill fauoured
ones, that euery one is out of loue with them
so soone as they are borne. A poore, and a ne
                     •
                  
                  die

birth, without beautie, or comelines, o
                     •
                  
shape, or strength, or any thing to liue vpon o
                     •
                  
his owne. And surely a fit birth for the Sluggard
to begge withall. The sluggard and the
sluggards birth, are faine to liue vpon other
mens labours, and yet are still poore, and necdie:
like Pharaohs seuen leane kine which 
                     ••
                  
                  uoured
seuen fat kine, and yet were leane: now
that was but a dreame, but this is a trueth. And
n
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  uaile: for it is iust and 
                     〈…〉
                  
which will not sowe in sommer, for feare of a
shower, should beg in winter when showers
doe fall. And he that will not worke when he
may, and is able, must bee put from his meate
when he would eate.
               
                  Therefore thy pouertie commeth, &c. As if he
should say, thou art the cause of thy owne pouertie
thy selfe, which is more then the sluggard
would willingly confesse. For by nature
we would be rich, and idle too: and when 
                     〈◊〉
                  
are most dissolute and careles, yet then 
                     〈◊〉
                  
looke to bee relieued aswell as if they had 
                     ••
                  
                  uer
been the cause of their owne pouertie: 
                     〈◊〉
                  
prophane reprobates, which looke to cometo
heauen aswell as any bodie, and yet care not
for the ordinarie meanes which God hath appoynted
to bring men thither by.
               By this then wee may see what a hard matter
it is for flesh and bloud to see what is the
crue cause of Gods hand vpon men, especia
                     •••
                  
when the fault is in our selues: for selfe-loue is

blinde. And though we bee-plagued through
our owne default, yet commonly we think not
so: but wee make that the cause which is not
the cause: sometime most wickedly accusing
the Lord of harde dealing against vs, who is
most iust in all his waies, and holie in all his
workes: sometime crying out vpon the hardnes
of the weather, and vnseasonablenes of the
yeare: sometimes condemming others for wā
                  
                     •
                  
of charitie, and compassion, as is to bee seene
when any dearth, or scarcitio commeth vpon
vs: sometime with one thing, and sometime
with another: but as for our selues we can neuer
intende it, to search out the cause there:
but still put it off from our selues, though indeede
our owne sinnes haue moued the Lord
to deale in this and that sort against vs. Wherein
we shew our selues to be the right children
of Adam 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  : for so playd they when the
Lord came to examine them about the eating
of the fo
                     •
                  bidden fruite: Adam layeth his fault
vpon his wife,Gen. 3. and his wife puts it off to the

                     •
                  erpent: but neither of 
                     〈◊〉
                   would be knowne 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  int
in fa
                     〈◊〉
                  . So when any plague or calamitie
came vpon the heathen, they cried out against
the Christians, and 
                     •
                  ayd, that they were
the cause of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which indeede was 
                     〈…〉
                  :
for 
                     •
                  od plagued the heathen, because
they 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Christians. By which wee
may see 
                     〈◊〉
                   heathenish tricke this is among

                     〈◊〉
                  , to blame, oth
                     •
                  r
                     •
                   f
                     ••
                   that

which themselues are the causers of:I. King. 18. 17. 18. like Achab, who said that Eliah troubled Israel, when
it was himselfe that troubled Israel, as Eli
                        ••
                     
                  
truely told him. Though Achab be dead, y
                     ••
                  
his peeuish and peruerse opinion still liueth amongst
vs, and the wicked keepe it fast, and
pleade hard for it, as though it were Achabs legacie
beq
                     •
                  eathed vnto them, which no man
may take from them. For when any bee fallen
into decay, and proued bankeroupts, as many
are through their owne follie: as some by vn
                     •
                  
aduised suretiship: some by play and gaming:
some by feasting: some by negligence: some
by cousening, and other vngo
                     •
                  ly practises:
Then they crie out vpon the preachers, or against
the preaching of the worde, or again
                     ••
                  
the professors of the Gospell, or against their
creditors: like d
                     •
                  gges which barke at the
Moone, when it giueth 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and n
                     •
                  ue
                     •
                  
did hurt them, more then Eliah did hurt Achab,
when perhaps he tolde him of his fa
                     •••
                  ,
and bad him looke to his soule. And being
thus bewitched and besott
                     •
                  d, they sleepe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
out in all securitie, and brauerie, 
                     •
                  hrowding
themselues vnder false pretences, and vaine

                     •
                  llegations: as l
                        •
                     nas did vnder the hatch
                     ••
                  ,
when both himselfe and the wholeship were
readie to petish with him. And so doe wi
                     ••
                  
ked men lye still in their vnthriftines, and idlenes,
and vaine life, when they bee readi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  ink themselues, and many others with 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Therefore the Lord doth here pul out the sluggard,
and set both his sinne and the fruit thereof
before his face, and telleth him plainly that
himselfe is the cause of his owne pouertie, and
miserie, and none but himselfe.
               Againe, wee are to note that God doth not
say 
                     •••
                  plie [pouertie shall come vpon thee] but
he sayth, [Thy pouertie] teaching vs thereby to
distinguish of pouertie, and the causes thereof:
for sometimes good men are in pouertie, aswell
as bad: Christ was poore in the world, bu
                     •
                   his
pouertie was to make vs rich: Iob was striken
with pouertie, & yet a good man, fearing God,
and painfull to doe any good that he could to
all men: but his pouertie was sent him to make
tri
                     •
                  ll of his patience, and to set forth the riches
of Gods spirit in him, which els could not haue
so well appeared. Lazarus was poore, but his
pouertie was to trie the rich mans charitie
withall, and to make the hard hear
                     ••
                  dnes of
rich gluttons to appeare. And as the blind
                     •
                  
m
                     •
                  n in the Gospell, was made blinde,Iohn 9. 3. neither
for his owne sinne, nor his parents sinne, but
that the worke of God might bee made manifest
in him: so some are made poore, neither
through their owne fault, nor through their
pa
                     •
                  ents fault, but that the work of God might
appeare in them, as it did in Iob: and that in other
                     •
                  
either the worke of God, or els the work
of the diuell may bee made manifest, while
s
                     •
                  me shew compassion in relieuing the poore,

and others shut vp all compassion from the
poore. All men shall dye, but not all of one
disease. Many haue suffered, but not al fo
                     •
                   one
cause: some haue suffered as cuill doers, and
some for well doing: and true it is, that not
the death, but the cause makes a martyr. Therefore
to make this poynt more plaine, wee will
consider of two things.
               First, how many kinds of pouertie there be.
Secondly, what be the true causes of the sa
                     ••
                  .
               Of pouertie then we will make two 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
according to the parts of man consisting of
body and soule, as by the same rule wee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
both the Sluggard temporall, and the Sluggard
spirituall: So that there is the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of the bodie, and the pouertie of the soul
                     •
                  :

                     ••
                  dily pouerty is bodily want, and that is when
a man wanteth such necessaries as belong to
this life, as health, and food, and apparel
                     •
                  , and
money, and lodging, and houshould 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and sufficient to pay euery man his 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
And of this bodily pouertie there bee also two
kinds: some belonging to the godly; and
some to the wicked, for both good and bad
haue oftentimes their part in these wantes.
So that good men, and honest men may 
                     〈◊〉
                  
poore, and yet good and honest still: for
goodnes and hone
                     •
                  tie goeth not by riches,
for oftentimes worldly riches are meanes to
the wicked to make them worse and 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
hauing wealth to corrupt themselues and others,

authoritie to doe violence, and health
makes them lustie to doe mischiefe. Neither
doe dishonestie and wickednes alwaies go
                     •
                  
by pouertie and want, though these thinges
be counted the onely euils of this life: yet we
see sometime they are meanes to good men
to make them better, as pouertie to bridle
lust, basenes to humble them, and incumbrances
to driue them to God, and to teach them
to succour others: by which we may see that
the pouertie of La
                        •
                     arus is better then the riches
of Diues: The sickenes of a wise man,
with his wisedome, is better then the health of
a foole with his follie. And what goods soeuer
a man hath, he cannot bee a good man so
long as hee himselfe is euill: and if a man may
be tearmed a good man for hauing riches,
then a foole may bee tearmed a wise man
when hee hath on a wise mans gowne. The
Scriptures speake much in the commendation
of godly poore men, and preferreth them
before vngodly rich men, as there is cause: ye
see your calling1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. (sayth the Apostle to the Corinthians)
How that not many wisemen after
the flesh, not many mightie, not many noble
are called: but God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise: and
God hath chosen the weake thinges of the
world to confound the mightie things: and
vile things of the world, and things which are
despised, hath God chosen, &c. To shewe of

what person
                     •
                   for the most part Gods Church
doth consist: now what greater preferment
then to be chosen of God, and who are counted
more foolish, and more weake, and more
vile, and more despised in the world then the
poore, especially whom God hath chosen, and
set his marke vpon? Among other great matters
which Christ sent to Iohn to shew the power
of Christ;Mat. 11. 5. this was one thing of speciall
note, that the poore receiued the Gospell,
which was as great a work, & as much to be reioyced
at as that the halt did walke, or that the
leapers were clēsed, or that the deafe did h
                     •
                  are.
The rich were most boūd to receiue the Gospel,
but the poore receiued it, & it was as much
as if he had said, the poore are become rich, &
the rich are poore, for the gospel is true riches.
               
                  Salomon sayth, Better is the poore man that
walketh in his vprightnes,
                  Prou. 28. 6. 
                  then a rich man that
peruerteth his w
                        ••
                     es: to shewe that a poore
man may bee an vpright man, and an vpright
man may be a poore man, and yet is to be preferred
before the wicked rich man. And in an
other place hee sayth,Eccle. 4. 13. 
                  Better is a poore and
a wise child, then an old & a foolish King which
wil
                        •••
                      more be admonished: to shew that wisedome
and lowlines doe not alwaies goe by
yeares and riches, though the riches of a king,
and that some mens pouertie is more blessed,
then some mens riches: and as the poore
which are godly, are more blessed then the

vngodly rich: so are they in more account
with the Lord, and alwaies more deare vnto
him. And therefore hath the Lord laid downe
so many charges in his worde concerning the
poore, which are as so many letters sent vnto
the rich in their behalfe. Remoue not the bounds
of the fatherles,
                  Pro. 23. 10. (sayth the Lord) for he that is
more mightie will surely defend them. And againe,

                     
                        •
                     ob not the poore,
                  Pro. 22. 22. 
                  because they are poore,
neither oppresse the afficted in i
                        •
                     dgement, for the
Lord will, &c. To shewe that the poore haue as
good frends to stand by thē, as the rich: for the
Lord himselfe doth promise to take their part,
especially (as S. Paul saith) If they feare God, &
be of the houshold of faith. And not without special
cause in his singular wisdome hath his maiestie
so ordained, that there shall alwaies be
some poore mingled amōg the rich in this life,
& one reason is: thereby to trie the rich mens
charitie, as appeareth by the Lords owne testimonie,
because there shall be euer some poore
in the land, therefore I command thee, saying:
Thou shalt open thy hand vnto thy brother,
                  Deut. 15. 11 (that
is, thou shalt bee liberal, and not close-fisted
vnto thy brother) to thy needie, and to thy poore
in thy laude: calling them our poore, and our
needie, &c. As if they were of our familie and
charge, to be prouided for by vs. And to this
doth the Son of God, the Lord Iesus also giue
witnes:Mat. 26. 11. 
                  The poore (saith he) you shall alwaies
haue with you, but me you shall not haue, (meaning

in bodily presence) and looke what 
                        〈◊〉
                     
would doe for me, doe it for them: to shew that
if the poore were wanting, the rich should not
haue whereupon to exercise the works of liberalitie,
and christian compassion.
               Another reason why there are poore in the
world aswell as rich, is, that by such a differēce
Gods bountifull liberalitie might appeare to
the rich, as he would haue the liberalitie of the
rich appeare to the poore. God could haue
made all alike, and enriched all alike, if it pleased
him: but hee sawe this inequalitie to bee
more for his glorie; wherein appeareth so many
singular arguments of his vnspeakable wisdome,
and power, and mercie, and goodnes
towards all men, and all his creatures. For if al
were head, where were the comelines of the
bodie? And what doth shew the height of the
mountaine but the valley that lieth vnder it?
And if the rich consider well of the worke of
God in this poynt, they shall finde great cause
to loue the poore, and not to disdaine them.
We see how proude and insolent many are if
they get vp a gorgious house ouer their heads,
or a veluet coate vpon their backes, or a golde
chaine about their necks: and as for their poore
neighbours, they count them but as peasants
and slaues in respect of themselues. But alas
poore soules, what is it that setteth out the
brauerie of their building, but the poore cottage
that standeth by it? And in what estimation

would their veluets and silkes bee had, if
some did not weare frize, and goe plainly apparelled?
And againe, if none were vnlearned,
then who would reuerence the learned? or
what account would there be of Artes and Scicoces,
if the knowledge of them were equallie
giuen to euery one? And where doth wisdome
shine most in her glorious beautie, but in the
middest of fooles? Therefore men should leaue
admiring of themselues, and despising of others
which come short of them, whether it be
in the riches of the bodie, or in the riches of the
minde, and learne to praise the wisedome and
goodnes of the giuer and disposer of them, and
in all humblenes of minde vse them to the glorie
of the giuer, and the benefite of their brethren.
And further, how could the rich liue
without the poore and baser sort of people,
whom God hath made their seruants to supplie
their wants? For as it is not meete the
ploughman should weare the Crowne: so is it
as vnfit for the King to holde the plough. And
therefore as in the bodie naturall God placed
diuers members, and all differing one from an
other, that one might be seruiceable to an other:
so in the bodie politicall he hath in no
lesse wisedome made diuers degrees & estates
of men, that one might be seruiceable & helpfull
vnto another. And thus wee see that for
diuers causes the Lord will haue the poore still
amongst the rich, and that good men haue bin

in pouertie aswell as bad: and yet the Lo
                     •••
                  
hath still supplied their wants, and not 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them to lacke what he sawe good for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
neither wil he, but wil either giue them bread,
or abate their hunger, or giue such a blesing
with their little portion, that it shal go as fa
                     ••
                  e,
and content them aswell as if it were gre
                     •••
                  ,
and withall makes them rich in the heauenly
graces of his spirite, wherein many very 
                     〈◊〉
                  
rich men of the world are both bare and barren.
               As there be good poore men, so be there also
wicked poore men, which are become
poore and miserable through their owne negligence,
and slothfulnes: such are they 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Salomon speaketh vnto in my text. And to
such persons, pouertie is both a reproch of
men, and a iudgement of God: for as it is no
shame to suffer, but to suffer for euill doing: so
it is no shame to bee poore, but to become
poore through our owne negligence and wilfulnes.
Of those that beare the burthen of pouertie
in that sort there be some in the Church,
and some in the common wealth: of Church
men that bee in pouertie, some are of the popish
and antichristian Church, and some of
the christian Churches. In the popish church
there are a companie of idle Monkes and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ers, and hedge priests, and cloisterers, which
professe wilfull pouertie, making the worlds
beleeue that it is a step to happines, and a degree

of christian perfection, and if that be 
                     ••
                  ue,
what need the Sluggard care for such a iudgement?
Nay then it is no iudgement at all, but
a blessing and a happines: and so by that reckoning
the Sluggard were a blessed and a happie
man, and the Sluggards life were the onely
happy life that could bee deuised in this
world, but that cannot bee; for here wee see
pouertie and necessitie set vpon the Sluggard
to punish him for his slothfulnes. In our christian
Church also we haue seene some both in
the ministerie and otherwise, who liued in
good estate: and yet afterward through their
couetousnes and ambition haue fallen into
great decay: for when they were not content
with that which was conuenient for them, but
still would haue more: it hath happened oftentimes
to them as it did to the dogge, that
hauing a piece of meate in his mouth, would
snatch at the shadowe of the meate in the water,
and so when he thought to haue both, hee
lost both.
               In the scriptures there are diuers causes of
pouertie set downe, and pouertie is made a
punishment for diuers kindes of offenders,
and is a whip for the backe of many fooles:
it is a whippe for the Sluggards backe, that in
time will whip him to death if he repent not,
for Salomon saith, The disire of the Sluggard

                        •
                     layeth him▪ for his hands refus
                        •
                      to wor
                        •
                     e.
                  Pro. 21. 25. 
                  It is
also a scourge for the wasting vnthri
                        •
                     t, and

prodigall spender,Luke 15. as may appeare in the example
of the prodigall sonne, who hauing
spent all, was driuen to feed among the swine.
When it hath scourged the vnthrift, it will also
serue to scourge the niggard, that knoweth
not how to vse his goods, as appeareth by the
parable of him that hid his talent,Luk. 19. 20. 26. and therefore
had all taken from him in the ende, to
shew that it is not the best way to thriue, for a
man to liue to himselfe.Pro. 11. 24. 25. And Salomon sayth,
There is that scattereth and is more encreased,
but hee that speaketh more then is right, shall
surely come to pouertie. The liberall person (sa
                        ••
                     h
he) shall haue plentie, and he that watereth shall
haue raine. When it hath punished the niggard,
and the myser, it shall also punish the

                        ••
                     uell man, & the oppressour: for it is set down
by Salomon
                     Pro. 22. 16. as a definitiue sentence against
him in this manner: He that oppresseth the poore
to enritch himselfe, and to giue to the rich, shall
surely come to pouertie. And the Prophet Esay
as one in the same cōmission confirmeth the
sentence, and goeth a little further and faith,
Esa. 33. 1. 2. 
                     W
                           •
                        e hee to thee that spoylest and wast not spoi
                           ••
                        ,
for when thou shalt cease spoiling of others, th
                           ••
                        
shalt he spoiled by others, and when thou hast deals
wickedly against others, then others shall deal
                           •
                        
wickedly against thee. The trueth whereof i
                        •
                     
not hard to bee seene in some that haue gotten
vp by prises, and many that haue liued by vsurie,
brokerage, promooting, bribing, extorting,

cousoning, and such like meanes. As it
punisheth the cruell oppressour, so will it also
punish those which are rash and prophane in
their affaires: as Esau,
                     Heb. 12. 17. who (without any more
adoe) when hee was hungrie, solde away his
birthright for a messe of pottage, and when it
was gone, cried to haue it againe, but could
not get it. The sentence is recorded by salomon
thus:Prou. 21. 
                           •
                        . 
                     The thoughts of the diligent dee surely
bring abundance, but who soeuer is hastie, commeth
surely to pouertie. Which is also verified
in many sureties which haue in a vaineglorious
heate, passed their wordes, neither regarding
for whom, nor for what, and after warde
haue repented them too late: and surely this
is a point not vnfit for noble men, and great
gentlemen to consider of, whome God hath
blessed both with great liuings, and also beautified
with a liberall and free heart, lest being
(as many are) attended vpon and haunted by
hungrie horse leaches, and fawning parasites,
they impeach their estate and honour before
they bee aware. As it punisheth the rash and
headie foole, so doth it also helpe to plague
fornicatours and adulterous fooles: as may
appeare by that wofull complaint of such as
haue beene brought into the fooles paradise
by the alluring ba
                        •
                     tes of harlots. And therefore
Salomon,
                     Prou. 5. 8. 9. 10. that great man of experience,
aduiseth all that feare God, to keepe their way
farre from the harlot, & not to come neere the

doores of her house, and giueth this as a reason:
lest (sayth he) thou giue thy honour vnto
others, and thy yeares vnot the cruell: and
le
                        •
                     t the strangers bee filled with thy strength,
and thy labours be found in the houses of strangers.
And last of all it is a piece of a punishment
for the contemners of the worde, and
those that obstinately disobey the lawes of the
almightie.
                  Deuter. 28. 15. 23. 24. 
                  For (saith Moses) If thou wilt not
obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keepe and
to doe all his commandements, and his or 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
which I command thee this day, The hea
                        •••
                     
shallbe brasse, and the earth iron: The Lord shall
giue thee for the raine of thy land, dust and ashes,
vntill thou be destroyed. So that pouertie and
necessitie, bee like a common gallowes at the
townes end, which hang vp both theeues, and
murtherers, and traytors, and witches, and all
that are brought to be executed. Then it is not
a part of happines, nor a degree of perfection
as papists holde, but a verie sore iudgement of
God.
               Here is now the Sluggards pouertie, and
the niggards pouertie, and the vnthrifts pouertie,
and the hastie mans pouerty, & the whoremongers
pouertie, and the cruell mans pouertie,
aud the vngodly mans pouertie, and pouertie
is a whippe for them all. By which we are
taught not to blame others (as many doe) if
they bee fallen behinde hand, but let euery
man examine himselfe in these poyntes: and

if thou canst cleere thy selfe of one, suspect
thy selfe in another, and trie thy heart in
all, till thou hast founde out the cause, as
thou wilt trie euery keye of the bunch vntill
the locke bee opened. And saye to thy
soule as Dauid saide to the woman of Tekoah,
who came to the King about Absalom,
                  2. Sam. 14. 19.
                  Is not the hand of loab in all this? So is not
the hand of flouth, or negligence, or the
hand of crueltie, or the hand of incontinencie,
or of niggardlines, or of rashnes,
or of vngodlines in this my pouertie? And
this may suffice for the pouertie of the bodie.
               And nowe a little of spirituall pouertie.
Where of the Scriptures speake sometime in
the better part, and sometime in the euill part:
in the better part it is attributed to the children
of God to their great commendation,
and as a speciall ve
                     •
                  tue, and grace of God, and
that is when they be humble & lowlie in their
owne eyes, and thinke poorely and basely of
them themselues in respect of others. And this
is that 
                     •
                  pirituall po
                     •
                  ertie which our Sauiour

                     〈◊〉
                   speaketh of, and calleth it blessed po
                  
                     ••
                  itie,
in Ma
                     •
                  th. 5. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  hen hee saith: Blessed

                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     oore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome
of 
                        〈◊〉
                     : To shew that it is not onely a blessed,
but a rich pouertie, because the kingdome
of H
                     •
                  auen doth follow it. And this is a grace
founde 
                     •
                  swell in Kings and great rich men of

this worlde sometimes, as in the pooret 
                     〈◊〉
                  
when God dooth sanctifie their hearts, and
teach them to knowe themselues: such a one
was Abraham a rich 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and Iob a rich man
and Dauid a King: yet were they poore in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
rite, and therefore blessed: the contrar
                     •
                  e whe
                     •
                  
                  of
is found in those that are wise in their own
conceite, and wedded to their owne wai
                     •
                  r,
whatsoeuer can bee said to the contrarie,Pro. 26. 10. whether
they bee rich or poore, of such Sal
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
saith, There is more hope of a foole then of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Againe to bee poore in spirite is sometime
taken in the euill parte, not as a vertue, but 
                     〈◊〉
                  
fowle vice: not as a grace but as a disgrace
                     •
                  
and that is when men a bounde in their owne
spirites, and in their owne iudgements, and 
                     ••
                  
                  ing
altogether carnall, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , are 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of the spirite of God, and barren in the gr
                     •
                  t
                     ••
                  
of the same spirite, abounding in pride, and
ba
                     •
                  re
                     •
                   in humilitie, abounding in ma
                     ••
                  ce, and
barren in loue, abounding in ignorance, and
barren in knowledge, abounding in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  ie, but barren in 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and so i
                     •
                   the rest
and yet thinke not so, 
                     •
                   president of which
pouerti
                     •
                   wee haue in theminister and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of Laodicea, to whom Christ speaketh in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
sorte:Reue. 13. 17. 
                  Thou saiest thou are rich and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
with goods, and bast needs of not 
                        •
                     ing, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
est not that thou art wr
                        ••••
                     ed, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
and poore, and blinde, and naked. And in 
                     〈◊〉
                   do
the soule that is destitute of the heauenly 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
c
                     •
                  s of the holy ghost, is a poore soule, although
he iette it vp and downe in his silkes and veluets:
yea and in cloth of golde too. But the
soule that hath them is rich indeede, though
otherwise for want of worldlie necessaries
they bee constrained to lye begging in the
streetes. Therefore the holy ghost doubteth
not to call them riches,Ephe. 2. 7. saying that God sent
the Gospell of his sonne amongst the gentiles
that hee might shew thereby to the ages to
come, the exceeding riches of his grace,
through his kindenes towards vs in Christ lesus.
To shew that the giftes of the holy ghost
sanctified to the children of God, are riches,
and more then riches, for they are exceeding
riches. And in the same Epistle, the Apostle
saith, that he preached vnto the gētiles, the vnsearchable
riches of Christ,Ephe. 3. 8. to shew that whosoeuer
hath Christ, is rich enough. Therefore
is the Gospell of Christ compared to a pearle
of inesti
                     •
                  nable value, which could not bee
bought, except a rich man solde all his substance
to buie it, to shew how rich they are
that haue that pearle. Many rich men want
these riches: Therefore let no man saye,
oh I am rich and well increased in worldlie
goods, therefore I am not guiltie of the sluggards
sinne, for through thy slouthfulnes thy
soule may bee poore enough in the riches of
Gods spirite, how rich soeuer thou bee in the
things of this world. And if any man woulde

haue these riches, he must earnestly desire, and
long after them:Luk. 1. 53. for the Lord filleth the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
grie with good things, but the rich, that is the
full stomack, he sendeth emptie awaie. In the
2. of Prou. Salomon propoundeth two thing
                     •
                  
and sheweth what course must bee taken of
those that will obtaine them. The 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the vnderstanding of the feare of God, and the
knowledge of God: the way to get them is to
receiue the worde, and to hide it: then he must
hearken with his eares, and encline his heart,
then to calland crie af
                     •
                  er them, as if they were
going away, for feare they shuld not beint
                     ••
                  
rained as they are worthie: 
                     •
                  nd if they cannot
be had with calling and crying, then hee must
fall to seeking, and searching, as if they sought
for filuer, and searched for treasure. This being
done, then shalt thou vnderstand, and fi
                     •••
                  
&c. to shew that these things sent from God,
must be earnestly sued vnto, and will not ma
                     •
                  
                  rie,
but with such as will vse them well, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
count of them as speciall guests. Vnto whi
                     ••
                  
hunger and longing, must also be ioyned 
                     〈◊〉
                  
gence, and painefulnes: for A slotfull 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
(saith the holy Ghost) maketh poore,
                  Pro. 10. 4. 
                  but 
                        〈◊〉
                     
hand of the diligent maketh rich: So a slot
                     〈◊〉
                  
eare to heare, and a slothfull heart to bele
                     •••
                  
maketh poore in heauenly things: but the
eare and the heart of the diligent maketh rich.
Some say they haue been diligent in hearing,
&c. and yet are poore, and that may well 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
for it is not our diligence, but the blessing of
God that maketh rich, which blessing is not
giuen alwaies at the first, but is promised to
those, that in faith and patience, and by earnest
prayer are continuall su
                     〈◊〉
                   and seekers
for the same,Gen. 32. 26. like lacob, who could not obtaine
a blessing of the Angell, without great stri
                  
                     ••
                  ng
and wrestling. And sometime it is v
                     •
                  terly
denied, and not giuen at all to some, because
the Lorde seeth in them a false heart, and a
wicked affection that sette them a worke,
and knoweth that if the wicked should haue
those excellent graces and ie
                     ••
                  els, they would
abuse them filthilie and proudely, to the dishonour
of the giuer, like swine which trample
pearles vnder their feet, and digge vp filth out
of the dunghilk and to speake indifferently,
what should the Lorde doe reucaling his secrets,
and his counsels to them that meane not
to follow them? Of such kinde of seekers, and
gatherers of spirituall riches, is that speech of
Saint Iames verified,Iam. 4. 2. which hee vseth against
some, that seek fo
                     •
                   temporall riches: Ye lust and
haue not, ye 
                        〈◊〉
                      others, yede fire 
                        〈◊〉
                      derately,

                        〈◊〉
                      cannot obtai
                        •
                     e, yee 
                        •
                     ight and 
                        •
                     arr
                        •
                     , and get

                        •••
                     hing, because ye aske not.
                  verse 3. Then to those that
aske he saith: Ye aske and receiue not, because ye
asks amisse, that you might laie the same out vpon
your pleasures. So in seeking for heauenly riches,
many 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and haue not, and no bodie
doth pitty their longing, because they are not

with child traueling,Apoc. 12. 1. 2. nor traueling in paine
                     ••
                  
be deliuered as the true church doth. Again
                     ••
                  
they enuie the giftes of other men, they des
                     ••
                  
immoderately, they would attaine to gre
                     •
                  
matters, but they cannot obtaine, they stri
                     •
                  
and keepe a stirre and get nothing, because
they aske not. And when they aske, they 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ceiue not, because they aske amisse, to spend
their knowledge and their learning, and the
                     ••
                  
vtterance in maintaining of contentions, and
quarrels, and in defending of superstitions,
and sinne, and in peruerting the straight wai
                     •
                  
of the Lorde, and all at their owne pleasure,
but nothing to the glorie of GOD, or to the
good of Gods Church. Now it is well, if 
                     〈◊〉
                  
pouertie commeth not for want of diligence
and painefulnes but then God may curse 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vnsanctified affections, and his giftes that h
                     ••
                  
gauevs may be giuen in his wrath, as Saul was
to the Israelites, and the wicked may peri
                     ••
                  
with all their knowledge and excellent graces,
for want of Gods grace, as the Iewes
                     ••
                  
ed with the meate in their mouthes, for want
of Gods blessing: and this may likewise 
                     〈◊〉
                  
fice for the matter of spirituall pouertie. Now
further (to encrease the paine) besides poue
                     •
                  
                  tie
there commeth necessitie, to shew that the
time willcome, when the sluggard shall be
                     •
                  
glad of that which before he despised and ca
                     ••
                  
away, and shall not get it, like the rich glutto
                     •
                  
who while h
                     ••
                   liued amongst his delicates

scorned to drinke water, yea perhappes wind
exceptit were the best, but being in hell, hee
called for water: yea but for a droppe of water▪
and could not get it. Or as the prodigall child,
who was at last glad of pease hulles amongst
the swine, whē in his fulnes he scorned bread
And so is it in spirituall necessitie, the time
wil come when many wil be glad to heare the
meanest of those Sermons, and instructions,
and bookes, which now they neglect, and
lothe, and consure at their pleasure, and will
thinke themselues happie too, if they may

                     •••
                  ue but a droppe of that water to drinke,
which now they power downe the streetes
and chanels, for God must needes bee reuen
                  
                     ••
                  d
of such horrible contempts.
               Now for the manner of this iudgement, it

                     •••
                  ery fearefull, for it is saide in my text, first,
that it shall come vpon him as one that trauai
                  
                     ••
                  h
by the way, which 
                     •
                  eeteth with a thee
                     •
                  e
on a sodaine, before he looked for his cōming.

                     〈◊〉
                   hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   out with 
                     •
                  any dealers and

                     •••
                  upiers in the world, who for want of diligence,
and carefull circumspection, haue gone

                     〈◊〉
                   still, as if they were on a iourney, and so
                  
                     ••
                  inely
haue been ouertaken with pouertie,
and set vpon by necessitie before they haue

                     〈◊〉
                   aware, and where as they were taken
before, to bee in very good case, it hath been

                     •
                  ounde, that when euery man hath taken his
share, they haue been left very poore and naked.

And so shall Gods graces waste in v
                     〈◊〉
                  
one after another, if we suffer them to di
                     〈◊〉
                  
vs for want of renewing, and continual
                     〈◊〉
                  
payring: And at the last when wee think
                     ••
                  
haue the most vse of them, our faith will 
                     〈◊〉
                  
gone, and turned into infidelitie; our rep
                     •••
                  
tance shall bee turned into impenitencie 
                     〈◊〉
                  
hardnes of heart, our zeale will be blasted, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
our loue wee shall finde abated, and also 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ted vp, as if all the hogges in the tow
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                  
been in our garden. And then we shall 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and doe nothing but weepe for them, as 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  chel wept for her children, and shall not 
                     〈◊〉
                  
comforted because they are not, nor can
                     •••
                  
be had or else we shall hardly kno
                     •
                   them, 
                     •
                  
take them againe, nay they will hardly know
                     •
                  
vs, or take vs againe, we shall be so altered, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
if wee had r
                     ••
                  ne away from out masters, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
lien long abroade in ditches, or as though w
                     ••
                  
had been newlie taken out of our sti
                     •
                  ck
                     ••
                  
graues.
               And lastly, as this execution shal be so
                     ••••
                  
ly serued vpon the Sluggard, so shall it 
                     〈◊〉
                  
mightily assisted with necessitie, which shall
come against him as an armed man: so
                     〈◊〉
                  
no rescue or resistance can bee made. And 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the Sluggard then make any, it will not se
                     •••
                  
his turne, for he shall be so ouer matched, that
he shall not be able to recouer himselfe, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
new supplie of strenght and grace come from
God. And this point may serue notably t
                     ••
                  
                  
uerthrow the folly of Papists, and secure gospe
                     ••
                  ers,
which thinke to commaund God, and
to repent when they list, or beleeue, or heare,
or worke when they list. No, no, well maiest
thou striue, but it shall bee against an armed
man, and thy selfe naked: yea thou must then
yeelde and confesle thy folly in spite of thy
teeth.Gen. 49. 14. The Sluggards are of kinred to Isbachar,
who seeing ease to be good, and the land pleasant,
became secure, and careles, and like a
strong asse cou
                     •
                  hing downe betweene diuers

                     •••
                  hens: to shew that the Sluggards are like
asses, which haue some strength indeed, but al
their strength is in couching downe, but not
in rising vp: when hee goeth to sleepe, and betakes
himself to idlenes, & slothfulnes, he shal
finde himselfe strong enough: but when hee
thinketh to rise vp to worke, and to make resistance
against pouerrie and necessitie, the
Lords sergeants sent to arrest him; hee shall
then finde himselfe weake enough, and too
weake. For as the drun 
                     •
                   ard drinketh till hee
hath drunke all the money out of his purse,
and all the wit out of his head, and all goodnes
out of his heart, that there is no difference
betweene him and the beast, except it bee in
this: that the beast can goe and keepe his way
which the drunkard cannot doe: so the Sluggard
sleepeth in all securitie, and neglecteth al
his busines, and puts off all care, for doing of
all his dueties, vntill he hath slept all thri
                     •
                  t out

of his shop, and all his friends out of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
panie, and all Gods gra
                     •••
                   out of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and all comfo
                     •
                  t out of his 
                     •
                  oule▪ & all 
                     〈◊〉
                  
out of his bodie, and all conscience out of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
dealing, till his stocke be spent, and his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
pying decaied, and his customers gone, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Gods spirite gone, and all bee gone: and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
nothing be left but feare, and shame, with 
                     〈◊〉
                  
uertic, and penurie, and a bare head and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ble shoulders to beare off the blowes. And in
                     •
                  
word, til there be no difference betweene hi
                     •
                  
and the asse, except it bee in this: that the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
can rise againe when hee is downe, which th
                     •
                  
Sluggard cannot doe: For his pouertie is 
                        〈◊〉
                     
like one that trauaileth by the way, and his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
cessitie is set vpon him like an armed man. And
thus haue you heard the Sluggardrowsed. If 
                     •
                  
hath roused any of vs, let vs thanke God for it
if it hath not, let vs pray that it may, and
when wee are gone, let vs take
heede wee fall not asleepe
againe, lest a worse
thing happen
vnto vs.
               FINIS.
               
                  Soli Deo gloria.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table whrein are set forth the principall poyntes that are handled
in the Treatise following.
            
               
               
            
         
      
   