
      
         
            
            
            THE
Christians heauenly
Treasure.
            
            BY
WILLIAM BVRTON of Reading
in Barkeshire.
            
               MATTHEW 16. 26.
               What shall it profit a man to winne the whole world,
and loose his owne soule.
            
            
               PHILIP. 3. 7.
               The things that were vantage vnto mee, the same I
counted losse for Christs sake.
               8 And doe iudge all things to be dunge that I might
winne Christ.
            
            LONDON:
Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man senior,
and Ionas Man, dwelling in Paternoster-Row,
at the signe of
the Talbot. 1608.
         
         
            
            
            TO
the right VVorshipfull,
and religious Knight, Sir Drue
Drurie, encrease of Grace and
Peace in this life, and fulness
of heauenly treasure in the
life to come.
            
               RIght VVorshipfull
Maecenas, in regard
of the manifolde
fauours, and encouragements,
which I haue receiued
from you, euer since I first
entred into the sacred worke of
the Ministrie, first in Norfolke at

your house by Norwich, where
then you remayned, and many
times since, I doe heere (as dutie
bindeth mee) offer vnto your
VVorshipfull Patronage, this
short Treatise, of the Christians
heauenly Treasure, which sheweth
in some sort, the difference
betweene false goods and true
goods, betweene Heauen and
Earth, the riches of the one and
the riches (or penurie rather) of
the other, and the way how to
enioy the one without losse of
the other. Which is not to teach
you any thing that yet you know
not, for God bee praysed you
knew these things long agoe, but

(as S. Peter wrighteth) to confirme
& strengthen your godly
minde, and to vphold your holy
Faith, which long since through
the mercy of God shined in you,
accompanied with true loue, the
handmaid of Faith, to the great
glory of God, the ioye of the
godly, and the comfort of the
Saints hearts. This Argument
doth of right belong vnto your
Worship, because the Lord hath
plentifully replenished your hart
with the loue of heauenly things
and true zeale vnto his glory, for
heauenly matters, onely in heauenly
minds and sanctified harts
receiue kind entertainment, like

the Angels in Lots house, reioysing
each in others company &
conference, like Mary and Elizabeth,
but they shun the companie
of the wicked, like the Wise
men, which balked Herods house
& returned another way, when
they vnderstood what a Fox he
was.
            The God of all Mercie and
Consolation, who hath made
your old age glorious by crowning
the same with a most constant
loue and sincere profession
of his blessed Truth, so prosper
your holy proceedings and religious
endeuours; that at the end
of this your earthly pilgrimage,

you may with holy Simeon depart
in peace, and receiue with
all Saints, that crowne of immortall
glory, and endlesse rest,
which God hath prepared for
you, and for all those that loue
and desire the glorious appearing
of the Lord Iesus Christ.
From my friends house in London,
this 21. of Ianuarie 1607.
            
               Your Worships in all
Christian affection,
VVilliam Burton.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
Christians Heauenly
Treasure.
            
               MATTHEVV. 6. 19.
               
                  Lay not vp Treasures for your selues in
earth, where the Moth and Canker
corrupt, and where Theeues digge
through and steale.
                  20 But lay vp for your selues Treasures in
Heauen, where neither the Moth, nor
Canker corrupteth, and where Theeues
neither dig through nor steale.
                  21 For, where your Treasure is, there
will your hart bee also.
               
            
            
               OVr Sauiour Christ hath in
the former part of this chapter
condemned the fond affectation
of Vaine-glory as
the onely bane and poyson of all good
actions, wherof he giueth three instances:

The one in giuing of Almes: The other
in Fasting: The last in Prayer▪ He
now for biddeth worldlinesse, and greedy
desire of earthly things, as dangerous
an enemie to our Saluation, & no lesse
a staine vnto our Christian profession,
as the former. Vaine-glory and Hypocrisie
as a burning poyson that infecteth
and inflameth the inward parts, is to be
auoyded, yea, as a Theefe that robbeth
the Almightie of his glory is to be pursued.
Greedy Couetousnesse or worldlinesse
as Thrones that choke the graces
of Gods Spirit, is to bee plucked vp
by the rootes. As a spirituall Feuer that
relisheth no goodnesse, but distasteth all
H
                  ••
               uenly and Spirituall things, is to
bee purged and taken heed of, yea, the
desire of riches is to bee auoyded as a
streame both deepe and swift, that will
both drowne mens soules & carry them
quite away from God. To that ende
Saint Paul saith,1. Tim. 6. 9 they that will bee rich,
(meaning whether God will or no, or
before the time that God hath appointed)
fall into many noysome and foolish
lusts, which drowne men in perdition and

destruction, to shew in what a miserable
case a worldling is: for speak to a drowned
man, smite him, teach him, and cry
out vnto him, or sound a Trumpet in
his Eare, and he heareth not, he feeleth
not: and so is it with a man whose hart
is drowned in the cares of this World,
and loue of riches. And yet those are in
greatest admiration, for the world doth
not onely desire to be hauing more still,
but doth admire those that haue worldly
Treasures. Therefore our Sauiour
Christ doth warne vs of that gnawing
Worme, and tels vs, that if wee bee so
greedy of the world as to set our harts
vpon it, we loose heauen for our labo
                  ••
               .
And therefore wee must take heed how
wee vse this world: for Christ would
teach vs how to vse the world, that wee
bee not cousened by it.The scop & summ
                     •
                   of this Text. A little thing
certaine is better then much vncertaine,
as a poore man with a little Coppyhold,
is better to passe in that respect
than hee that hath much, and no assurance
in it: The World is vncertaine,
for it is in danger of Theeues which will
rob, or of Mothes which will f
                  •
               e
                  •
               , or of

Rust which will consume, or of Death
which wil end all, but Heauen is not subiect
to any of these nor the like. Againe,
hee that will bee saued must send Treasure
before hand to Heauen, and not
driue of till death come, for none shall
finde Treasure there, but they that lay it
vp before they dye.
            As a man that remooueth to another
place to abide there, sendeth his stuffe
and prouision before him: so they that
meane to remoue hence and to abide in
Heauen, must send their Treasure thether
before hand, by relieuing the poor,
and helping forward other holy & cha
               
                  ••
               table
works. And wheras some alledge
for themselues, that they haue had great
losses, &c. and therefore cannot giue any
thing to the poore, or other holy and
charitable vses, they must know that
they haue the more need to giue, and to
bee liberall, and to doe good with that
they haue, and so to lay vp in Heauen,
when the World goeth from them, or
else they will bee poore both here and
there too. Now if any man bee desirous
to know whether he hath any treasure

in heauen or no, let him take this course:
First, let him see what it is that doth
command his hart: and next what doth
most moue him, and touch him: and lastly,
what hee taketh most delight in, and
what he beateth his braine about most:
and if the matters of Heauen and Gods
Kingdome doe most commaund his
heart, and occupy his head, and delight
his minde, then his Treasure is there, his
stuffe is sent before hand to the place
whether hee intendeth to remoue when
God calleth him, or else not: and this
is the summe of Christs words and holy
counsell in this place.
            This Text hath 2. parts.The parts of the Text.
               
                  1. A Commandement.
                  2. A reason of the same.
               
            
            The Commandement hath likewise
two parts. The first is Negatiue in
Verse 19. Lay not vp Treasure for your
selues in▪ earth, &c. The second is Affirmatiue
in verse 20. But lay vp for your
selues Treasure in Heauen, where neither
the Moth, &c.
            
            The Reason is in Verse. 21. For
where your Treasure is, there will your

hart bee also. As touching the Negatiue
part of our Sauiour his Precept, wee are
to vnderstand that his manner of speaking
is here no otherwise then in other
places, and other cases also of the like
kinde:Ioh. 6. 27. as, Labour not for the meate that
perisheth, but labour for the meat that endureth
to Eternall Life. And in another
place,Luk. 12. 33 
               Sell that you haue, and giue to
the poore.
               Mat. 10. 9 And in another place, Possesse
not gold nor siluer. And in another place,
Be not carefull what to eate and drinck,
               Mat. 6. 25. 
               or
what rayment to put on. All which places
being literally taken, and not according
to the minde and meaning of our Sauiour
Christ, may breed error, as they haue
done: for from hence the Anabaptists
fetch their communitie of goods; the
Monks and Fryers their wilfull pouerty;
and the Iesuits hereupon perswade
others to impouerish themselues to enrich
them: And lastly, vnder the shadow
of these words: the slothfull sluggard, &
idle person would shrowd themselues,
to bee thereby discharged of all honest
labor and diligent following of their vocations.
Therfore first the true meaning

of the words is to be sought for, and then
we shall the better vnderstand what do
               
                  •
               trines
from thence may bee gathered,
for our further instruction and consolation
in the Lord.Treasure This word Treasure, is
taken in the Scripture sometime for gold
and siluer. 1. King. 7. 51.1. King. 5 
               And Salomon
brought in the things which Dauid his father
had dedicated: the Siluer, and the
Gold, and the Vessels, and laid them among
the Treasures of the house of the Lord. So
Prou. 2▪ 4.Pro. 2. 4. 
               If thou seekest for wisedome as
for siluer, and searchest for her as for treasure.
And Mat. 13. 44.Mat. 13. 
               The Kingdome
of Heauen is like vnto a Treasure hid in
the field, &c. Sometime it is put for abandance
of riches or any other thing.
As, Mat. 13. 52.Mat 13. 
                     •
                  
                
               Euery Scribe which is
taught vnto the kingdome of Heauen, is like
vnto a House-holder, which bingeth forth
out of his Treasure things both new and old.
And Mat. 12. 34.Mat. 12. 
                     •
                  
                
               out of the aboundance
of the hart the mouth speaketh. Verse 35.
A good man out of the good Treasure of his
hart, or abundance of good things, br
                     •
                  ngeth
forth good▪ things. So Rom. 2. 5. Thou
after thine hardnesse, and hart that cannot

repent, treasurest vnto thy selfe Wrath
against the day of Wrath, that is, causest
vnto thy selfe abundance of Wrath, &c.
And sometime it is put for whatsoeuer a
man taketh delight in, as here in this
place, Where your Treasure is, there will
be your hart also, that is, where the thing
is that you delight in, there will be your
hart, your minde and affection. Againe,
all Treasure is eyther temporall or eternall.
2. Cor. 4. 18. The things that are seene
are temporall, but the things that are not
seene are eternall. Eternall or heauenly
Treasure is from heauen, and consisteth
in the grace and fauour o
                  •
                God, and is
the onely true Riches. Esay. 33. 6.
                  
                     •
                  sa. 33. 6 
               The.
feare of the Lord shall bee his Treasure.
And a good man out of the good Treasure
of his hart bringeth forth good things.
               
                  
                     •
                  uk. 6. 45.
These are called:
                  
                     •
                  uk 12. 33 
               Bagges that wax not
old.
               Cor. 4. 7 And Light of glory brought in earthen
vessels. The renuing of the inward man.
Ver. 16. An excellent and eternall waight
of glory. 17. And things not seen, yet looked
vpon.
               Cor. 2. 9 
               Vers. 18. Such as no Eye hath seene,
nor Eare hath heard▪ nor haue entered into
the hart of man. And here in our Text

               such as Moths cannot eate, nor Rust consume,
nor Theeues steale, that is, they are
not subiect to any kinde of casualtie or
mischance: all which places doe rather
shew what it is not, then what it is, for
indeed it is God himselfe in Christ Iesus,
which cannot bee expressed, because he
is infinite and incomprehensible.
            Of this latter it is not that hee speaketh,
when hee saith Lay not vp for your
selues Treasures in earth, then hee must
needes meane the former. But what?
doth the Lord Iesus meane that it is in
no wise lawfull for a Christian man to
get, or enioy the riches of this world?
not so, for in Pro. 2. 4.Pro. 2. 4. it is said that we
must seeke for Wisedome as for golde:
to shew that golde also may bee sought
for.1 King. 10 22 And King Salomon made a nauie
of ships, which once in three yeeres returned
with golde and siluer, Iuory, &c.
And in Gen. 37. 28.Gen. 37. 28 it is said there was
traffique betweene the Midianites and
the Ismalites Marchants,Chap. 39. 1 and betweene
the Ismalites and the Egiptians, that one
country might by that meanes bee benefited
by the commodities of another.

What then? doth hee meane that it is
vnlawfull to keepe any thing in store
for hereafter? Not so neither, for Ioseph
is commended for laying vp against the
time of famine,Gen. 41. 35 yea, it is Iosephs counsell
that Pharaohs officers shall gather all
the foode of seauen plenteous yeeres,
and lay vp Corne for foode in the cities
to bee kept against the seauen yeeres of
famine. What then? doth hee meane
that a man must take of earthly goods
onely so much as will serue his turne,
and cast away that which is left? Not so
neither, for in Iohn. 6.Ioh. 6. 12. He commandeth
his Disciples to gather vp in baskets
that which was left, when the people
had bene miraculously fed, and let nothing
bee lost (saith the Lord.) What
then? doth hee meane that wee must
not prouide for those that wee leaue behinde
vs? Not so neither, for the Apostle
saith,1 Cor. 12. 14 
               The Children ought not to lay
vp for their Fathers, but Fathers for
their Children. And hee telleth Timothy,
that hee which prouideth not for his familie
               Tim. 5. 8.
               is (meaning in that respect) worse
than an Infidell, and hath denyed the faith
               
What then? doth hee meane that all
must bee common? Not so neither, for
then there could bee no breach of the
eight Commaundement if any man did
steale; and all exhortations and precepts
of distributing to the poore were in
vaine, if the poore might bee their owne
caruers of rich mens goods: yea, what
should then become of buying and selling?
Buy the Truth but sell it not,
               Prouerbs. saith
Sa
                     •
                  omon: And defraud not one another
(saith the Apostle) in barganing,Thessalo. and
buying, and selling.
            What then? doth hee mean that we
must sell away all that wee haue and
begge for our selues, as Popish Fryers,
and Monkish Papists would haue vs
to doe? Not so neither, for in Luke 12.
33.Luk. 12. 33 It is not said sell that you haue, but

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Sell that you
haue ouerplus, and may well spare, and giue
to the poore, otherwise we should loue our
neighbours not as our selues, but aboue
our selues, which God neuer required.
And better it is for a man to keepe his
goods for himselfe, than to bestow them
vpon idle Monks, and a wicked rabble

of Fryerly locusts, which bee as necessarie
in a christian Common-wealth, as
Snakes in a mans bosome, or Mice in
a barne full of Corne.
            What then? doth hee meane that a
man may liue idly, and then looke to
be maintained by others? Not so neither,
for the Apostle being ruled himselfe by
the spirit of Christ, hath set downe a
Rule for such irregular persons, that if
any can worke and will not,
               
                  
                     •
                   Thess. 3. 10 
               such should not
eate, to shew that idle persons are inordinate,
and so burdensome to a Common-wealth,
that they are not worthy
to liue, but to bee punished by the most
cruell death that 
                  •
               an bee, and that is to
bee starued and pined to death. And
in Pro. 6. 6. the sluggard is sent by the
holy Ghost to the Pismire, that in beholding
her wayes hee might learne to
bee wise, for shee hauing no guide, gouernour
nor ruler gathereth her meate
in Summer, and prepareth her foode in
Haruest, to shew that euen by honest
and painefull trauaile men should prouide
in Summer against the hard time
of Winter, and in health for sicknesse.

And albeit the Lord Iesus saith in Ioh. 6
Labour not for the meate that perisheth,
               Ioh. 6. 27.
yet his meaning is not to discharge men
of their honest labour, and following
(euen with diligence) their callings, but
that we must not labour so much for the
bread that perisheth, as for that which
abideth to Eternall life, or that our temporall
commodities should not bee the
only end of our labour, or that we must
not mingle our labour with distrust and
vexing care,Psal. 90. 10 for that euen our strength
is but labour and sorrow, and when Salomon
by his Wisedome had waded
through all matters, and had made tryall
of the world, hee vpon his approoued
experience, set downe his verdict,
that all is but vanit
                     •
                  e and vexation of spirit,
as if hee should say, moyle not, vexe
not, weare not out your selues so much
as you haue done about the world, to the
loosing of your heauenly treasure. Well
then, if Christ doth allow men to get
and enioy riches as the Merchants of
Tirus: and King Salomon, if he doth allow
vs to prouide and lay vp beefore
hand as Ioseph did, & to saue that which

is remaining, as himselfe and his Disciples
did, and to lay vp for our families
as the very Infidels doe. If the Lord Iesus
will not allow men to haue all things
common as Anabaptists doe, nor to
pro
                  •
               esse wilfull pouertie as beggerly
Fryers do, nor to feed Idle-packs which
will not labour for their liuing, as preposterous
pittie doth, what then should
bee his meaning when he saith, Lay not
vp for your selues Treasures in earth?
            
            That wee may the better finde out
the Lords meaning we, are to know that
Treasure here, is put not onely for money,
riches, and prouision for the time
to come, but also for any thing else (as
was said before) wherein a man taketh
most delight, and whereupon hee dependeth
most, or which hee maketh his
felicitie; yea, and doth so lauish out his
loue vpon it, and torment himselfe with
careful thoughts for the same, as if without
it hee should be vtterly vndone, and
could not possibly liue. In which maner
Worlldings gather riches, and Atheists
seeks after pleasure, the Ambitious man
hunts after Honour, euen with all their

harts, with all their minde, with all their
might, strength & soule, as if it were their
God that did make them, and it should
preserue and saue them, which is a manifest
breach of the first commandement.
            Now all is made the Treasure that
the heart is set vpon, as for Example.
            Some men take more to heart the
losse of a Childe, than the losse of all
their goods besides, and doe so much
set their affection vpon it, that they will
say, if God should take this Childe away,
then all our ioy is gone,Mat. 2 28. like Rachel
that mourned for her children & would
not bee comforted.
            Some are so iealous ouer their Honour,
that if they haue not all manner
of outward complements afforded vnto
them▪
               Hes. 3. 5. 6 they are as male-contented as
Haman, who was full of Wrath, and
studied nothing but monstrous & mischeuous
reuenge, because Mordecai did
not bow the knee vnto him, as others
had done.
            Some againe dote vpon their Credit.
that if their wicked counsell bee crossed
at any time, they are readie with

               Achitophell (that treacherous counsellour)
to goe hang themselues.Sam.
            
            Others are so madde vpon their present
pleasure, that with the beastly Epicures
they cry,1. Cor. 15 let vs eate and drincke,
though wee dye for it to morrow.
            Some are so enamored of their wealth,
that when their goods are encreased and
their barnes enlarged, then with the
worldling they dreame of a quietus est:
And cry soule be now at rest,
               Luk 12. 19 
               for thou hast
goods enough for many yeeres.
            
            Of all these it may be said they haue
layde vp Treasure in Earth but not in
Heauen, beecause in these things they
haue reposed all their ioy, their delight,
their trust. And therefore being inuited
to the heauenly banquet of the Gospell,
they `answere like earth-wormes, making
light of the matter,Mat. 22. 5. I must looke to
my farme saith one,Luk. 14. 18 and I to my Oxen,
saith another, and I must aske my wife
first, saith another: which is no more in
effect but thus much, wee must follow
that wee delight in, and that wee trust
in, these are the things that our heart
delight in, and trust in, these are our

treasure▪ If wee saw more goodnesse in
that Feast then in these our commodities,
wee would goe to it, but wee cannot
relish them as wee doe these worldly
matters, and therefore thank your Maister
for his good will, and pray him to
hold vs excused: for the 
                  •••
               th is, wee
must follow that which our hart affecteth,
our worldly Treasure, wee cannot
come. To all such it is said here. Lay not
vp your Treasures on earth, &c.
            
            And these words may bee expounded
two wayes. Lay not vp, &c. Thou
that art a Christian and hast giuen thy
Faith to the Lord Iesus Christ in thy
Baptisme, thou that art a Cittizen of the
heauenly Ierusalem, and hast the holy
One of Isr
                  •
               ell, euen the Lord of Hoasts,
and the mightie God of Heauen and
Earth for thy father: his sonne, yea, his
onely beloued Son for thy Redeemer,
and the holy Ghost which proceedeth
from them both for thy sanctified guide
and Comforter, and thou that hast the
Angels to guarde thee, and the Saints
to pray for thee, and all the Creatures
to serue thee, and therefore art of all the

Creatures the most noble and excellent,
thou must needs haue somewhat to delight
in, to occupy thy minde vpon, and
to set thy hart vpon. Take heede it bee
not vpon earthly things, for all the earth
cannot yeeld thee a fit match, thou being
called to so high and heauenly 
                  •
               
calling, but heauen can. In earth is 
                  •
               othing
that can make thee happy, but in
heauen there is happinesse it selfe. In
earth there is no commoditie without a
discommoditie, but in heauen there is. In
earth is no perpetuitie, but in heauen
there is. In earth there is no securitie or
safetie, but in heauen there is both: therefore
Lay not vp thy Treasure in earth
where the Moth and Canker corrupteth,
and where Theeues dig through and steale,
but in heauen where is no such matter.
Or it may thus bee expounded. Thou
which art a Christian doe not so greedely
seeke after earthly substance, as
thereby to neglect thy heauenly substance,
as the manner of all men is to
do by nature, like Esau who was so hungry
for a messe of his brothers pottage,
that for loue thereof, and for feare of

               
                  •
               taruing (except he had it) lost his birthright,Gen, 25. 32
for which prophane part of his,
he
                  •
                could not finde any place to repencance,Heb. 12. 16
although hee sought the blessing
with teares. Verely a thing this is, that
may make our harts to ake, for wee are
at Esaucs passe: So we may get the world,
keepe our customers and win the pottage,
wee are safe: but marke thou, that
art of Esaues humour, well maiest thou
weepe for the losse of thy temporall benefits,
but for this damnable profanenesse
of thine in preferring of Earth before
Heauen, except Gods grace bee the
more abounding towards thee, thou
wilt hardly repent. Therefore if thou be
wise indeed (as thou wouldest seeme to
bee) forsake Esaues dyet in time, and
lay not vp Treasure in Earth where Moth
and Canker do corrupt, and Theeues break
through and steale, &c.
            
            Heare Christs reason Where Moths
doe fret,
               Christs Reason. 
               Canker corrupteth, and Theeues
dig through and steale. The summe of his
reason is this, that whatsouer this world
affordeth, is subiect to consumption, or
corruption, or both: if it bee in vse, it is

consumed with the vse, if it bee not vsed,
then it corrupteth for want of vse.
The consuming and spending of these
worldly goods, is eyther by the owners
of them, or by Theeues that oftentimes
are pertakers of them to the hurt of the
owner. They are also consumed 
                  •
               yther
by sensible and liuing Creatures, as by
Mothes, Flyes, Mice, and Rats, and such
like: or else by insensible & dead things,
as Rust, and Mould, and Fire, and Water,
and Ayre, and Age, &c. Now consider
the matter, consult & giue sentence.
What madnes is it to prouide for theeues
and Robbers? What inhumanitie to giue
that to Mothes and Mice, &c. which is
better bestowed vpon thy selfe, vpon thy
familie, or vpon the poore? What vanitie,
yea, what misery is this to bee a
slaue to such things as theeues and robbers,
Vermine, and rottennesse shall do.
minier ouer, and in a short time must
perish eyther in the vse, or for want of
vse? This doe not worldlings consider,
they locke vp, and lay vp, and put out
their Treasures to be kept for them, yet
can they not keep their garments from

Moths, nor their golde and siluer from
Rust, nor any thing they haue, from one
casualtie or another long. When they
haue gotten goods together, they cannot
promise vnto themselues either perpetuitie
of them or securitie: And what
a misery is that? but either their goods
or themselues must weare away, and
their goods are in daunger for their properties
sake, and the owners are in danger
for their goods sake.
            Neither are these all the discommodities
that thy Treasure is subiect vnto,
who knoweth not that the Fire may
consume them, as it hath done thousands?
or the Water may drowne them,
as it hath done thousands? or the Plague
may infect them as it hath done thousands?
or Time may weare them, as
it hath done millions of thousands?
or Death may fetch thee away, as it
hath done infinit millions of thousands?
Besides all this,The miserie of a worldling consider how manie
haue beene vndone by vnconscionable
Debtors, by crafty headed Lawyers, by
vnthrif
                  •
               re Children, by vntrusty Seruants.
Yet this is not all, for what restles

care doth teare thee in getting them?
what tormenting feare doth abate thy
comfort in keeping them? and what
hart breaking sorrow doth vexe thee
in loosing of them? Yet this is not all
neither, for here thou art praysed, there
thou art dispraysed, now thou art loued,
by and by thou art enuied, of some thou
art admired, of many thou art scorned,
and all for thy wealths sake.
            The worldling is like a Mill, driuen
violently by a maine streame, and great
prouision is made to feede in one place,
and to coole in another, the Sacke is
brought to feede the Mill, and the Mill
grindeth and weareth it selfe to fill the
Sacke againe, and still the Wheele is
where it was, for all his whirling about,
and as you finde it so you leaue it: so is
it with a worldly man and his goodes,
but this similitude applyeth it selfe, I
will therefore follow it no further.
            This wee all know, but how often,
or rather how seldome doe wee thinke
vpon it, or remember it, or make vse of
it, to stay vs from greedy coueting and
egar pursuing of the World, with the

hazard of our Saluation? The Diuell
hee cryeth, follow the World, compasse
the worlds goods, oh thou shalt profit
thy selfe,Mat. 16. but Christ saith, What shall it
profit a man to winne the World, yea, the
whole World, and to loose his owne Soule?
that the Diuell concealeth; yea, he dealeth
with vs as hee did with Christ himselfe,
hee shewed Christ the glory and
maiestie of worldly kingdomes, but not
the troubles and tumults, not the daungers
and enimies of the same: So he deludeth
the fooles of this world, he sheweth
them the brauery of the Court, but
not the vanitie that is in the Court: hee
sheweth them the glory of honour, but
not the daunger of honour: he sheweth
the flowers of Beautie, but not the deceiptfulnesse
of Beautie: hee sheweth
the commodities of Offices, but not the
discommodities of Offices: he sheweth
the wealth of such a Country, but not
the enuie & misery of the same country.
And thus are the Fooles of this world
(as God himselfe calles them) deluded
and abused,Luke. 12. yea, and destroyed many
times by the Diuels shewes, like the

miserable Troyans who doted so much
vpon the Grecians counterfaite and
monstrous horse, that they would neuer
leaue vntill they had pulled▪ downe the
wals of their Cittie to get it in, neuer
dreaming of the hidden mischiefes and
armed Souldiers that lay in the belly
thereof, prepare
                  •
               d for their present destruction.
But they see what a shew this
maketh, and what a shew that maketh,
and meruailous it is in their eyes, then
their hart is on fire till they haue it, and
their head still is deui
                  •
               ing how to compasse
it, to which end all meanes are attempted,
there is flattering, and glosing,
and fore-stalling, borrowing here, and
pawning there, and selling one thing to
buy another: and when hee hath gotten
his harts desire, then he thinks of nothing
but his gettings,Dan. 4. as Nabuchadnezzar
that proud King of Confusion,
thought of nothing but of his glorious
buildings, Oh (said hee) Is not this great
Babell, which I haue built for the honour
of my Macestie? strouting vp and downe
in his Galleries, and admiring himselfe
for his Building, as a foole admireth

himselfe in a glasse, so doe the fooles of
the world, oh (saith one) how rich shall
I bee? how worshipfull saith another?
how much admired for my wealth, for
my brauery, for my strength, saith a
third? &c. Within a while commeth the
Moth, the Mouse, and the Rat for their
fees, the one taketh vp his lodging in his
braue apparrell, and gnaweth holes in
his lodging, the other in his Barnes and
granieries, and taketh as deepe toule as
the Miller, the Rust falleth and feedeth
vpon his gilded and glittering Armour,
and the Canker seazeth vpon his Gold
and Siluer. After these commeth the
legall Theefe, that is, the Vsurer, and
he must haue for the lone of his money,
then comes the Mercer and Draper
with their Bils, wherewith they giue many
astonishing blowes on the head (as it
were with clubs) for wearing out their
braue Apparrell before it bee paid for.
Then the fashion altereth, or the Ayre
is not wholesome, and both must bee
changed, or the Flatterer licketh his
Dishes, or the Begger pulleth him by
the sleeue, and then the propertie is

altered, Oh quantum mutatus ab ille?
Hee is not the man hee was taken to
bee, neyther is it all gold that glistred in
his eyes.
            Now, speake to these Earth-wormes
of Heauenly things, and amidst their
ioyes or dumps, aske them if they will
goe to a Sermon, or ioyne with the congregation
in Prayer, or the like, what
is their answere? Is it not Nabal-like?
who when his kindnesse was requested
towards Dauid and his Souldiers, answered
like a foolish Churle, euen like
himselfe. Who is Dauid? and what is the
Sonne of Ishai that I should send of my
vittailes vnto him? So say they, the Sermon,
what good shall wee get by going
to a Sermon? who worse then these
Preachers themselues? Oh they can
talke well, and tell a trim tale in the Pulpit,
but their liues are not thereafter.
And thus they play the currish Dog,
barking and bawling at them that bring
them meate. Oh, wee shall haue a Puritaine
of you, how holy you are? Tell
not mee of the Sermon, I haue other
matters to thinke vpon, I must follow

my suites in Law, or I must goe and
beare such and such company at the
Tauerne, or at Bowles, or at Tables, &c.
I haue not sleptinough, (saith another:)
And others haue not their ruff
                  •
               s, and
their cuttes, and their hoopes, and their
knackes fine inough: I cannot abide to
sit so long saith one: I must goe serue
my customers: I like not this kinde of
teaching (faith another) And thus doe
they answere, when they are moued to
meete the Lord, in the meanes of their
saluation and sanctification, which lay
vp Treasures on earth, and not in heauen:
And therefore Lay not vp your
Treasures on earth, but in heauen.
            
            Againe, how doe worldlings deale in
bargaining, in buying and selling? Doe
they not assault one another with lyes?
Doe they not vndermine one with another
with deepe dissembling? Doe
they not sweare fasly, to deceiue one
another? Doe they not promise largely,
deny impudently, and falsifie vniustly
their promises? Doe they not work
vpon the aduantage, and take the extrenitie
of Law one against another? Doe

they not thus deale which are onely
deuoted and altogether addicted to the
Treasures and pleasures of this World?
            Againe, how are they accounted of?
how are they accounted of?
how are they accursed? Are they not
(for the most part) accounted as Iudasses
and tray-Gods? as Machiuels and
Tirants, as Cut-throats and Cousoners,
vnconscionable and cruell, hard-harted
and mercilesse, and that euen of their
friends? They are cursed of the rich,
which pay for their kindnesse, and of
the poore they are cursed, because they
can get not kindnesse of them: Of whole
Countries, trades & Common-wealths
they are accursed, for they will haue a
cast at all. Wee cannot buy but of him
faith one: Wee cannot sell but we must
agree with him faith another: Wee cannot
vtter our commodities because of
him, faith a third. The country curseth
him: where were wont to bee so many
Ploughes kept for Tillage (faith the
country) is there now nothing but a
Shepheard and his dogge. Vbi Troia
iam seges: nay I would it were so well,
but now vbi seges iam segnities:
               Weedes. all is little

enough for a stinking Weede, that hath
in most places, put down both Tillage
and Pasture, to set vp the pride of life,
and lust of the eye, as if the Commonwealth
might liue rather by colour, than
by cloath, and by accidents, rather than
by substances. And as the country curseth
the worldling, so the poore seruants
doe iustly cry out vpon them for detayning
of their wages, and do truely apply
those words in the Gospell against such,
they reape where they sowed not, and take
vp where they laid not downe. And thus
are they accounted of, which follow
onely earthly Treasure, and therefore
Lay not vp Treasure on earth.
            
            How they liue wee haue heard, but
how doe they dye? commonly Qualis
vita, finis ita: Doe not many of them
prooue Bankroupts and spend-thrifts?
Doe they not dye deepe in debt, plunged
in despaire, voyd of comfort, and
without confidence in God? Is not their
wedge of Golde their confidence? and
doe they not say to their bags of gold,
these are the Angels that shall keepe vs?
Oh most fearefull, and what more miserable?

As they loued not the word of
God in their health time, so doe they
wholy distast it in their sicknesse, and
their light goeth out in obscure darknesse,
leauing a filthy smell behinde it,
like a snuffe in a socket, when the candle
is burnt out.
            How many of them doe take their
leaue of the World (after their long
doting vpon it) most he
                  ••
               eshly blaspheming
of God, most cruelly cursing of
men, most monstrously execrating of
themselues, and most brutishly roaring
like beasts knocked on the head, or
lying most sencelesly like blockes and
stocks. And if any make a better end,
that may bee reckoned amongst the miracles
of Gods superabounding mercy.
But thus commonly doe they dye, that
haue had their thoughts, and their cares,
wholy drenched in the loue and delight
of earthly things, to verifie the saying of
the Apostle:
                  
                     •
                  hil. 3. 18. 
               Many walke of whom I
haue tolde you often, and now tell you
weeping, they are enimies of the crosse of
Christ, whose God is their belly, whose
glory is their shame, which minde earthly

things, & therfore their end is dam
                     •
                  ation.
And thus we see how the profane Irreligiousnesse,
the deceiptfull dealing, the
wicked liuing, and the cursed ending of
worldlings doe all cry out with one
consent, and bid vs beware, that we lay
not vp Treasure on earth onely, where
Moths doe gnaw, and Rust doth consume,
and Theeues breake through and
steale.
            When the men of Lystra would haue
worshipped Paul and Barnabas, those
blessed Apostles cryed out,Act. 14. 15. 18. 
               O men why
doe you such things? wee are euen men as
you be, and subiect to the same passions that
yee bee, yet scarce refrained they the people,
that they had not sacrificed vnto them.
So when worldlings would sacrifice
their harts to earthly Treasure, doth not
the earth cry out and say. O vaine man
what dost thou meane? I am as thy selfe,
and as base as thy selfe, I was another
mans, and am for euery mans turne, I
am enuironed with thornes and Bryers,
and inhabited with Toads, Vipers, and
noysome Vermine, & all my commodities
are haunted with moths, & cankers,

with Theeues and Diuels, yet scarse
doe they refraine from offering sacrifice
vnto them. I know not whereunto the
earthly Treasure may bee better resembled
then vnto the huge horse that the
Greekes had prepared for the destruction
of Troy (if that story be true) which
made a great and goodly shew, but vterum
armato milite complent,
               Virg. Aen. lib. 1. it was within
full of armed Souldiers, who when
they saw their fittest opportunitie, issued
out of his panch, to the vtter ruine of all
those that doted so much vpon it, and
tooke so much paines to bring it into the
Cittie. But most pithy was the counsaile
of Lacoon that valiant and prudent Cittizen,
concerning that monstrous mountaine
of hidden mischiefes, and happy
had it beene for that Cittie if his counsaile
had beene followed, and surely, Simeus
non leua fuisset (as the Poet speaketh)
if they had not beene too light of
beliefe, and too much enchaunted with
a false perswasion thereof, they had done
well enough, for hee spake plainely enough,
when he told them that Aut hocinclusi
ligno occultantur Achiui, aut hoec in

                  
                     •
                  ostros fabricata est machina muros: Eyther
(sayth hee) our enimies lye lurking
in this woodden horse, or else it is some
Engine erected for the battering of our
wals. Nay more Aut aliquis latet error,
Equo nè credi
                     ••
                   Teucri, There is more
mischiefe in it then wee are aware of O
Troyans, bee wise and take heede you
trust not a Horse. Yea, but it is a gifte
that the Greekes haue left for Pallas.
Well, saith hee, Quicquid id est, ti meo
Danaos & dona ferentes: Make what you
can of it (saith hee) there is, no trusting
to the Greekes, though they come with
gifts in their hands: So hee that hath a
spirituall eye indeed, that can pearce further
then to the out-side of worldly
shewes, can truely say it, and may safely
iustifie it, that the golden shewes of
profits and pleasures, which are often in
this world presented vnto his view, haue
eyther some secret mischiefes lurking
in them, or are like some strange engine
erected to batter his estate, or to cut his
throate, or to ouerwhelme his head with
cares and feares, or to prouoke him to
some desperate attempt: but let the best

bee made of it that can bee made, yet
the world is not to bee trusted, though
it comes sawning and flattering, creeping
and crouching to a man with giftes
and presents in the hand, for in a kisse
was treason, and Ioabs kind embracings
prooue but deadly stabbings, and the
wisest that euer was amongst the sonnes
of men, hauing made tryall of all, and
taken not a taste, but his fill of all the
treasures and pleasures that this world
could possibly inuent for the delight and
strength of a king, could at the casting
vp of his accompts, giue no better verdict
of it but this:Eccles. 1. 
               Vanitie of Vanities,
and all is but Vanitie and vexation of
spirit. And here againe one wiser and
greater then Salomon tels vs (if we haue
grace to beleeue him) that both the rust,
and the Moth, and the Canker, and the
Theefe, and all cry out vnto vs, and bid
vs take heed how we dote vpon worldly
Treasure.
            Of this discourse we may make good
vse,Vse. 1. when wee are tempted to the breaking
of Gods Commandements for the
gayning of the worlds goods. When any

is tempted, let him but reason thus with
his soule: My Soule what thou wouldest
haue thou seest, but what thou shalt
haue thou seest not, thou seest the horse,
but not what hee hath in his belly: thou
seest the Bee, but not her sting: thou
seest sweet meat, but not the sower sauce:
thou seest the baite, but not the hooke:
the cheare, but not the reckoning: a fawning
face, but not the hand at the back:
In a word, thou beholdest the profite
that thou art like to get by profaning of
the Sabboth with working and drudging,
the gaine of Vsury and Bribery, the
commoditie of lying and cogging, and
the gaine of deceit and falshood, and the
like: but what stings and wounds, thou
shalt get in thy Conscience by following
of those spirituall Couseners, thou
dost not consider, and therefore stay,
and proceede no further vnlesse thou
wilt bee so mad as to loose Heauen for
Hell.
            Agane when thou art in prayer or
hearing of Gods word,Vse 2. or about any other
of thy godly deuotions, and feelest
thy heart stepping aside to haue conference

with earthlie cogitations, doe
but say thus to thy selfe with Salomon,
for whom is it that I now care? is it not
for the world, that will cousen me of the
word? is it not earthly treasure that cals
my minde away, that I might loose this
Heauenly treasure? returne then O my
soule vnto thy rest, and keepe thy standing,
beware least thou be cousened of
the heauenly verity, with a shew of earthly
vanitie.
            And in like manner when thou hapnest
to loose any worldlie commoditie,Vse 3.
neuer lay it to heart, but euen say this to
thy selfe, now the world hath shewed
it selfe like it selfe; God hath taken that
from me, which otherwise would haue
pulled me from him. As a louing father
he hath but taken from mee that knife
wherwith I might like a child haue hurt
my self: And as a most wise captaine he
hath rid me of my luggage, that I might
pursue my enemies more swiftly, and
make more expedition toward my heauenly
countrie, where are better things
prouided for me, euen such as no fire
can consume, no Moth can freet, no

Theefe can steale, no time can weare, &
so with patience let it goe, and giue God
thankes, that hath better prouided for
thee, then thou wert aware of.
            But lay vp for your selues treasure in
heauen, where &c.
            Our Sauiour Christ hauing forbidden
the gredy seeking of earthly things,The Affirmatiue part.
and brought men out of conceit with
the bewitching vanities of this life, he
presently offereth vnto vs better things,
and commaundeth vs to lay them vp in
heauen, to our owne vse when time shall
serue, as if he should say, I doe not absolutely
forbid you to gather, and to lay
vp in store, but I would haue you so
gather, and so to lay vp, that you may
finde store of treasure in Heauen,Heauenly Treasures are to bee preferred in three respects, viz. your
heauenly countrey, whereunto you are
borne againe, and where you must abide
for euer. And these treasures thus to be
laied vp, hee commendeth vnto vs, for
their Excellency, for their Securitie, and
for their Perpetuitie;1. Excellencie. things which all
desire,2. Securit
                     •
                  
                and which are able to free a mans
minde from all care.3. Perpetuitie. Of which it will
not be amisse for vs to take a little view.
            
               
What are those treasures then that
are commended vnto vs for their excellencie?
In a word they are heauenly,Of the excellency of the Christians Treasure. now
looke how farre heauen is more excellent
then the earth, and the spirit then
flesh, and God then man, so much doth
the Christians heauenly treasure excell
all the treasures of this world.
            This is true indeede:Obiect. but in heauen
(thou wilt say) there is neither buying
nor selling, trading nor traffique, building
nor planting, letting nor hiring, hungring
nor thirsting, no cold nor heat, no
working nor labouring, no iourneying,
nor trauelling. And therefore we need
not care for any prouision for any such
vses, what then are those treasures, or
what is in them more then in others that
wee are so charged to lay them vp? here
we know (saith the Atheist) what wee
haue, but what we shall haue there we
know not.Answere. But heare thou earthly minded
man, and harken O thou whose
mind and hart lye buried vnder a loafe
of bread. There are indeed no such commodities
in heauen as the earth affordeth,
yet heauen is a rich countrey, & the

commodities thereof are far aboue the
fine golde of Ophir. First there is the
Lord Iesus who is the Lord high treasurer
of heauen and earth,Col. 2. 3. 
               In whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge.
In whom God hath blessed vs,
               Eph. 1. 3. 
               with
all spirituall blessings in heauenly things:
               Iohn. 1. 16. 
               Of
whose fulnes we receiue all grace for grace,
In whom and by whom wee liue,
               Act. 17. 28. 
               and
moue, and haue our being, of whom the
church enquired and was sicke of loue
vntill she found him.Cant. 5. 8. Worldlings make
a wonder at this geare vntill they know
what it is, but then they are as desirous
of it as others, as plainely appeareth by
the conference that passed between the
regenerate Spouse of Christ, and the
vnregenerate members of the visible
Church, about the excellency of Christs
person and loue, and the effect of the
said conference most liuely and pathetically
deciphered by Salomon in his spirituall
song.Cant. 5. 8. And first the regenerate
and Godly Spouse of Christ beginneth
in this manner. I Charge you O Daughters
of Ierusalem, if you finde my wel-beloued,
that you tell him that I am sicke of

loue. Now mark the answer that is made
to this charge by those which yet knew
not the excellency of Christ.Verse. 9. 
               O the fairest
a mong women, what is thy welbeloued
more then other welboued? what is thy welbeloued
more then an other louer, that thou
dost so charge vs? Now mark the descriptiō
of Christ, set forth by the true church,
as glorying and delighting to speake of
the beautie and riches of their heauenly
Bridegrome, to the shame of those that
beare the title of Christians, and yet are
neuer so much daunted and silenced at any
thing, as when speach is offered them
of Christ and Christian Religion, as if
it were possible that an honest woman
should bee ashamed to heare good spoken,
or to speake good things of her
Husband,Verse. 10. 
               My belouod (saith the Spouse
of Christ) is white and ruddy, the cheifest
of ten thousand.
               11 
               His head is as fine gold,
his locks curled, and black as a Rauen.
His eyes are as Doues vpon the Riuers of
waters,
               12 
               which are washed with milke, and
remaine by the full vessels.
               13 
               His cheekes are
as a bed of Spices, and sweet Flowers, and
his lips like Lillies dropping downe pure

Mirrhe. His hands like rings of Gold,14 se
                     •
                  
with the Chrisolite, his belly like white Y
                  
                     •
                  ory,
couered with Saphirs.15 His legs as pillers
of marble, set vpon sockets of fine gold,
his countenance as Lebanon, excellent as
the Cedars. His mouth is as sweet things,
and he is wholy delectable,16 that is my Beloued,
and this is my Louer, O Daughters
of Ierusalem. What say you to him now?
Heare now what effect this sweet description
of Christ hath wrought with
the Daughters of Ierusalem, that is, with
the members of the Church, yet such
as hitherto were ignoraunt of these
things. O the fairest amongst women, whither
is thy Welbeloued gone? whither is
thy Welbeloued turned aside, that wee
may seeke him with thee? And would
you seeke him indeed? then heare more.
This heauenly and louely Bridegrome
hath for his Spouse a whole Cittie, and
A holy Cittie called new Ierusalem (whose
Daughters you are) come downe from
God our of heauen,
               Apo. 21. 2 
               prepared as a Bride
trimmed for her husband, hauing the glory
of God, and her shining is like vnto a
stone most precious, and as a Iasper stone

cleare as Christall.
               Verse. 11. 
               The Wall of it is great
and high,
               12 
               and hath twelue Gates, and at
the Gates twelue Angels (for Porters)
And the Wall of the Cittie hath twelue
Foundations,
               14 
               and in them the names of
the Lambs twelue Apostles.
               16 
               It is euery
way twelue thousand furlongs, as broad as
long, and extending aswell to one part of
the world as to another.
               18 
               The building of
the wall is of Iasper, and the Cittie pure
Gold like cleare Glasse.
               19 
               The foundations of
the Wall were ga
                     •
                  nished with all manner
of precious stones.
               20 
               And the twelue Gates
wore twelue Pearles, and euery Gate is of
one Pearle,
               21 
               and the Street of the Cittie is
of pure Gold.
               22 
               There is no Temple there, for
the Lord God Almightie, and the Lambe
are the Temple of it,
               23 
               There is no neede of
Sunn
                     •
                   or Moone, for the glory of God▪ doth
light it, and the Lambe is the light of it.
And the people which are saued shall walk
in the light of it,
               24 
               and the Kings of the earth
shall bring their glory and honour vnto it.
               25
               And the gates of it shall not bee shut by
day: for there shall be no might there.
               26 
               And
the glory and honour of the Gentiles shall
bee brought vnto it.
               27 
               And into it shall enter

no vncleane thing, neyther whatsoeuer
worketh Abhomination or Lyes: but they
which are written in the: Lambs booke of
Life. Now if the Gates, Wals and Streets
of this Cittie bee so
                  •
                beautifull, and
sumptuous, then how glorious and rich
are the inward parts? nay who can expresse
the riches and pleasures that are
there layd vp for the Cittizens and
Spouse of Christ? are they not (thinke
you) like those things which Saint Paul
saw when hee was rapt vp into the third
heauen, which the tongue of man cannot
vtter? And must
                  •
                they not needes
bee those ioyes which the same Apostle
saith,1. Cor. 2. are such as no Eye hath seene, no
Eare hath heard, no Tongue can expresse
                     •
                  
nor Hart conceaue? Now doe but consider
with thy selfe (if thou canst) what
some Eyes haue seene, what some mens
Eares haue heard, and what some trauellers
Tongues haue reported in these
dayes, and what the hart of some man
is able to conceaue, and then doe but
imagine what those ioyes of heauen are
if thou canst. But what are the commodities
and Riches of that Heauenly

Ierusalem, and the Cittizens therof, that
cannot bee valued? If the report thereof
will mooue thee to seeke after them▪
then heare, for euen in this life the true
Christian is put in possession of them
in part, by which as by a tast, hee is certified,
and as by an earnest p
                  •
               nny hee is
assured of the rest that is kept for him,
vntill hee bee ready for them.Apo. 3. 18. Saint Iohn
saith, that (as if some rich merchant were
come from a far Country) the Lord Iesus
inuiteth vs, and setteth vp as it were
his bils in euery Church, offering to all
that will vse the meanes to make themselues
sure of his marchandise (which is
meant by buying) no worse wares then
fine▪ Gold tryed in the fire, to make vs
rich, white rayment to couer our filthy
nakednes withall, and eye salue to heale
vs of Spirituall blindnesse, that is, himselfe,
his Word, and his Spirit. And the
like offer in most kinde mann
                  •
               r againe
hee maketh by Salomon, willing vs (if
wee bee wise to God ward) to receiue
instruction and not Siluer,
               Pro. 8. 10. 
               and knowledge
rather then fine Gold.
               Pro. 16. 16 Whereof Salomon
himselfe giueth this testimony (after his

long experience of both) that to get wisdome
is much better then gold, but how
much better hee cannot tell, it so far excelleth,
and therefore hee sets it downe
with an Interrogation: How much better
is it,
               Pro. 3. 13. 
               &c. and to get Vnderstanding (saith
he) is more to be desired then Siluer, Yea,
Blessed is that man (saith hee) that findeth
Wisedome, and that man that getteth
Vnderstanding. Now marke his reasons.
For the marchandise thereof is better then
the marchandise of Siluer,
               14 
               and the gaine
thereof is better then gold.
               15 
               It is more precious
then Pearles, and all things that thou
canst desire, are not to bee compared vnto
her.
               16 
               Length of dayes is in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and glory.
               17 
               Her
wayes are the wayes of pleasure, and all her
pathes posperitie.
               18 
               Shee is a Tree of Life
to them that lay hold on her, and blessed is
hee that receiueth her.
            
            There is also a spirituall traffique and
intercourse betweene Christ & the faithfull
Christian.Phi. 3. 20. For Our conuersation is in
beauen saith S. Paul, very troublesome
and dangerous (I confesse) for a time, for
this world is the sea,Apo. 4. tempestuous and

tumultuous enough.Christs ship described. The Church militant
is the ship of Christ that is tossed
in the same. The tackling of this ship
may be the communion of Saints. The
Pilate that guides the course, the spirit
of God. The Carde or Compasse, the
Word of God. The Purser of this ship,
is loue. The Baliffe is humane frailties,
noisome feares, and troublesome doubts,
The munition of this ship, is the armour
of God, that is, the Helmet of Hope, the
Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit,
the Brest-plate of Righteousnesse, &c.
as the Apostle describeth it in the 6. to
the Ephesians.
               Eph. 6. The windes which driue
this Bark are prosperitie and aduersitie.
The waues which tosse this ship are
presumption and despaire. The enimies
to this ship, are the world, the flesh, and
the Diuell. The Factours are the faithfull
Ministers of Christ. The Commodities,
are the Treasures of Heauen, the
Riches of Christ, or Fruites of the Spirit.
Our Messenger is Peace, a speedy
Poste. The Hauen is the Kingdome of
Heauen. The landing place is Golgotha.
The Land is the land of the liuing.

The Customer is Death, who sets all
men at libertie, and yet is bound himselfe.
Peter was once one of these heauenly
Factours for the Lord Iesus: a
Creeple came vnto him for an Almes,
but what was his aunswere?Act. 3. 6. 
               Siluer and
Gold haue I none, but such as I haue, I
giue thee, in the name of Iesus of Nazaret
arise and walke: A better Almes a
great deale then hee expected. So wee
may say: If you aske vs what commodities
our vessell hath brought, we may
make Peters answere, Siluer and Gold
wee haue none; new wine haue we none;
pleasant tales haue wee none; and Popish
trash haue wee none; but wee haue
the hidden treasures of the Gospell,The cornmodities of the Gospell. the
puritie of true Religion, the rich Iewels
of the holy Ghost: as Faith to ouercome
the world, repentance to make men new,
remission of sinnes, and Reconsiliation
with God, by the death of Christ, peace
of Conscience which passeth all vnderstanding,
and is a continuall Feast, ioy
of the holy Ghost, a
                  •
               d gladnes of hart,
which the world cannot take from him
that hath them, wee offer loue to God,

and Charitie to men, zeale for the truth,
patience in affliction, moderation of affections,
lowlinesse of Spirit to grace all
our actions, and assurance of euerlasting
life after this life, the great gaine of godlinesse,
with sweete contentation to all
estates.
            Behold, these are the Riches, and these
are the Treasures that the Lord Iesus
sendeth from heauen to enrich and glad
his seruants withall, while they liue here
dispersed and despised vpon the face of
the earth. And yet here bee not all, for
euen all outward blessings also do attend
vpon these inward graces, so that if any
man can finde these, and hartely affect
them,Earthly Treasure. the other shall follow measurably
and proportionably according to euery
mans place and want.doth follow the heauenly. And therfore our
blessed Sauiour (not knowing how to
enuy, or deny vnto his Church the smaller
things, hauing frankly bestowed
himselfe, and the greater things of his
Kingdome) set vs in the way, and directeth
vs a right course for the obtaining
both of heauenly Treasures, as also of
earthly Commodities. Seeke first (saith

hee) the kingdome of God,
               Mat. 6. 33. 
               and his righteousnesse,
and all these things shall bee cast
vnto you, but Gods Kingdome must bee
first sought.1 King 3 12. 13 When Salomon preferred
(in his request vnto God) a wise and vnderstanding
hart, for the well gouerning
of his people, God gaue him that, and
also Riches and Honour, things that he
asked not: So, if our chiefest desire and
endeauour be to lay vp treasure in heauen,
and to bee rich in the graces of the
holy Ghost, the Lord will giue vs those
Graces, and earthly Blessings besides.
But alas, it fareth with most men as it
did with Boaz his kinseman,Ruth. 4. 4. 5 who was
well content to redeeme the field of Naomie,
but when hee heard that hee that
should haue the field, must also marry
Ruth, hee would none. So, many hearing
of earthly commodities, and worldly
blessings, are content to strain themselues
for the obtaining of them, but
when they heare that they must take
them as Religious dowrie, and vpon
condition that they liue vertuously, and
liberally amongst their Brethren, they
wil none, for the one they wil deale, but

not for the other: but hee that hath the
one, must haue the other also, and whosoeuer
will straine himselfe for the best
part, shall bee sure to haue his share in
the other: as hee that married Ruth
with her meane portion, lost nothing
thereby, because shee was a vertuous
woman, and what was wanting in goods,
shee had it supplyed in goodnesse: so
he that hath godlinesse can be no looser,
for Godlinesse is profitable vnto all things
(saith the Apostle) and hath the promises
of this life,
               1 Tim. 4. 8 
               and of the life to come.
            
            Godlinesse will make thy selfe, and
thy seed, thy ground and thy cattell, thy
wealth and thy credit to bee blessed.
It is like the Tree that bearet
                     •
                   fruit euery
month, & beareth twelue manner of fruits,
and the leaues thereof are good to heale
the nations withall.
               Apoc. 22. 2 And as for them that
thinke that godlinesse is not fit for all
things, for all times, and for all places,
but count it a dead world when vnchast
daunces, ribald songs, and other scurrilitie
are restrained at feasts, and marriages,
and other merry meetings, nor can
relish any mirth or ioy, that is seasoned

with words of grace, it seemeth they
are better acquainted with the sacrifices
of the Indians, than with the sacrifices
of Christians: But let them speake that
haue made tryal.Mal. 3. 10. Haue any done as Malachie
willeth them, that is, brought their
Tithes and offrings, liberally and freely
vnto Gods house, for the maintenance
of the Lords seruants and seruice, and
hath not the Lord (according to his promise)
opened the windowes of heauen,
and powred out a blessing vpon them?
Haue any suffred hunger and thirst for
righteousnes sake (which hunger onely
is sa
                     •
                  ra fames,
               Mat. 5. holy hunger indeed) and
not bene filled with good things? Hath
any faithfull person decayed in his outward
man,2 Cor. 4. and hath not his inward man
beene renued daily? Haue any seene
Christ in some part of his glory,Mat. 17. and not
beene rauished with a desire to dwell
there still? Nay more, hath any followed
him in this r
                  •
               generation (as he saith
himselfe) that doth not now, and shall
at
                  •
                th
                  •
                last day sit on seats to iudge the
nations of the world? Hath any with
the poore Widdow of Sa
                     ••
                  pta
                     •
                  
                shew
                  •
               d

kindnesse, and beene at cost with the
Lords Prophets, and not found it
againe with increase? Haue any for
the loue of Christs gospell left all, and
followed him in time of persecution,
and not bene prouided for sufficiently?
Hath any with the woman of Samaria,
left scoffing at Christs words, and hath
not her hart beene so enflamed with the
Truth, that shee hath runne in to call
forth her neighbours, to take part of her
happinesse? Haue any with Paul and
Silas beene imprisoned for preaching
of Christ Iesus, and haue they not found
that in prison, which hath made them
to sing Psalmes for ioy? Hath any gone
to the Lords warres, at his owne cost?
or planted the Lords vineyard, and not
drinke of the wine? Hath any laboured
in the Lords husbandry, and gone away
without his reward? Haue any at any
time beleeued God, and ben deceiued?
Hath any trusted God with his estate,
that hath not beene compassed about
with the mercies of the Lord?Psal. 32. 10. Hath
any loued the Lord, and not bene loued
againe? Hath any craued day and not

beene borne withall? repented and not
beene forgiuen? In a word; did euer
any imploy his talent to the Lords aduantage,
and not more to his owne aduantage?
for haue they not (besides the
receipt of commendations for their faithfulnesse)
beene put in possession of their
maisters ioy?Mat. 25. 20 And on the contrary, hath
any neglected the gifts of God bestowed
vpon him, and hath it not bene to his
owne losse, as hee that hid his Talent
in the ground? Hath any Esau sould his
birth-right, and not lost the blessing?
Hath any Iudas sould his Master, and
betrayed the truth, & not been the first
that repented the bargaine, by that time
that he and the gallowes, or the Diuell,
or both haue reckoned together? Haue
any with Demas forsaken gods seruants,
to follow this present world, and not
with Hymeneu
                     •
                  
                and Alexander made
shipwrack of faith & a good conscience?1 Tim. 1. 19.
Beleeue mee (good brethren) it will
stand vs in hand to looke lesse to our
earthly Treasure, and more after the
heauenly, least in the end wee loose
both.
            
               
To conclude therefore this point:
seeing as the Christians heauenly Treasure,
which is both Christ himselfe and
all the riches of his Gospell bee so excellent,
rare, and precious that nothing
may bee compared therewith; and seeing
the treasures of this his kingdome
of Grace (though they bee inestimable
and vnspeakable) are but a tast and earnest
of those treasures, which bee reserued
for the Saints in his kingdome of
glory. And lastly, seeing as they which
seeke after the heauenly Treasure, shall
also haue earthly blessings to accompanie
the same, as farre forth as God shall
see good for his children, let euery Christian
hart bee hereby moued and perswaded
to lay vp from henceforth Treasure
in heauen, rather than on earth, sith
euery man desireth the best things.
            As the Christians heauenly Treasure
is so bee preferred before all things,
for the Excellencie thereof, so also is it
here commended vnto vs by our blessed
Sauiour, for the Perpetuitie, and the
Securitie of the same. For their Perpetuitie,
hee saith that neither Moth can

eate it, nor Rust consume it. And for
their security the safe keeping, he tels thee
that they are where no Theefe can dig
through and steale them, meaning that
no enimie whether terrestiall or infernall,
whether man or Diuell can possibly
deceiue thee or depriue thee of them.
            Now as touching the Perpetuitie
of the Christians heauenly Treasure,Of their Perpetuity it
is such and of so long continuance, that
euen in that respect it is to bee preferred
beefore all earthly and transitorie
Commodities: for all earthly commodities
and treasures they are ey
                  •
               ther vsed
or not vsed, if they bee put to any vse or
employment, they consume and weare:
if they be put to no vse, but lye by, then
they are corrupted, which corruption
also abateth not a little both of their substance
and glory: But as for the Heauenly
Treasures of Gods grace and spirit,
they are neyther consumed, nor corrupted.
There is more vse of them then
of any earthly thing whatsoeuer, yet are
they not, neyther can they bee subiect
to any consumption: Nay, they are no
whit the worse, but much the better for

the vsing. Tell me, is there not a daylie
yse of Prayer, of Preaching, of Faith, of
Charitie, of Repentance, of Patience, of
Hope, of Humilitie, &c. And are they
not through continuall vse encreased,
strengthened, and made easie? like the
fiue tallents, which being put forth to
aduantage, gained fiue more. And as
Milo that Tullie speakes of,Milo. by vsing
his strength day by day, in carrying of
a Calfe did so increase his strength, that
hee was able to beare it on his shoulders
when it was an Oxe: so doth the
Christian Soule by inuring his patience
and faith to beare smaller crosses, that in
time hee is able through daylie exercise
of the spirit, to beare greater crosses, and
to put vp mighty wrongs: Through
negligent slothfulnesse, cursed ingratitude,
& prophane abusing of Gods heauenly
Graces, they may dye and decay
in thee, but the more they are vsed, the
more they are increased.
            The glorious Garment, and royall
Robe of Christ that Sonne of Righteousnesse,Mal. 4. 2.
wherewith Saint Iohn saw the
Church clothed, is neuer worne out,

nor shall euer be put off, vntill faith and
Hope bee abolished; their pure Gold
that they buy of him is neuer spent, and
their Sunne is neuer set, though sometime
perhaps it may bee vnder a cloud.
The Oyle of gladnesse wherewith they
are annointed is like the widdows Oyle
of Sarepta, wherewith shee paid her
debts, maintained her selfe & her house,
and yet her Cruse was still full.Ioh. 2. Nay,
Christ turneth the water of his seruants
(that loue to enuite him vnto their feasts)
into wine, and the oftner it is powred
forth the sweeter it is. One Helmet of
Hope, one Shield of Faith, one Sword
of the Spirit, &c. shall last all thy life,
and saue thee in a thousand battailes of
temptations and spirituall conflicts, and
neuer bee worne: for whom the Lord
loueth, hee loueth 
                  •
               to the end, and his
mercies endure for euer. There is but
one Faith, one God, one Lord, one Baptisme,
one Word, one Spirit, and one
Hope, though there bee many misbeliefes,
many Diuels, many falsehoods,
many doubts; there is but one supreame
goodnes, though many euils, & that one

shall ouercome all, and remaine alwayes
the same, that we may still sing with the
Psalmist, The mercies of the Lord endure
for euer.
            
            And as the Christians heauenly treasure
doth excell for Perpetuitie,Of their Security. so also
for Securitie: for it is laid vp in heauen,
where the Lord himselfe dwelleth, and
from whence hee laugheth all Theeues
both infernall and terrestiall to scorne.
            Many lay vp their treasure in the bottome
of a ship, and the sea swalloweth
it vp; but what sea can deuoure those
Treasures that are layd vp in heauen?
Many put their treasure into other mens
hands, who spend it vainely, or runne
away secretly; but who can spend, or
runne away with that which is laid vp
in heauen? Many bestow their Treasure
vpon their backe, belly, and building,
three such Bees as will sting the
land to death,3 Bees. if they be not taken heed
of, and all perish in the vse, by fire, or
by age, or by sicknesse, or by death; but
no such thing can happen to those treasures
which are laid vp in heauen. Many
haue houses, and lands, and riches, and

friends, to day in very good securitie
as the world thinketh, and by to morrow
they are gone, or sold, or wasted, or
stolne, or dead, or turned to another
minde, but they that haue once laid vp
the Treasures of a good life, and a good
Conscience in heauen, shall bee sure to
finde them there, and to enioy them for
euer: for they are so kept to his vse, that
no Theefe can euer steale them from
him.
            And howsoeuer some vaine and presumptuous
Persons will not sticke
through greedinesse of gaine, to vndertake
(for a quantitie of money) to secure
a mans goods at sea, or at land, yet
considering the miserable vnquietnesse
that mans life is exposed vnto, and the
vniuersall disagreement and warre that
is betweene man and all the Creatures
in the world, yea, betweene the Creatures
themselues, nay more, betweene
man and man in all estates and degrees:
nay more than that, between euery man
in himselfe. I see no reason, why any
man should be so vnwise, as to promise
vnto himselfe any secure enioying of

any worldly commoditie, or why another
should so confidently (or desperately
rather) vndertake to secure any mans
goods or estate, when as hee cannot secure
himselfe one minute of an houre
to an end. And first, for the miserable
and vnquiet estate of this life, I see not
what can bee said more to discouer the
same, then hath beene already said by
Petrach that learned Italian Oratour,Fran. Petrach. de remedijs vtrius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fert.
the substance of whose discourse, concerning
this point, I thinke will not
bee lost labour to lay before thee, which
briefly is this: that considering the vncertaine
and sodaine chaunces & changes,
whereunto the affaires and estates
of men are subiect,Nothing more frail or vnquiet than the life of Man. nothing can be more
fraile, nothing more vnquiet then the
life of man. In other liuing creatures
(saith hee) it is not so, and why? because
nature hath prouided for them a
wonderfull kinde of remedy: but what
is that remedy? might not wee enioy it
with them? Oh no, for it is a certaine
ignorance of thēselues, by reason wherof
they inioy their life and being, in lesse
misery, and more quiet then man doth,

for in vs onely that haue degenerated,Memory, Vnderstanding and prouidence peruerted vnto our own toile &c.
both our memory, & vnderstanding, our
prouidence, and all the diuine gifts of
our minde are conuerted (or peruerted
rather) vnto our owne toile & destruction:
for, are wee not haunted alwayes
with vaine and superfluous, yea, with
noysome and pestiferous Cares:Cares. which
cause vs to bee grieued with the present
time,Grieued. to bee vexed with the time past,
and to bee afraid of the time to come?Vexed.
If our life were well gouerned,Afraid. it were
the most happy and pleasant thing that
wee possesse, but now so many causes of
miseries and nourishments of sorrowes
doe wee daylie heape together, that we
make our life a wretched and wofull
toile,Entrance blindnes. whose Entrance is blindnes,Progresse labour. whose
Progresse is labour, whose End is sorrow,End sorrow.
and the whole Course error. What
Day doe we passe oue
                  •
                in rest and quietnes?Course error.
or rather that we finde not more
painefull and troublesome then other?Day.
What Morning haue we euer passed so
merry and pleasant,Morning. that hath not been
ouertaken with some sorrow and heauinesse
before night? What perpetuall

warre is it that wee make against FortuneWar with Fortune.
(as some speake which know not
the diuine prouidence to be the gouernor
of all things) Wee onely being
weakelings and vnarmed, take vpon vs
to encounter a most fierce foe, in vnequall
fight; and bee againe (as lightly
as things of naught) tosseth vs vp,Better ouercome then bee had in continual scorne. and
throweth vs downe, & turneth vs round
about, and playeth with vs, so that it
were better for vs to be quite o
                  •
               ercome,
then continually to bee had in scorne.
And the cause heereof, is nothing else
but our own lightnesse and daintinesse:
for wee seeme to bee good for nothing
else, but to bee tossed het
                  •
               er and thither
like a tennis-ball,The cause, our 
                     •
                  owne lightnesse. being creatures
of a very short life, of infinit carefulnes,
and ignoraunt vnto what shore to fall
with our ship, or vnto what resolution to
apply our mindes.
            And besides the present euill, we haue
alwayes somewhat to grieue vs behinde
our backs, and before our eyes to make
vs afraid: which thing hapn
                  •
               th to no
other Creature besides man, for vnto all
others it is most perfect Securitie, to

haue escaped that which is present. But
wee in respect of our Wit and Vnderstanding
of our minde, are in a continuall
wrastling and strife with an enemie.
Which being so, what safetie or securitie
can wee looke for with our earthly
pelfe (notwithstanding all the bonds, and
Bils, Euidences and Conu
                  •
               aiances, and
whatsoeuer deuise else by craftie heads
can bee contriued) when wee can by no
meanes secure our selues of our selues in
rest and quietnes one houre to an end.
            Now as touching the vniuersall disagreement
and war,Vniuersal discord betweene man & the Creatures. that is betweene man
and the Creatures, and betweene the
Creatures themselues, and between man
and man, yea, and in euery man in himselfe,
it is more then euident, for doe not
the Stars moue against the Firmament?
Doe not the Elements which be of contrary
qualities striue one against another?
Are not the Windes at continuall
conflicts among themselues? Doth not
one time contend against another time,
and one thing against another thing, and
all things against vs? The Spring is
moist, the Summer is dry, the Haruest is

pleasant, and the Winter sharpe: And
this which is called change and alteration,
is in very deed strife and disagreement,
although by the diuine prouidence
of almightie, they are made to
agree together, against their owne nature,
to serue mans turne, that man might
serue him.
            These things vpon which we dwell,Of the Elements. by
which we liue and are nourished, which
flatter vs with so many enticements, how
terrible are they when once they begin
to bee angry? the earthquakes, shipwrackes,
whirlewindes, raging fires, and
mightie flouds, doe sufficiently declare.
With what violence doth the Haile fall?
What force haue stormes and tempests?
What ratling of Thunder? What rage
of lightning? What fury of the waues?
What blowing of the Sea? What roaring
of flouds? what excursions of Riuers?
What recourse and concourse of
clouds? Our meates and drinkes which
we take to nourish vs, if they be immoderately
and excessiuely taken of vs,
what seazures and forfaitures doe they
make of Reason, Sence and Strength,

yea, oftentimes of health and life it
selfe?
            There is no liuing Creature without
war.No Creature without war. Fishes, Foules, wilde Beasts,
Serpents, Men, one kinde of these persecuteth
another, none are at quiet. The
Lyon followeth the Wolfe, the Wolfe
the Dog, the Dog the Hare, and the
Hare the greene Corne; with what cra
                  •
               t
doth the 
                  •
               oxe pursue our Lambs, and
our Poultry? What watching is there
of Crowes and Kites about our Pigeon
houses, and Broodes▪ of Chickens?
And what assaults of Theeues is there
against the priuie Chambers, and Closets
of rich men? What watching and
warding is there in euery seuerall kinde,
how great and diligent contention?
            But though these cease, yet disagreement
ceaseth not:Of Loue and Mariage. for what hart-burning
is there euen in Loue? What disagreement
in Marriage? How many complaints, what suspicions are there amongst
Louers?Masters & Seruants. What sighes, what
paines, what contention betweene Masters
and Seruants?Parents & Children. Yea, what bitter
contention do we see betweene Parents

and Children, and betweene Brother
and Brother? And as touching the loue
of Parents, who are most tenderly affected
towards their Children, yet how
great their indignation is, it is euident,
whiles they loue them that are good,
and lament their case that are euill, and
thus in a manner they hate while they
loue hartely.Friends. Now among Friends although
there be agreement in the words
and ends, yet in the way, and in their
actions what disagreement and contrari
                  •
               tie
of opinions and counsels is there?
What then shall a man hope for in hatred?
for there is Hatred in Loue, and
Warre in Peace, and Dissention in agreement.
If wee consider the orders of
Bees in their Hiues,Bees. what thronging together,
what noyse, what wars, not onely
with their neighbours, but amongst
themselues, what domesticall conflicts,
and dissentions is there amongst them?
If we looke vpon the Doue,Doues. that innocent
and simple bird, and which (as some
write) hath no gall, with what battailes
and disquietnesse, with what clamours
and outcryes (I pray you) do they passe

forth their life? And now (to meet with
Christs instance againe) How doth the
Moth gnaw the cloth?Moth. the Rot the post,
and little Wormes by day and night fret
through the bowels of Beames & huge
Timber?Rot. Againe,Wormes what an enemie is the
Grassehopper to Hearbs, the Caterpiller
to Fruites before they bee ripe, and
the Fowles of the Ayre to ripe f
                  •
               uites
and graine?Sparrow. what an enemie is the Mildew
to the Vintage,Mildew. the blasting to the
Hearbs, the Canker to the Leaues, and
the Moule to the rootes?Moule. What should
I speake of the hurtfull plentie of branches
and leaues of Trees, against which
the wakefull Husbandman giueth diligent
attendaunce? And what doth the
continuall returne of Bryars and weeds,
but minister perpetuall matter of toyle
and strife? I let passe the furious rage of
showers of Raine, and heapes of Snow,
and biting of Frosts, and violence of
Ise, and force of Flouds, which many
times shake whole Regions and Countries.
            But thou liuest amongst the Richer
and more delicate sort perhaps,The toiles of the richer sort. yet art

not thou nor any of them without their
discommodities and toyles, for how is
their quiet silence, and sweet sleepe interrupted
and troubled eyther with the
cryings and screiches of Owles, or the
continuall barking of Dogs all night
against the Moone, or with the horrible
outcryes and hellish clamour of Cats,
meeting vpon the tiles and toppes of
houses? And on the day time they are
annoyed with the common clamour and
laughter of Fooles, then which nothing
is more ridiculous, and the merriments
of Drunkards, then the which nothing
is more grieuous? Then come the complaints
of such as be at variance, and the
Iangling & scoulding of old wiues. Ad
hereunto the thronging and noyse of
Iudgement
                  •
                Hals vpon court dayes, the
Altercations of Merchants, and such as
buy and sell, together with the vaine
Oathes and Protestations both on the
one side and the other. Adioyne herevnto
the sorrowfull singing of workmen
to asswage their painefull trauaile. Finally,
examine whatsoeuer there is, run
through in thy mind all the Heauen, the

Earth, the Sea, there is like contention
in the top of the Skie, and the bottome
of the Sea, and there is strife in the deep
rifts of the earth, as wel as in the woods
and Fields, and aswell is there perpetuall
disagreement in the Desarts of
sands, as in the streets of Cities.
            At the very beginning of the world
there was a battell fought in the first
Heauen, and those vanquished Angels
(now Diuels) whilst they endeauour
to bee reuenged vpon vs mortall
men, that inhabite the earth, they procure
vnto vs immortall warre of sundry
temptations, with most hard and doubtfull
businesse. And to gather all into a
short summe, all things whatsoeuer hauing
sence, or without sence, from the
vppermost top of heauen, vnto the lowest
center of the earth, and from the
chiefest Angell, to the basest worme,
there is continuall and euerlasting strife
betweene them, what securitie then can
be looked for of any thing in this world.
            As for man himselfe, the Lord and
gouernour of all things,Of Man against Man. who onely by
the rule of Reason, should bee able to

guide in Tranquilitie, this swelling and
troublesome sea, with what continuall
strife is hee tossed, both externally with
other things, as also internally with himselfe.
As for the things that are outward,
whereby man is tossed and turmoilde,
they are innumerable and vnspeakable,
euen from one man to another,
and practised by one man against
another: Homo homini Lupus, one man
is become a Wolfe towards another.
What mischiefe is there, that one man
worketh not against another? and all
other harmes, by what meanes soeuer
they happen, yet being compared with
these, doe seeme but light discommodities.
Who can number the disagreement
of opinions, the variety of sects, the contentions
of the learned, and the warres
of Kings and Nations? Who then can
bee assured of the Truth? Who can
assure his peace long, if hee seeke no
further for Peace and Truth then vnto
this world?
            But if thou or thy estate be called into
question, as whose is not somtime? thou
wilt repaire to s
                  •
               kilfull Grammarians,

who can tell what Construction to
make of euery things; or to eloquent
Rhetoricians, that can tell how to perswade
much; or to wittie Logitians, who
can dispute thy cause well; or to learned
Lawyers, who can plead thy cause effectually,
but then remember againe,
what contentions are amongst Grammaians,
not yet decided? what conflicts
among Rhetoricians? what Quirks and
quidities amongst Logitians? what brabble
and clamour amongst Lawyers?
who how well they agree the continuance
of their Cliants causes doth euidently
declare.Lawyer
                     •
                   for thy Wealth▪
                And if thou sayest thou
wilt haue Law for thy mony▪ then remember
first, that they will also haue
thy mony for Law, and by that time
the Law hath tryed thy cause, it may be,
halfe thy estate and wealth must bee
sharde amongst the Lawyers and their
Clarkes, who hauing eaten the Oyster
which made the strife, will returne thee
the shell for recompence.
            Well then,Phisitions for health. thou wilt say, if thy wealth
stand vpon so tickle a pinne, thou wilt
looke to thy Health, and to that end

thou wilt make much of the Phisition;
but then heare againe, make thou as
much of him, as thou canst, bee sure of
one thing, that hee will make as much
of thee as hee can. And as for the agreement
of Phisitions about diseases,
their causes and their cures, let their
Patients bee iudge, for that life which
they haue pronounced to bee short, by
their contentions they haue made most
short. But if thy wealth & Health be so
vncertaine, thou wilt then looke to thy
Religion, and be assured that that shall
be right and sound: thou doest well in
so doing, but then thou must take heed
thou hang not thy Faith or Religion
vpon men, but vpon God, and his word,
for else what deformitie and disagreement
of opinions is there in the holy
rites and religion of the Church, where
Gods heauenly direction in his Word
is neglected,Strife for Religion. and that not so much in
the words of the learned, as in the weapons
of the armed, and oftner tryed in
the field then in the schooles? But it
may bee for more securitie of thy selfe
and thy estate, thou wilt looke to the

common life and affaires of men, and
conforme thy selfe to the fashions of
the most in house keeping,To doe n
                     •
                   the most doe. in building,
in apparrell, in recreation, &c. But
then remember againe, that if thou hast
not light and Wisedome from Heauen,
thou maist soone slip into the broad
way that leadeth to Hell. And againe euen
then thou wilt bee to seeke, so many
windings and turnings thou shalt
meete withall, for there are scarce two in
a cittie that doe agree, both many things
else, but especially the great diuersitie
of their houses and Apparrell, doth declare,
for who euer succeeded any man
in an house, were hee neuer so rich and
good an Husband, that hath not (for all
that) changed many things in it? so that
looke what one man had a desire to
build, another hath a pleasure to pull
downe: witnesse hereof may bee the
often changing of Windows, damming
vp of Doores, and the skarres and new
reparations that are done in old Wals.
Nay more, is not euery mans opinion &
Iudgement contrary to himselfe? whilst
(according to the saying of the Poet) He

pulleth downe,
               Horace. 
               and buildeth vp, and changeth
that which was square into round.
               Diruit, 
                     •
                  dificat, mutat quadrata rotundis. By
which it may appeare that almost no
man can agree with another man, nor
yet with himselfe.
            To these may bee added the contention
that is oftentimes without an Aduersary,Contention without an aduersary.
as of Sriueners with Parchment,
with Inke, with Pens, with Paper,
before they can make them serue their
turne,Scriueners. and many the like? What a coile
haue SouldiersSouldiers. (not with their enimies
onely) but with their owne Horses and
Armour, when as the horse waxeth obstinate,
and their Armour wayeth them
downe?Speakers & writers. What businesse haue they that
speak, and those that write at the mouth
of another, whilest the one through earnest
intention speaketh many things
vnperfect, and the other through ignorance,
or vnskilfulnes, or a flitting & vnconstant
wit misconstrueth those things
that are perfect? Againe, what Conflicts
haue InfantsInfants. with fals, ChildrenChildren. with
their Bookes, and Young menYong men with pleasures
and vnruly affections? Yong men
are indeed to bee pittied, for there are no

kinde of men that would seeme to bee
more merry, and none indeed are more
miserable and sorrowfull. And againe,
in what danger are WomenWomen. in Childebearing?
what wrastling haue men continually
with Pouertie and Ambition?
What great carking & caring for more
then is needful for liuing? And finally,
what euerlasting warre haue old menOld men
                     •
                  
               
with old age and sicknesses? and all other
persons with death also, and (that which
is more grieuous then death it selfe) with
the continuall feare of death?
            But to omit this external strife (which
is one while with Aduersaries,Of the internall strife in a mans self. and another
while without an Aduersarie) how
great is the internall Contention, not
onely against another, but euen against
our selfe, euery one enduring a continuall
war euen in the secret closet of his
minde? With how diuerse and contrary
Affections doth the mind striue against
it selfe? with how variable and vncertaine
motion of minde is euery man
drawne, sometime one way, sometime
another? hee is neuer whole, nor neuer
one man, but alwayes dissenting and

deuided in himselfe. Now hee willeth,
by and by hee will not that which hee
would before: now hee liketh, by and
by hee misliketh: now hee loueth, by
and by hee hateth: now hee flattereth,
presently he threatneth: now he iesteth,
and presently is in good earnest: here
hee beginneth, there hee leaueth off:
now hee admireth, by and by hee disdaineth:
one while hee goeth forward,
and straight way he turneth back again,
and such like, then the which there can
bee nothing imagined more vncertaine,
and with which the life of man ebbeth
and f
                  •
               oweth more turbulently, from the
beginning to the ending without intermission.
And what tempests and madnes
is there not in these foure passions,
to hope or desire, and to reioice, to feare,
& to be sorry, which trouble the poore
and miserable minde by driuing it with
sodaine windes and gales, far from the
Hauen, into the middest of most dangerous
Rocks? And therefore say not as
some doe, that thou wilt trust no body
but thy selfe, or what thou hast once resolued
vpon, no man shall alter thee

from it, for they selfe are most variable,
and thine owne false hart will bee the
first that shall betray thee. And therefore
to conclude and returne where wee
began, sith the life of man is so full of
misery and vnquietnesse, sith there is so
little agreement, nay, so much strife and
contention betweene all things created,
sensible and insensible, and all against
man, and sith there is so much discord
and iarring in all estates and degrees of
men, and lastly, in euery particular man,
with himselfe, how canst thou now that
art a Christian (and induced with any
sparke of Heauenly light) set thy heart
vpon the world, or any thing that is in
the World, to make it the study of thy
braine, the care of thy minde, or the ioy
of thy heart, sith in this world as there is
nothing of any Excellency, or Perpetuitie,
so likewise is there nothing of any
Securitie or safety, but all exposed to perill,
danger and losse?
            But in heauen it is otherwise, looke
what Treasures thou sendest thether before
thy▪ dying day, thou shalt bee sure to
haue them secured vnto thy vse for euer,

and why? surely because they are with
thy GOD and most louing Father,
where no Theefe can breake through
and steale.
            As this Doctrine should cause vs to
leaue our doting vpon this World,Vse. so it
seru eth to stay the troubled Conscience
from drooping vnder his sins,
                  •
                and from
despairing of Gods mercy, for though
thy Si
                  •
               nes bee many and great, yet thy
Treasure is sure in heauen, and there is
thy Comfort. Haddest thou euer any
Peace of Conscience, any Comfort in
Christ, any Ioy in the holy Ghost, that
same abideth still in heauen for thee: and
that which thou haddest here, was but
an earnest of that which is laide vp for
thee there.
            But thou canst not see it,Obiect. nor feele it,
thou canst not pray so effectually as
thou wert wont to doe, &c.
            What then?Answ. yet it is in Heauen and
nothing can take it from thee. God doth
not keepe our Treasure from Mothes
and Theeues, to let the Diuels deceiue
vs of it, no, no, it is sure for euer. When
the Childe abuseth such things as his

Father bestoweth vpon him, they are
taken from him and laid vp till another
time; and though the foolish Childe
would haue them still in his sight, yet
that may not bee, the wisedome of the
father will not suffer it: so God dealeth
with his Children, as touching the gifts
and graces of his Spirit, and the vse of
them. The similitude applyeth it selfe:
It sufficeth Iacob to heare that his sonne
Ioseph was a liue, though hee saw him
not: so it should much comfort vs, to
know that our Sauiour Christ liueth in
vs, though wee alwaies feele him not
alike.
            I once loued the word of God (thou
wilt say) and was zealous for the glory
of God,Obiect. and did beleeue his promises,
and did reioyce in the exercises of Religion,
and prayed continually, and grieued
heartely for my sinnes; Oh then I
had Treasure in heauen, now all is gone,
my Spirit is dull and heauie, I cannot
pray, nor meditate with that feeling and
comfort, that I was wont to feele.
            But doe the Lord no iniurie:Answere. doe
not measure his grace by thy feeling:

while Sathans messenger did buff
                  •
               t
Paul,
               2. Cor▪ 12. that blessed Apostle could not so
sensibly feele Gods grace as before, but
cryed out,Rom. 7. 
               Oh wretched man that I am,
who shall deliuer mee? So whiles temptations
doe buffet vs, wee are benummed
and know not well, how it is with
vs in respect of Grace, but yet Gods
grace doth vphold vs for all that Whiles
Sathan sifted Peter,
               Luk. 22. 32 Christ prayed for
him that his Faith might not faile, but
it was more then Peter felt, and so it is
with the rest of Gods Children at some
times. These buffetings and siftings are
tokens of Gods fauour, yet secret in vs
for the time, for whom doth Sathan
most desire to sift of all the Apostles?
surely none so much as him that before
had made the best confession of Christ.
And none are more buffeted then they
that haue receiued the greatest Graces.
Ye shall sorrow (saith our Sauiour Christ)
in the World,
               Ioh. 16. 20 
               but in mee yee shall haue ioy,
and your ioy shall no man take from you,
no nor Diuell, nor Angell, nor God
himselfe,1. Tim. 2 for if wee beleeue not,13 yet
God is faithfull (saith Saint Paul) and

not deny himselfe.Verse. 19. And againe, The
foundation of God abideth sure, and hath
this seale. The Lord knoweth who are his,
and let euery one that calleth on the name
of the Lord les
                     •
                  is depart from iniqui
                     ••
                  e, to
shew that if wee depart from iniquitie,
wee shall our selues also know that wee
are the Lords, yea, and to that end wee
ought to call on the name of the Lord
Iesus, that by his grace wee may depart
from iniquitie. And in so doing we may
say as the Apostle saith,2. Tim 1. 12 
               I know whom I
haue beleeued, and I am perswaded that
hee is able to keepe that which I haue committed
Vnto him against the day of Christ.
            
            And whereas thou complainest that
thou canst not pray, know that yet for
all that the Spirit of God may bee in
thee,Rom. 8. 26 
               For the Spirit (saith Paul) helpeth
our infirmities for we know not how to pray
as we ought, but the Spirit it selfe maketh
request for vs with 
                     •
                  ighes, which cannot be
expressed, to shew that when the hearts
of Gods Children are oppressed with
burdensome Temptations, which stop
the course and passage of our Prayers,
that then the Spirit of God makes a

supply by sighes and grones.
            But if Gods spirit were in thee (thou
sayest) thou shouldest feele it working in
thee some heauenly and spirituall work.Obiect.
            
            True it is, and so hee doth, for euen
the sighes and grones of a troubled spirit,Answere.
are the workes of Gods spirit, and
euen the hungring after righteousnesse,
is no lesse the work of Grace, then the
hauing of righteousnesse. And the work
of Gods Spirit is oftentimes more secret
in thee then thou art aware of: for could
God take a Rib out of Adams side
while hee slept, and neuer felt it, and
cannot God put his Spirit into thy hungry
and heauie Soule, and keepe it there
as a Liger, while thy Faith sleepeth,
and thou not feele it? God dealeth with
his Children as Ioseph dealt with his
Brethren, who knew them well enough,
but for a time would not bee knowne
of them, yea, and put their money into
their sacks more then they knew of, and
at last made himself knowen vnto them.
Gods spirit is called the Comforter, and
his words are the words of Comfort.
Sonne bee of good cheare, thy sinnes are

forgiuen thee, Hee hath thy pardon with
him in thee, and when thou hast most
neede, hee will deliuer it thee, and thou
shalt see it, with ioy and great gladnes.
            In thee meane time, that hee is in thee
know by this, that thou dost not hate
the Lord, but loue him and hast an holy
desire,Heb. 13. with some earnest endeauour
to serue him, to liue honestly, and to
keepe a good Conscience in all things,
and art afraid of falling away. And surely
all good desires are of the Lord. Waite
the Lords leysure with Patience, seeke
for Peace, which though thou canst not
finde awhile, yet by Prayer thou must
wayte on the Lord, and say, Lord because
there is mercy with thee that thou
maist bee feared, I will wayte on thee,
euen as the eye of a Maid seruant waiteth
on the hand of her Mistresse, I will
condemne my selfe of folly, and say, O
my Soule, why art thou cast downe, wait
on God, for hee is thy present help and
thy God. And thus shalt thou bee restored
to the ioy of thy Saluation. And
as Iob after his manifold tryals, had both
of Gods goodnesse, of Sathans malice,

his friends vncharitableness, and his
owne weakenesse, had all seauen folde
restored vnto him againe: So thou after
thy supposed losse of heauenly Treasure,
shalt finde heauenly treasure plentifully
restored vnto thee againe. When
Christ stept aside from his earthly father
and Mother, to doe the businesse
of his heauenly Father, hee meant to
come againe, but in the meane time they
sought him with heauy hearts, and at the
last, they found him in the Temple, disputing
with the Doctors, to their great
ioy and astonishment: So Christ sometimes
doth as it were step aside from
vs, to the end wee may seeke after him,
and wee may perhaps seeke him with
heauie harts, but yet at the last, we shall
finde him with great ioy, for they that
sowe in teares, shall surely reape in ioy.
            Thou hast heard what high commendations
are giuen of the Christians
heauenly Treasure; doest thou beleeue
it? then lay vp thy treasure in heauen,
say not as the buyer doth, it is naught,
it is naught, for if thou couldst obtaine
it, with the losse of all the world, thou

mightst and wouldst brag of thy bargaine.
But alas, how few regard this?
The poorer sort care not, but for backe
and belly, and neuer repaire with good
will to the house of God,How mos
                     •
                  men goe to Gods house. but when they
thinke to receiue an almes, like the criple
at the gate of the Temple, or like the
people that followed Christ, to haue
their bellies filled of free cost. Others
come to the sermons and prayers of the
Church, but loaden with their sins, &
their mindes cumbred with pleasures &
cares of this world, to whom the house
of God is as a house of correction, and
they sit there to bee whipped, and euery
sentence of the Preacher, that crosseth
their delights, or beloued sinnes, is as
so many lashes and ierkes tormenting
and tearing their guiltie Consciences.
Others againe, make the Lords house
as it were a market place, repairing thether
onely to muze and studie of the
prizes of their commodities, or to make
some bargaines, or to doe some busines
with some whom they haue appointed
to meete there. Others againe, make the
house of God their play house, and the

Pulpit the Theater, the Preachers are
their fooles, and Scripture phrases are
their Iests, to make themselues merry
withall. And others goe to the Lords
house as children goe to schoole, the
one for feare of the rod, and the other
for feare of Lawes and Presentments,
whereupon the Prouerbe is growen, as
willingly as euer I went from schoole,
but these may say, as willingly as euer I
went for Church, but alas poore soules,
long it will be before any of these kinde
of hearers, get any heauenly Treasure,
except they seeke after it, with better
mindes and affections.
            But now, as wee haue heard these
Treasures commended for their Excellencie,Foure circūstances.
                     1 Place.
                     2 Time.
                     3 Manner how.
                     4 Why.
                  
               
for their Perpetui
                  •
               y, and Security,
so it will not bee amisse, to consider of
the Place wher we must seeke for them,
of the Time when, of the Manner how
to lay them vp, and lastly of the Reason
why: All which are questions necessarie,
for the Serpent commended knowledge,
but withall shewed a wrong way
thereunto: so all commend the heauenly
Treasure, but all take not a right course

to obtaine it, therefore saith the Apostle,
Sorunne that yee may obtaine.
               1. Cor. 9. 24 Christ
is the Treasure and Treasurer. And this
Treasure is in the ship of Christ, that
is his Church, and no where else. The
Ministers of the Church or Masters of
the Assembly (as Salomon calleth them)
are the factours. Now in what roome to
search, or in what Vessell, is the question?
In Ierusalem there were many chests,
yet but one Ark, that had the holy things
and sacred Monuments in it. Though
there were many Waters, yet was there
but one Poole of Siloam, in which Lepers
were cleansed. In Christs Ship bee
many places, but the place of the treasure
is but one.2. Cor. 4. Saint Paul saith it is in
earthen Vessels, so say wee too, meaning
the Ministers of the Gospel, because
we are in shew contemp
                  •
               ible and in substance
brittle.
            These vessels haue a booke that will
shew all, if any man can open it, and vnderstand
it, and it is the Word of God,
contayning the holy Scriptures of the
old and new Testament, which Christ
would haue vs to search, because they

beare witnesse of him,Ioh. 5. 39. and containe in
them eternall life. Like a Merchants bill
they are, which sheweth what commodities
are in the ship. This booke hath
ben by gods prouidence mightily & miraculously
preserued from time to time
from burning, drowning, and loosing,
and this priuiledge it hath, that it endureth
for euer, and when heauen & earth
shall faile, yet not one iot or title thereof
shall fall to the ground.
            The places then that wee must frequent
if wee will finde this Heauenly
Treasure, are the holy Assemblies of
Gods people, where God is called vpon
by the publike Prayers of the Saints,
the Word is truely taught, and the Sacraments
sincerely ministred, for the
working and increasing of faith, and not
the conuenticles of Schismatikes, who
haue seperated themselues from the
publike assemblies of Gods Church,
and are at open defiance with their mother
the true Church of Iesus Christ,
who first brought them to that knowledge
and Faith that they haue, if in
truth and soundnesse they haue any at

all. That which must discouer vnto vs
this heauenly Treasure, is the holy Bible,
and sacred Scriptures of God, and not
the reuelations of Anabaptists, nor the
Dreames of the Familie of Loue, nor
the Iewes Ta
                  •
               mud, nor the Turks Alcaron,
nor the Popes Portuise, nor the
Tridentine Counsels, nor the Traditions
or decrees of the Church of Rome,
all which will leade vs to trash, but not
to Treasure; to hell, but not to heauen;
to the flesh, but not to the spirit, and so
from God to the Diuell.
            And being come now to the place,
and hauing found the Booke that will
rcueale this Heauenly Treasure, what
must wee doe?Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures,
saith our Sauiour Christ, to shew that
there is some hidden Trasure in it more
then is seene outwardly, or more then
they make shew of, and so there is. And
therefore the Word is preferred before
Gold,Psa. 19. 10 albeit most men had rather haue
Gold then the Word: but Da
                     •
                  id could
say that of Gods Word, which he could
not doe of Gold, nor all the world besides,Ps. 119. 92
and that was this, Except thy word

had beene my comfort in my Affliction, I
had perished.
               Pro. 3. 13. And Salomon auoucheth
that man to bee blessed that findeth
wisedome, and him happy that getteth
Vnderstanding, and doubteth not to
yeeld this for his reason,14 
               That the marchandise
thereof is better then the Marchandise
of Siluer, and the gaine thereof
is better then Golde.
               15 
               It is more precious
(saith he) then Pearles, and all things that
thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto
her.
               16 
               Length of dayes is in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and glory. Her
pathes are the pathes of pleasure, and all her
wayes prosperitie.
               17 
               Shee is a Tree of Life
to them that lay hold on her, and therefore
blessed are they that receiue her. But to
see these are required very heauenly and
spirituall eyes, euen the eyes of a liuely

                  •
               aith; for carnall sence cannot comprehend
them, and worldly wisedome cannot
conceiue them,The crosse of Christ an offence to some. yea, many laugh at
vs, because we seeke for life in the death
of Christ, grace in his curse, righteousnesse
in his condemnation, and comfort
in his holy Gospell. Verely (say they)
so floweth cold water out of a burning

Furnace, and so springeth light out of
darknesse, and hereupon they conclude,
that none are more foolish then wee,
which hope for Life at a dead mans
hand, which aske forgiuenesse at a condemned
person, which fetch the grace
of God out of one that was accursed,
and flye for refuge to the Crosse, as to
the onely author of euerlasting Saluation,
which are all the Treasures that the
word of God doth offer vs, and therewithall
laughing at our simplicitie, they
think themselues very sharp-witted, but
alas they want the chiefest thing in true
wisedome, namely, the feeling of Conscience,
and the 
                  •
               eare of God-Let vs but
enter deeply into our selues, and so soone
as wee acknowledge our owne wretchednesse,
the way for vs vnto Christ,
and for Christ vnto vs, will bee by and
by paued and made l
                  •
               uell, for as to the
attaining of humane Sciences, is requisite
a fine and well furnished wit, so
to this Heauenly Philosophie is required
a subdued minde, for what tast can
there bee where is lothing?
            
               
As many then as will not willinglie
bee deceiued and perish,How to auoid the former offence. let them learne
to begin with this l
                  •
               sson, to know that
they haue to doe with God, to whom
they must giue accompt, let them set
before their eyes, that iudgement seat,
that makes euen the Angels to tremble,
let them hearken to their owne conscience,
bearing witnesse against them, let
them not harden their harts against the
pricks of sinne, and then they shall find
nothing in the death of Christ to bee
ashamed of. And let not their astonishment
bee a stumbling blocke to vs, but
rather let vs bee carryed from the humane
nature of Christ, to the glory of
his Godhead, which may turne all curious
questions into admiration: And let
vs goe from the death of Christ, to his
glorious resurrection, which may wipe
away all slaunder of his Crosse: Let vs
passe from the weakenesse of the flesh,
to the power of the Spirit, which may
swallow vp all foolish thoughts: And
let vs still pray with holy Da
                     •
                  id, that
the Lord would open the eyes of our
Vnderstanding, that wee may see the

wondrous things of his word; for not
euery one that readeth the booke of
God, doth come to the Treasure, for it
is like a Nut with a double shell, both
which must bee broken before the kernell
can bee found; or like a Chest with
many locks, and euery one must be opened
before the Treasure can bee met
withall.
            To which end the Lord hath appointed
Preaching and Preachers, and
endued them with the tongues of the
learned, and all to open the hidden
Treasures of the Gospell of Christ. To
which must bee ioyned a diligent eare,
a minde to meditate, and a sober tongue,
to confer with thy Pastor and familie,
and an humble Spirit, to bee enformed
and reformed by the counsell of God.
These meanes are called digging, and
searching, laborious exercises indeed, to
shew what paines and diligence must
bee vsed in searching after the heauenly
Treasure.Prou. 2, 1
                     •
                  
                
               My Sonne (saith Salomon) if
thou wilt receiue my words, and hide my
commaundement within thee, and cause
thine eares to hearken vnto Wisedome,
               2 
               and

incline thine heart vnto Vnderstanding,3 if
thou callest after Knowledge, and cryest for
Vnderstanding,4 if thou seekest for her as
for Siluer, and searchest for her as for
Treasures,5 then shalt thou vnderstand the
feare of the Lord and finde the knowledge
of God. But if wee bee negligent, backward,
and indifferent or luke-warme,
then will it fare with vs, as with Laodicea,Reu. 3. 18.
               wee shall thinke wee are rich, and
increased with goods, and haue neede of
nothing, when indeed wee are wretched,
and miserable, and poore, and blind, and
naked.
            
            And alas so it is with too too many
and therefore when you come into their
houses, if the booke of God bee there,
you shall finde it couered ouer with
much rubbill, and drosse, as Cards and
Tables, merry Tales with sorry or sorrowfull
tailes, profane and scurrilous
discourses, and paultry pamphlets, and
such like stuffe, which domineere ouer
the booke of God, as the Iewes did ouer
Christs in Pilates hall; all which should
bee swept out of doores, or sacrificed
in the fire: and as for such humorists

as do nothing but feede mens humours
with idlenesse, and ply them with the
pleasures of sinne, to the losse of their
precious time, which should bee spent
in seeking of the heauenly Treasure,
say vnto them as Christ did vnto Peter,
when hee solicited him against the will
of God, vnto carnall courses, Turne thee
behind me Sathan, thou art an offence vnto
mee, and sauourest not the things of God.
            
            The next thing to bee considered is,Of the time when to lay vp. &c. E
                     •
                  cles. 9
the time of gathering and laying vp this
heauenly Treasure, for there is a time
for all things, saith the holy Ghost. All
in time, saith the World, hereafter when
old age comes, or when sicknesse comes,
or at the houre of death. It is not good
to bee too forward in Religion, or to
meddle too soone with matters of God
and Godlinesse, for a yong man may
prooue an old Diuell. But heare what
God saith,Eccle. 12. 
                     •
                  
                thou foolish man. Remember
thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth,
before the euill dayes come vpon thee, and
the dayes whereof thou shalt say I haue no
pleasure. And Esai cryeth out vnto thee,
saying:Esa. 55. 6. 
               Seeke the Lord while hee may be

found, and call vpon him while hee is nigh
at hand, to shew vs that the Lord will
not alwayes bee found, much lesse when
wee thinke good, neyther will the dayes
of olde age and sicknesse bee like the
dayes of youth and health, for then shall
wee feele our selues vnfit and vntoward
to seek after these things, in two regards:
first, in regard of naturall infirmities and
bodily paines which will hold thy mind
occupied about meanes of ease, as Phisicke
and such like. Secondly, in regard
of that strong hand which sin through
long custome will beare ouer thy soule,
euen to the hardning of thy heart, for
custome of sinne, breedeth hardnesse
of heart, and hardnesse of heart begetteth
impenitencie,Rom. 
                     •
                  . 1. as the Apostle sheweth
in the second to the Romanes.
            
            But the speciall time of gathering
and laying vp this heauenly Treasure,
is the holy Sabboth, and other times of
holy assemblies, and generally whensoeuer
thou art called forth, to heare the
Word preached vnto thee, or hast any
occasion to exercise thy Faith, in the
workes of Charitie and pietie. Then

comes the Angell to stirre the Poole,Iohn. 5
                     •
                  
               
step in then, if thou wilt doe thy selfe
good, for afterward will bee too late,
Whosoeuer carelessely neglecteth the
Sabbaoth of the Lord, and presumptiously
giueth God the slip in the holy
Assemblies, as many car
                  •
               all Christians
doe, who mistrusting God with their estate,
thinke it no sin to spend the Sabbaoth
day in their worldly affaires, or
vaine exercises, well may they with Esau
get a sup of pottage to stay their hungry
mawes withall if God doe not crosse
their enterprises, and curse their labours
(as oftentimes hee doth) but surely their
heauenly Birth-right is for
                  •
               aite by the
bargain, and but bankroupts they proue
in the heauenly Treasure of a Christian.
They heape vp, but it is nothing
but wrath against the day of wrath.
            The Sabboth day is especially appointed
for gathering of heauenly treasures,
Remember therefore that thou
keepe it holy as the Lord comminandeth,
p
                  •
               etend not a necessitie of breaking the

                  〈◊〉
                rest, where 
                  〈◊〉
                is apparant, as the
manner of some is when 
                  〈◊〉
                a faire

Sabboth day, they must work, for feare
of Raine, but consider thou whose heart
is buryed vnder thy loafe, and wilt needs
bee rich by deceiuing the Lord of his
right, consider I say, hath not the Lord
prouided for thee when it hath rained?
and darest thou not trust him when it is
faire? did he euer deceiue any that trusted
him with their estate, while they walked
reuerently in his feare, and carefully
kept his commandements? what indignitie
then and dishonor is this that thou
offrest vnto the most high, in that thou
darest not trust him with thy body,
whiles thou seekest for the good of thy
Soule? And how doest thou thinke to
answere this geare, when thy conscience
shall bee summoned to answere therevnto,
before that Iudgement Seat, which
maketh the very Angels and Celestiall
Powers to tremble? Oh consider of
these things betimes, and the Lord 
                  〈◊〉
               
thy drowsie soule.Euill company how dangerous And aboue all,
beware of sorting thy selfe with profane
company, which will cause thee to loose
thy time, and dull the edge of the Spirit,
decay thy graces, and make thee to

treasure vp sinne against the day of vengeance,Eecle. 9. 18
for one sinne admitted with loue
and liking, letteth out many graces and
maketh hauock of all thy vertues.
            Now the manner how to lay vp this
heauenly Treasure,How to lay vp heauenly treasure. commeth next to be
remembred, and that is done three waies.
First, by relieuing of the Lord Iesus
Christ in his members, which stand
in neede of help, Sell that you ha
                     •
                  e ouerplus
(saith Christ) or that you can sp
                     •
                  are

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and giue to the poore. Make
you bags which waxe not old. Luke 12. 33.Luk. 12. 33
to shew that when a man giueth almes
to the poore, hee doth but take it out of
one purse and put it into another, out of
bags that waxe old, and put it into bags
that waxe not old, and in so doing saith
Christ, thou shalt finde treasure in heauen,
in so doing I say, but not for so doing,Mar 19. 21
as Papists teach, If thou wilt be perfect
(saith Christ to the rich yong man)
goe and sell that thou hast and giue to the
poore, and what you doe to them, I take
it as done vnto my selfe, for saith our Sauiour
Christ,Mat 25. 34 when they my poore
members were in prison, I was in prison;

when they were hungry, naked, and
cold, &c. I was hungry, naked and cold,
and therfore what you did to them, you
did to mee. To the like effect speaketh
the Prophet Esai,
               Esa 58. 7. 
               If (saith hee) thou
deale thy bread to the hungry, and bring
the poore that wandreth into thy house, and
couer the naked when thou seest him, then
shall thy light breake forth as the morning,
and thine health shall grow speedely, thy
righteousnesse shall goe before thee, and the
glory of the Lord shal embrace thee.
               Necessary encouragements, and why, These
bee sweet encouragements and necessarie,
because poore people are vnable to
recompence the kindnesse of those that
bestow any thing vpon them; and as
they are vnable, so for the most part,
they are very ingratefull, and their vnthankfulnesse
doth not a little discourage
many, who would otherwise bee
more beneficiall then they are. And in
these respects, men had rather venture
their goods vpon any other thing, then
vpon the poore. For (say they) quod ingrato
feceris perijt: It is cast away which
is giuen to vnthankfull persons: but howsoeuer
it bee that many of the poorer

sort, bee both wretchedly vnthankfull,
and miserably vnable to repay thee, yet
if thou giuest them for Christ his sake,
in whose name commonly they aske it,
thou shalt finde it againe in heauen.
            But it may bee, thou wilt be content
to giue part of thy ouerplus to the poore,
so thou maist reserue the other part to
bestow on thy pleasure, but beware thou
deceiue not thy selfe, for all thy ouerplus
is for the poore,Ouerplus for the poore. when thy familie
is prouided for, thy debts paid, and all
Dueties that thou owest to the Church
and Common-wealth, thy Prince and
Countrie are de
                  ••
               ayed, that which remaineth
is for the poore, to play for that
is to cast lots vpon the Garment of
Christ,Cal. Har. 
               Ne fundis parcendum est, (sayeth
Cal
                     •
                  sin, Euen of a mans ground and Inheritance
a Christian man must deuide,
some to poore Schollers, some to scholes
of learning, some to the Ministry of the
Gospel, some to maimed souldiers, some
to poore hospitals, & in all to Christ, &
he that giueth but a cup of cold water to
the poore members of christ,Ma
                     •
                   10. 42 hauing no
more to giue, shall not loose his reward.
            
               
The second way to lay vp Treasure
in heauen,The 2 way to lay vp, &c. is by suffring constantly and
patiently for Christ, when thou art
thereunto lawfully called and required,
and that two wayes: First, thou must
suffer the word of Christ which is the
sword of the Spirit, to hew and cut thy
sinnes, and bee content with patience,
to endure the sifting and fanning of the
Gospell,Ioh. 15. for except the dead and superfluous
branches be cut off, we can neuer
bring forth fruit in Christ. Secondly,
wee must resolue to endure all outward
crosses and losses, for the euerlasting
Truth of Christ, for hee that will saise
his life (saith Christ) shall loose it,
               Mat. 10. 
               and he
that will loose it for my sake and the Gospell,
               39
               shall saue it. And if wee suffer with
him (saith S. Paul) wee shall also raigne
with him.
               Rom. 8. 17 If wee belong to Christ, wee
must looke for tribulation, and anguish,35
and persecution, and famine, and nakednesse,
and perill, and sword, all which
will try their force, to see if they can seperate
vs from the loue of Christ. Yea,
wee must looke for his sake,36 to bee killed
all the day long, and to bee counted

as sheepe for the slaughter.37 But in all
these things (saith the holy Apostle) wee
are more then conquerours, through him
that loued us.
               2 Cor. 4. And therefore wee faint
not, but though our o
                     •
                  tward man perish,
               16
               yet th'inward man is renued daily.
               17 
               For our
light affliction which is but for a moment,
causeth vnto vs a farre more excellent
waight of glory.
               18 
               While wee looke not on
the things which are seene, but on the things
which are not seene. This point will bee
scarce welcommed, or well liked, of nice
and daintie professours of the Gospell,
which must neuer goe to Gods house,
but when the Sunne shineth, the waies
are faire, and no Winde is stirring, to
blow vpon them; and when they are
there, they must heare nothing but pleasing
things, their sinnes must not bee
touched, much lesse can they endure to
haue the cutting knife of Gods law, laid
to the throat of their sinne. And if all
the world doth not applaud and commend
their zeale, and good deeds, they
soon are discouraged, & stand stone stil,
like the winde mill that goeth no longer
then the winde bloweth, no scoffe

or reproach, no persecution or trouble
can they endure for the Truths sake,
what Treasure can these lay vp by their
daintinesse in heauen?
            The third way to lay vp Treasure
in heauen,The third way to lay vp, &c. is while thou liuest here vpon
earth, to grow in the powerfull and
liuely knowledge of Christ crucified, &
by a liuely apprehensiue faith to make
thy selfe sure of all his benefits, in comparison
of whom, thou oughtst with the
blessed Apostle,Phil. 3. 10. to esteeme all the world
but drosse and dung. Now to effect this,
we must consider the merite of Christ,
the vertue of Christ, and the example
of Christ, and what benefit wee haue
by euery one of them; as that worthie
man of God M. Perkins, hath both learnedly
& heauenly declared, the somme
whereof, I will breefly recall into thy
minde.
            Christ is to bee considered, as the
common Treasurie and store-house of
Gods Church, for God hath blessed vs
with all spirituall blessings in Christ. Eph.
1. 4.Ephe. 1. 4. And in him are all the Treasures of
Knowledge & Wisdome hidden. Col. 2. 3.Col. 2. 3.
               
And of his fulnesse
                  •
               wee all recei
                  •
               e grace
for grace.Iohn. 1. 
               Iohn. 1. So that all the blessings
of God without exception are
conuayed vnto vs from the Father by
Christ, and so must they bee receiued
and no otherwise. But concerning the
benefits of Christ wee are to learne further
two things: first, what they are:
Secondly, how or in what manner to
vse them. His benefits are three: Merit,
Vertue, and Example.
            The Merit of Christ is the value of
his death and passion, whereby he hath
obtained to vs Reconciliation And this
Reconciliation hath two parts: first,
Remission of sinnes, Secondly, acceptation
to eternall life, and both for the merit
of Christ imputed. This benefit must
bee knowen not by conceipt, nor carnal
presumption, but by the inward testimonie
of gods Spirit. To attaine to the
infallible assurance of this benefite we
must call to minde the promises of the
Gospell touching remission of sins, and
the gift of eternall life to the Faithfull.
Secondly, wee must endeuour by the assurance
of Faith to apply them to our

owne hearts. And thirdly, wee must vse
often exercises of Inuocation and repentance,
for by our crying to God for reconciliation
commeth the assuraunce
thereof. And if it so fall out that a man
in temptation, feele nothing but the furious
wrath of God, yet euen then against
all reason and feeling, hee must hold to
the merit of Christ, and know that God
is a most louing father to them that haue
a care to serue him, euen at that instant
when he sheweth himselfe a most fierce
and terrible enimie, which Iob knew
right well when hee said,Iob. 13. 15 
               If the Lord
should kill mee, yet I will trust in him.
            
            From the benefite of Reconciliation
proceede foure benefites. First, that excellent
peace of God, which passeth all
Vnderstanding▪ 
               Phil. 4. And that hath
sixe parts: first, peace with the Trinitie,
for being Iustified by Faith, we haue peace
with God. Rom. 5. 1. Secondly, Peace
with Angles, who do ascend and descend
vpon the Sonne of man. Iohn. 1. 51. and
all for the good of Gods Church. For
the Angels doe incampe about those
that feare the Lord. Psal. 34. And like

Nurses doe beare them in their armes.
Psal. 90. 12. that they hurt not their foot
against a stone. All this seruice which
the Angels performe vnto the faithfull,
proceedes of this, that the faithfull being
in Christ, are pertakers of his merit.
Thirdly, peace with the Faithfull, for,
the Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe,
               Esa. 11. 6. 
               and
the Leopard shall lye with the Kid, and
the Calfe and the Lyon, and the fat beasts
together, and a little child shall lead them.
Esay. 11. 6. Fourthly, peace with a mans
selfe, and that is: first, when the Conscience
washed in the bloud of Christ,
ceaseth to accuse a man: secondly, when
the will and affections are obedient to
the minde, enlightened by the Word
and Spirit of God, and this is that which
the Apostle meaneth, when hee saith,
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts.
Col. 3. 15. Fiftly, Peace with our enimies,
and that two wayes: first, in seeking
Peace with all, hurting none, but doing
good to all:Dan. 1. 9. secondly, in that God restraineth
their mallice & inclineth their
hearts to peace. Sixtly, Peace with the
Creatures. Psal. 91. 13.Psal 91. 13 
               Thou shalt walk

vpon the Lyon and the Dragon, &c. And in
that day (saith the Lord) I will make a co
                  
                     •
                  enant
for them, with the wild Beasts, and
with the foules of the heauen, & with that
that creepeth vpon the earth, &c. Hos. 2. 18Hos. 2. 18.
If therefore wee see God against vs, our
owne Conscience against vs, the Angels
against vs, the Faithfull against vs,
the wicked against vs, the Creatures against
vs, let vs examine this point, of
Reconciliation, and if all bee with vs, let
vs know that it is the benefit of Christs
merit.
            The second benefit of Christs merite,The secōd benefite.
is recouery of that right, which man
hath to all the Creatures, the which
Adam lost to himselfe & all his posteritie.
1. Cor. 3. 22. Whether it be the world,
or life, or death, or things present, or things
to come, all are yours, and you Christs.
The right way of knowing this benefit
is this, when God giueth meat & drinck,
&c. we must not barely consider them,
as blessings of God, for that very Heathen
men can doe, which know not
Christ, but as proceeding from the loue
of God in Christ. And so often as wee

vse the Creatures, this point must come
to minde, for blessings conceiued a part
from Christ, are misconceiued. Whatsoeuer
they are in themselues, they are
no blessings to vs, but in and by Christs
Merits: for this cause it is not sufficient
generally to know Christ to be our Redeemer,
but wee must learne to see him
and acknowledge him in euery particular
gift & blessing of God. If men when
they behold their meates and drincks,
could by faith behold in them the merit
of Christs passion, there would not
bee so much gluttony and drunkennes
as there is. If the like in their houses and
lands, their would not bee so much fraud
and deceipt, in
                  •
               ustice and oppression.
Also noble birth, without new birth is
but vanitie. The like is to bee saide of
phisicke, sleepe, health, libertie, recreations,
and very breathing it self. Therefore
it is meete, that with our earthly recreation
wee ioyne spirituall medi
                  •
               ation
of the death of Christ, then would there
not bee so many vnlawfull sports and
delights, and so much abuse of lawfull
Recreations as there is, and this wee

ought to do, for, Christ is all in all things.
Col. 3. 11.
            The third benefitThe third benefice. of Reconciliation,
is that all crosses, and afflictions cease
to bee curses and punishments to them
that are in Christ, and are onely corrections
& trials, because Christs death
hath taken away all, and euery part of
the curse of the law. In all crosses Christ
is to bee knowne on this manner, iudge
of them as chastisements or tryals, proceeding
not from a reuenging Iudge,
but from the hand of a louing father,
and therefore they must be taken in and
with the merit of Christ, as meanes sent
of God, to keepe vs from being dampned
with the wicked world, if otherwise,
wee take them as curses, and punishments.
And hence it followeth, that Subiection
to the crosse, or hand of God in
all crosses, is a marke of the true church
of Christ.
            The fourth benefitThe 4 benefite, of Reconciliation,
is, that Death is properly no death,
but a rest, or sleep. Death therefore is
to bee considered not as it is set forth
in the Law, but as it is altred by the

death of Christ, and when death commeth,
wee must looke vpon it through
Christs death as through a glasse, and
thus it will appeare to bee but a passing
from this life to euerlasting life.
            The second benefit of Christ,Of Christs Vertue. is the
benefit of his Vertue. The Vertue of
Christ, is the power of his Godhead,
whereby hee createth new ha
                  •
               ts in all
that beleeue in him. This Ve
                  •
               tue is
double: First, the power of his death.
Secondly, the power of his resurrection:
by the first, hee freed himselfe from the
punishment and imputation of our sins.
By the second, hee raised himselfe from
Death to Life. The benefit of Christs
diuine power is great to all the faithfull:
for, the same power which freed him
from the punishment and imputation of
our sins, setueth also to mortifie and crucifie
the corruptions of our wils, mindes
and affections. And the same which raised
him from death to life, serueth also
to raise those that belong to Christ, first
from their sinnes in this life, secondly,
from the graue, in the day of iudgement.
The knowledge of this double Vertue,

must not bee onely in the braine, 
                  〈◊〉
               
experimentall in the heart, that is, to
feele the power of Christs death killing
sinne in them, that wee might bee
able to say with Paul, Wee li
                     •
                  e not, but
Christ liueth in vs. This was one of the
most excellent things which pau
                     •
                  
                sought
for. Ph
                     •
                  . 3. 10. I have counted al things but
dung, that I may know him, & the vertue
of his resurrection. The way to know it,
is to cast off the old man, which is corrupt,
through deceiu
                     •
                  able▪ lusts. Ephe. 4. 22.
            The third benefite of Christ,Of Christs example. is the
benefite of his example, for Christ is to
be knowen, not onely as a redeemer, but
also as a patterne of all good 
                  •
               ueties, to
which we ought to conforme our liues.
Christ is to bee followed of vs, in the
practise of euery good duety, that may
concerne vs, without exception

                  〈…〉
                Our conformitie with Christ is,
first in the framing of our inward life:
secondly, in the practise of outward and
morrall dueties. Conformitie in spirituall
life, is not by doing that which Christ
did vpon the crosse, and afterward, but a
doing of the like by a certaine kinde

of imitation, and it hath foure parts.
First, a spirituall Oblation, for as hee by
prayer resigned himselfe vp to bee a sacrifice
to the iustice of his father. So we
in prayer must resigne our selues wholy
to the Seruice of God. Secondly, a
spirituall crucifying of our selues, for as
hee bare his owne Crosse, so must wee
denie our selues, and take vp all crosses
that come euery day. Againe, as hee
crucified his flesh, so must wee crucifie
the body of sinne. Gal. 5. 24. They which
are Christs, haue crucified the flesh with
the lusts and affections. He with a speare
was wounded, we with the sword of the
spirit must wound sinne to death, and
labour by experience to feele the very
death of it, and bury it. Thirdly, a spirituall
Resurrection: for as he came out
of his graue, so wee must come out of
our sinnes, as out of a most loathsome
graue, to liue to God. This worke cannot
bee done at once but by degrees, as
God shall giue grace. Fourthly, a spirituall
ascention, by a continuall eleuation
of the heart and minde to Christ, sitting
at the right hand of God. If yee be risen

with Christ, seeke those things which are
aboue. Col. 2.
            Conformitie in morall Dueties is generally,Consormitie in morall duties.
to bee holy as he is: specially to
bee like vnto him in foure Vertues, that
is, in Faith, Loue, Meeknesse, and Humilitie.
            
                In Faith,Faith. for as he when he apprehended
the wrath of God, wholy stayed himselfe
vpon the ayde, and good pleasure
of his father, euen to the last: so must
wee depend wholy on Gods mercy in
Christ, as with both hands, in peace, and
trouble, in life and pang of death. And
not let goe our hold, no though wee
feele our selues, as it were, descend to
Hell.
            
                Secondly, in Loue,Loue. for hee loued his
enimies more then himselfe. Ephes. 5. 2.
Walk in Loue, euen as Christ loued vs, and
hath giuen himselfe for vs, &c. The like
Loue ought wee to shew, by doing seruice
to all men, in the compasse of our
callings, and by being all vnto all, that
wee might do them all the good we can
both for body and soule. 1. Cor. 9. 19.
            
                Thirdly, in Meekenesse,Meeknes. 
               Mat. 11. 28.

Learne of mee, &c. His Meekenesse appeared
in bearing Patiently all In
                  •
               uries
and abuses, and suffering the curse of the
Law without grudging, submitting himselfe
to his fathers will in all things: So
must wee, and the more wee follow him
herein, the more wee are like him in his
Death and Refurrection.
            Fourthly, in his Humilitie,Humility. for being 
God, hee became man for vs, and of a
man a worme, that is troden vnder foot,
that hee might saue man. Phil. 2. 5. Let
the same mind be in you, that was in Christ,
who being equall with God, tooke vpon
him the shape of a Seruant, and humbled
himselfe euen to the death of the Crosse.
            
            Here is to be obserued, that the example
of Christ hath something more in it
then any other hath, or can haue, for it
doth not onely shew vs what wee ought
to doe, but it is both a remedie against
many vices, as also a motiue to many
good Dueties: as for example, the serious
consideration that the very Sonne of
God himselfe suffered all the wrath of
God, and curse of the Law for our sins,
is the most effectuall meanes to stir vp

our hearts to a godly sorrow for them,
to which end, euery man must bee perswaded
that hee was the man that crucified
Christ, that hee is to bee blamed
as well as Herod, Pilate, and the Iewes,
and that his sinnes were the nayles and
speares that pearced Christ. Againe, if
Christ for our sinnes shed his bloud, and
if our sinnes made him sweate drops of
bloud, why should not wee shed bitter
teares for our sinnes? Hee that findeth
himselfe so dull and hardened, that the
passion of Christ doth not humble him,
is in a lamentable case. Againe, when
thou art sicke and in paine, thinke how
light these are, being compared to the
Agony and bloudy Sweate, the Thorn
                  •
               
and Nayles which Christ endured:
when thou art wronged & abused, turne
thy eie to the crosse, consider how meekly
Christ bare it, and prayed for them
that put him to death: When thou art
tempted with Pride and Vaine-glory,
consider how for thy sinnes, Christ was
mocked, despised and condemned: when
thou art moued with anger and desire of
reuenge, think how Christ gaue himselfe

to death to saue his enimies, when they
most cruelly set themselues against him,
and these meditations being mingled
with faith, will ease thy minde.
            And hence ariseth (sayth M. Perk.)
a three-fold knowledge: first, of God:
secondly, of our neighbour: thirdly, of
our selues. Of God, for if wee would
know him to our Saluation, wee must
know him in Christ crucified, for God
of his owne nature is inuisible, and is reuealed
to vs onely in Christ, in whom
hee sets foorth his Iustice, Wisedome,
Goodnesse, and Prouidence. Heb. 1. 3.
Col. 1. 3. whatsoeuer out of Christ commeth
to vs in the name of God, is a flat
Idoll of mans braine.
            The second knowledge that ariseth
from the former meditations, is of our
neighbours, that is, those that are of gods
Church. They are to bee knowen of vs
in this manner. When wee are to do any
Duetie to them, wee are not barely to
respect their persons, but Christ crucified
in them,Acts. 9. and them in Christ, Saul,
Saul why, &c. when the poore come for
reliefe, it is Christ, that commeth to our

dores, and saith I am hungry, therefore
let our compassion bee towards them as
towards Christ.
            The third knowledge is of our selues,
and the right knowledge of our selues,
ariseth of Christ crucified, in whom and
by whom wee come to the knowledge
of fiue speciall things: First, the grieuousnesse
of our sinnes, and our miserie
in regard of them, for if wee consider
our offences in our selues, wee may bee
deceiued, because our conscience being
corrupt often erreth in giuing testimonie,
and so it seemes but little, but if sinne
bee considered in the death and passion
of Christ, whereof it was the cause, and
the vilenesse thereof measured by the
vnspeakable torments endured by him,
the least sinne will appeare to be a most
grieuous sinne indeed. Secondly, by this
wee know that men beleeuing in Christ,
are not their owne, but wholly both body
and soule belong to Christ. Thirdly,
that euery true beleeuer hath this being
from Christ, not as hee is a man, but as
hee is a new man. Fourthly, that all good
works done of vs, proceede from the

vertue, and merit of Christ crucified.
Ioh. 15. 2. Fiftly, that we owe vnto Christ
an endlesse debt, for hee was crucified
onely as our suertie and pledge, and in
the spectacle of his passion, wee must
consider our selues as the chiefe debters,
we owe him all our selues for the paines
that hee endured, to set vs most miserable
bankroupts at libertie, from Hell,
Death, and the Diuell, but 
                  〈◊〉
                when
doe wee beginne to pay it?
            Thus wee see what benefits we haue
by Christ crucified, and in what manner
wee ought to vse them, but alas, but
few haue treasured vp this knowledge
of Christ, as they ought, for herein faile
both the Papist, and the common Protestant.
The Popish Churches though
in word they confesse him, yet doe they
not know him as they ought, for in their
Sermons they vse the passion, as a means
onely to stirre vp pittie and compassion
towards Christ, and hatred of Pilate,
the Iewes, and Iudas, &c. But the seruice
of God which in that Church, stands
now in force, by the Cannons of the
Counsell of Trent, defaceth Christ crucified,

in that first the Passions of Martires
are made meritorious; secondly, the
very word and signe of the Crosse, is
their onely refuge and help; thirdly, the
Virgine Mary is made the Queene of
heauen, and a mother of Mercy, who
may commaund her Sonne; fourthly,
they giue religious adoration to dumbe
stocks, & Crucifixes made by the hands
of men. The common Protestant also
commeth short, for three causes, for first
though in Word they confesse him
to bee a Sauiour, that hath redeemed
them, yet indeede they make him a patron
of their sinnes: Secondly, they take
knowledge of his merit, but little regard
the vertue of his death, and resurrection,
in mortifying of their sinfull lusts and
affections: thirdly, they vsually content
themselues generally and confusedly to
know Christ to be their redeemer, neuer
once seeking in euery perticuler estate
of life, and blessing of God, to feele the
benefit of his passion. What is the cause
of all the securitie in the world, and that
men are not touched for their sins? surely
because they did neuer yet seriouslie

consider that Christ in the Garden, lay
groueling vpon the earth, sweating of
bloud, &c. for their offences. Againe
oppressours of the poore, neuer knew
that their sinnes drew out the hart bloud
of Christ. Againe proud persons puffed
vp with strange atire, neuer consider
that Christ was not crucified in gay atire,
but naked, that hee might beare
the whole shame and curse of the Law
for vs. These and such like, whatsoeuer
they say in word, if we respect the tenor
of their liues, are flat enimies of the crosse
of Christ, and tread his precious bloud
vnder their feete. So farre Perkins.
            
            But if thou wilt haue the Treasures
of Christ in heauen, thus thou must
learne to know and feele Christ crucified,
and the benefits of his Merit, Vertue
and Example, and thus must thou
come to the knowledge of God, of thy
neighbour, and of thy selfe, in Christ
crucified, euen whiles thou art here vpon
earth; which feeling knowledge is a sauing
knowledge, euen an excellent portion
of heauenly Treasure, imparted to
the true Christian in this life, and is a

pledge of endlesse and infinite treasure
prouided for him in the life to come, and
so much for the wayes and meanes of
laying vp treasute in heauen, which are
by giuing to the poore Members of
Christ, by suffering patiently for the
truth of Christ, and by growing in the
sauing knowledge of Christ crucified.
            In laying vp Treasure after this sort,
we shal prooue good Alcumists. An Alcumist
they say can turne lead into gold,
or out of Lead or other mettals extract
Golde, which many haue practised to
their vtter vndoing. The Pope is the
cunningest Alcumist it is thought that
the world hath, for hee can of a pound
of Lead, make an hundred pound of
Gold, for all his Buls and Pardons are
sealed with lead, but what fooles are they
that turne their Gold into Lead, or what
calues rather that buy his Buls so deare?
But lay vp Treasure as hath beene shewed
thee before,A true Christian a good Alcumist. and thou shalt turne
earth into heauen, corruption into incorruption,
Gold into godlinesse which is
great gaine, labour into rest, sorrow into
ioy, pouertie into riches, and thy

cottage into a kingdome, euen the kingdome
of heauen.
            Now followeth the reasons of Christs
Commandement,Verse. 21. The secōd part containing the reason of the Commandement. 
               For where your Treasure
is there will your heart bee also. A
Reason of great force as if hee should
say, for this cause chiefly you ought to
lay vp your treasure in heauen, that God
may haue your heart, which cannot bee
vnlesse you lay vp your Treasure in
heauen, for our hearts will bee where
wholy their Treasure is. Here wee are
taught, that no man can loue the Lord
with his heart, that seeketh and placeth
his happinesse in earthly things,
but onely those whose ioy and felicitie
is in heauen, and the heauenly graces of
the Lord Iesus Christ. Worldlings
make no doubt but that they may, and
doe serue God, and loue God with their
heart, yea, and haue as good 
                  •
                hart to
God as any whatsoeuer, though they
follow the world, & heare not sermons,
although they keepe not the Sabboth
so precisely as others do, which will not
worke or play then, though they neuer
meddle with the Scriptures, but bee

vtterly ignorant of the wayes and will
of God. But Christ here sheweth that
they are al deceiued, by a general principle
that neuer faileth. Wher the treasure
is there will be the hart, and wher the hart
is, there is the Treasure of the hart, wherupon
it followeth that they doe wholy
renounce heauen, that do seeke for happinesse
here below, and if they set their
harts vpon heauenly things, it cannot be
that they should esteeme of them no
better, or frequent them no oftner, then
they doe. The Philosophers haue most
exactly (so much as the Star-light of nature
would giue them leaue) disputed of
the happines or chiefe wel-fare of man.Summū Bonum.
And no meruaile, for who doth not desire
to bee happy, and to win that hold,
are all mens Sences, and Wits mustred
and marshalled, because it is the onely
true treasure, For where the Treasure is,
there will the hart be, but most men doe
mistake the matter, while they seeke for
happinesse in the flesh, which is not to
be found but in the spirit, & while they
confesse that it is in God, yet runne after
the Diuell for it. When some seeke for

it in Honour, Ambition is made generall
of the field, and doth commaund the
minde: while others seeke it in worldly
profite, Couetousnesse doth inuade the
soule, taking vp euery roome for worldly
desires, and noysome lusts, which doe
eat out the heart with cares, and drowne
men in perdition: others seeking for it in
carnall pleasure and sensualitie, cry one
to another, come let vs eate and drinck,
and bee merry, for to morrow wee shall
dye: and in the meane time the brute
beast in that regard is more happy then
such Epicures, for that more freely, without
any shame or feare hee enioyeth the
pleasure of carnall sensualitie, then they
doe.
            But if we were once soundly perswaded
of our happines in heauen, it would
bee an easie matter to tread the World
vnder foote, and to haue our mindes
mounted vp to heauen. If the loue of
God bee our Treasure, and through the
spectacles of a liuely faith, wee can read
our names regestred in the booke of life,
and descry our happinesse to be hidden
in Christ; if the spirit of Adoption doth

certifie our spirits that God is our Father,
and wee are his children, and with
the same certificate shall deliuer vs a
discharge against sinne, death and hell,
then will our harts feede vpon heauenly
meditations, and our soules hunger and
thirst after righteousnesse, wee will then
account all but dung, that wee might
winne the Lord Iesus Christ. And then
as the Hart brayeth for the riuers of
water, so will our soules long for the
presence of the Lord: And then the
Word of God will bee the ioy of our
harts, and wee will desire to bee dissolued;
and to bee with Christ, for where
the Treasure is, there will the hart bee
also: And vntill then wee shall sauour
nothing but earthly vanities. Therefore
when S. Paul would draw the faithfull
to the studie of a heauenly life, he doth
propound Christ vnto them, in whom
onely all true felicitie is to bee sought,
If yee bee risen with Christ (saith hee)
set your minds on things aboue,
               Col. 3. 1. 2. 
               and not on
things which are below, as if hee should
haue said, it is an absurd and base thing
for christians to haue their mindes grubling

on the earth, whose Treasure is hid
in heauen, and that is his reason, for
yee are dead (saith hee) and your life is
hid with Christ in God.
               Verse. 3.
            
            Hence we may further learne, in what
a miserable case they are, whose harts
are set vpon earthly things, which are
subiect to Mothes, and Theeues, Rust▪
and other such manifold mischiefes. A
cousening match it is of the diuels owne
making, hee is subtill, and sheweth men
the world and the glory of it, the Court
and the brauery of it, Honour and the
fame of it, iniquitie and the profit of it,
sinne and the pleasure of it, as it were
his daughters with their dowrie. On the
other side, wee are simple and beleeue
him, presently our hart is a match, for
them, and happy hee thincks himselfe
that can get one of them, and to breake
it off is a hard matter. Their affections
are fixed vpon a liking, they haue taken,
and although God himselfe forbid the
banes, yet it is to no purpose, for they
haue made a vowe, they haue spoken
the word, and their harts are setled, and
there is no remouing of them. And thus

men doe runne despe
                  •
               ately vpon their
owne ruine, like the fool
                  •
                that goeth
laughing to the stocks, and all for want
of due consideration, for if wee did but
consider:Foure things to be considered in this match first the basenesse: secondly,
the wretchednesse: thirdly, the vanitie:
and lastly, the daunger of this foolish
match, wee would not set our harts vppon
any thing that is in this world.
            
               How base a Worldling is.
               HOw base and vile a thing for a christian
heart to be wedded to worldly
things,
                     
                        •
                     . Basenesse may appeare by this, that man
at the first, was created in innocency &
holines, and in Christ is restored to the
same againe, of all creatures hee is now
the most noble, crowned with glory and
honour, but a little inferiour to the Angels,
hauing all things subiect vnto him,
and all things are to doe him seruice, as
the Angels to guard him, the Sonne of
God to ransome him, the word of God
to instruct him, the spirit of God to guid
him, the children of God to visite him,
the graces of God to adorne him, and

                  
                     •
                  he Kingdome of God to enrich him.
And this is the estate of a Christian.
Now for him that is so honourably descended,
so highly aduanced, so dearely
redeemed, and so mightely enriched, to
haue his hart closed vp in some old wal,
or locked vp in an iron Chest, or diging
in the ground, like a Swine or Mole,
or hunting after Vaine-glory, as after a
feather, or wedded to vaine delights, or
bathing in filthy pleasure, cannot bee
iudged but for a very base thing, and
matter of great indignitie.
               It is not for a Noble mans sonne to
addict himselfe to the conditions of the
vulgar sort, nor for a heroicall spirit, or
man of great place, to besot himselfe in
Ale-house pastimes: nor for honest persons,
to ioy in the company of filthy
packs: neither is it for a Christian mind,
who is truely noble, and altogether heauenly,
to set his hart vpon earthly things,
which at the best are but vanitie and vexation
of spirit. Therefore let Christians
say as the Apostle saith:1. Cor. 13. 11 
                  When I was 
                        •
                     
childe I spake as a childe, I vnderstood as
a childe, I thought as a childe: but when

I became a man, I put away childish
things: so when I was an earthly worldling▪
I spake as a worldling, I vnderstood
as a worldling, I studied as a worldling,
worldly things onely, but when I
became a right Christian indeed, I put
away worldlinesse, and set my heart vppon
Treasure that is in heauen.
               And therefore as Nehemiah (when
he considered the place of Magistracie
and rule wherein hee was) said, Should,
should,
                  Nehe. 6. 11. 
                  a man as I flye? so thou wilt say
that art a true Christian, and considerest
thy excellent calling, and what thou
are borne againe vnto by grace, should
such a man as I, bee an earth-worme?
and thus wee see how the dignitie of a
Christian, sheweth how base a thing it
is, to set the heart vpon earthly vanities,
where Moths fret, Rust eate, & Theeues
dig through and steale.
            
            
               How miserable a Worldling is.
               AS nothing is more base and sordid,
so nothing is more miserable then to
set the heart vpon earthly things, for that

is to subiect the Prince to the Subiect,
the Maister to the Seruant, or a Tyrant
rather, who commaundeth both all the
sences of the body, and all the powers
of the soule without any rest at all.Prouerbs. 
                  Salomon
saith, it is intollerable for a seruant
to beare rule, if intollerable then miserable
and much to bee pittied. Paul saith:
They that will bee rich fall into temptations
and snares,
                  1. Tim. 6. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  and into many noysome and
foolish lusts, which drowne men in perdition
and destruction. Money is not vnfitly
resembled in an Emblem by some to a
Queene aduanced on a Chariot, which
is drawne by a couple that represent the
golden fooles of the world, Periculum
& Pauor, Perill and Feare: the first
draweth the Chariot in a coller stickt
full o
                     •
                   Daggers with the points inward,
and going bare footed vpon sharpe
thornes: the other draweth with a sad
countenance, and a gnawing conscience,
still casting his eye backward to see who
is neare, the attendants of this Golden
Queene are bloudy Murther, spoyling
Theft, frantick Folly, and hart gnawing
Enuy, all couered with her vaile. The

speach that she is receiued with is this
following.
               
                  Te bijugi inuectam curru exitiale periclum
                  Sollicitus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pauor Regina pecunia ducunt.
                  At quia stultitiam, furtum, caedes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cruent as
                  Velas, cunctorum hinc in te spes firma recumbit.
               
               In English thus:

                     Both danger deepe and gastly feare are yokt
                     to draw thy Chariot O golden Queene:
                     For fooles, & theeues, & bloudy murdring mates,
                     thou with thy vaile dost hide from being seene,
                     For which sole cause the harts and hopes of all
                     In thee reposde haue alwayes firmely beene.
                  
               
               This is true, yet of greater authoritie
is that of the Apostle, to the same effect,
The desire of money is the root of all euill,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 6. 10.
                  which while some haue lusted after, they
erred from the faith, & pearced themselues
through with many sorrowes, to shew that
a man cannot set his heart vpon transitorie
things, except hee will bee a murtherer
of his owne soule, and liue in continuall
sorrow, for earthly treasures and

pleasures are lined and stuffed with sorrowes,
not a few but many, not easie but
sharp and pearcing, not a little way, but
quite through to the very hart. Lo, thus
is the worldling tormented on euery
side, like one rolled in a barrell of nailes.
Sathan sheweth onely the glory of the
world, but Paul the sorrowes of the
world; Sathan the hony, but Paul the
sting; Sathan the honor, Paul the dishonour,
to teach vs what course wee must
take to auoid, or to make void this miserable
match. What greater misery then
to haue, and bee neuer satisfied? Crescit
amor nummi, &c. The desire of money
encreaseth, as the heape encreaseth. Here
is no end of gathering, as in the Dropsie
there is no end of drinking, because
by continuall drinking the thirst is more
kindled, but no whit quench
                     •
                  d.
            
            
               How vaine a worldling is.
               AS the worldling is most base and miserable,
so nothing is more vaine, for
what greater vanitie then to bee addict
                  
                     •
                  d
or deuoted to those things which

cannot performe that which is expected
from them? which are of so short continuance,
which are so little while possessed,
& are no mans lesse then his that
gathereth them: such are all earthlie
things, and hee that lusteth after them,
to set his hart vpon them, is like those
vaine fooles that lust to eate of painted
grapes; or rather like the rich foole in
the Gospell, who hauing enlarged his
Barnes, cryeth out, like one in a dreame,
and bids his soule now take rest (for indeed
hee had found but little rest before)
and his reason is, because hee hath now
goods inough for many yeers, but as he
was thus dreaming of many yeeres goods
and rest, a voice comes and awakes him
and tels him plainly that he doth vtterly
mistake the matter,Luk. 12. 
                  Thou foole (saith
hee) this night shall they fetch away thy
Soule, and then whose goods shall those
be that thou hast gathered? So is it (saith
Christ) with him that gathereth riches
to himselfe, and is not rich in God. This
vanitie is well set out by the holy Ghost,
when Salomon saith,Eccle. 5. 12 
                  there is an euill sicknesse,
namely, 
                        •
                     iches reserued to the hurt of

their owners, and these riches perish by
euill trauaile. And this is also an euill sicknesse
(saith the man of experience) that
in all points as hee came,
                  15 
                  so shall hee goe, and
what profit hath hee that he hath trauailed
for the winde?
                  Cap. 6. 1. 
                  I haue also seene a man
(saith he) to whom God hath giuen riches,
and treasures, and honour, and he wanteth
nothing for his soule of all that he desireth,
but God giueth not power to eate thereof,
this is vanitie and vexation of spi
                        •
                     it.
               
               As this vanitie is a vexation to the
spirit of man, so is it no lesse grieuous to
the spirit of God, for that contrary to the
minde of our heauenly father, we bestow
our loue so fondly,A dishonour to God. vpon that which cannot
help vs. The commandement saith,
wee must honour our parents; now amongst
other things tending to the honour
of our earthly parents, this is not
the least, for a child to require the consent
of his parents in bestowing of himselfe
in marriage; and to marrie against
their mindes, especially when there is
reason to the contrary, cannot bee but a
great dishonour offred to our parents.
But what earthly parents haue so great

interest in their children, as God hath in
vs? what childe oweth such dutie to his
earthly parents, as wee owe to God?
If I be your father (saith the Lord) where
is my honour?
                  
                     
                        •
                     al▪ 1. 6. as if hee had said, if you
depend vpon me for your prouision, and
looke for my blessing, how is it that you
set your harts vpon my creatures, & not
vpon mee, knowing that my minde is so
much against such foolish bestowing
of your selues? as though I could not or
would not fill your harts with as much
ioy and gladnesse, as my creatures can
doe, and more too. Therefore saith Paul
to Timothy, Charge them that are rich in
this world,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 6. 
                  that they bee not high minded,
                  17
                  and that they trust not in vncertaine riches,
but in the liuing God.
               
            
            
               How dangerous worldliness is to the Soule.
               THere is no truer Nobilitie, then to be
a citizen of the heauenly Ierusalem,
sonne and heire to the most high, all
which is defaced and abolished, if the
hart lie buried in earthly things. There

is no sounder ioy, then the ioy of the
holy ghost, which is a fruit of Faith, &
is grounded on the loue of God, but this
cannot bee relished or tasted by him,
whose hart doth cleaue to this miserable
bondage of worldly cares. There are no
such goods as the sanctifying graces of
the holy ghost, which onely make a
man truely happy, as to cleaue vnto God
by faith, to loue the Lord from the hart,
to worship him in spirit and truth, and
to bee wholly vnited vnto him. But far
is hee from these things, whose hart is
set vpon earthly goods:Eze. 33. 31 At the Sermon,
his minde runneth after his couetousnesse,
and with his mouth hee maketh
iests, both of the doctrine and Doctor,
because hee liketh neither the one nor
the other; like the Pharises which mocked
Christ when hee spake against couetousnesse,Luk. 16. 14
because themselues were couetous.
When the Sermon is done, they
forget al, because their harts wer choked
with the thorny cares of the world: if
they fall to reporting of the Sermon, it
is with additions and detractions, mistakings
and falsify cations, most strange

to heare, as if the Preacher had ben mad,
or drunke, or in some dreame, when he
spake. Thus the word of life and grace,
which is a sweet sauour of life, vnto life
eternall, to the regenerate and spirituall
minde, yeeldeth a most fearefull sauour
of death, vnto death euerlasting, to the
carnall & worldly minded man. Seeing
therefore to bestow the hart & affection
vpon earthly things, is proued to be
a match so base, and vnbeseeming the
dignitie of a Christian, so wretched and
miserable, so vaine and deceiptfull, so
dishonourable to God, and preiudiciall
to our owne saluation, let vs labour by
earnest prayer and holy meditation, to
haue our mindes purged from this euill
sicknesse of worldly loue, and neuer giue
the Lord any rest, vntill by zealous
prayer wee haue obtained of his diuine
Maiestie the wings of a liuely Faith,
whereby our heauie harts, and dull spirits
may bee mounted vp aloft, to seeke
for our Treasure in heauen, and then
indeed shall wee bee heauenly minded,
for where the Treasure is, there will the
hart bee also▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               How to iudge by the heart whether 
                     •
                  
mans Treasure be in heauen or no.
               THere be certaine signes in the hart,
whereby a man may iudge of his
estate to come, as there be in the skie, to
know what weather shall happen:Mat. 16. 3 when
the skie is red in the Euening, men say,
faire weather: when it is red & lowring
in the morning, it is a signe of foule weather:Luk 12. 5
                        •
                     
                  
when a cloud riseth out of the
West, they say, a shower is comming:
when the South-winde bloweth, a signe
of heat. By obseruing how Ionathan shot
his arrows, Dauid knew how Saul stood
affected towards him: by the holding
out of the golden Scepter, Hester knew
shee was in the Kings fauour: by the
budding of the Trees wee know that
Summer is come: by the sound of the
Vessell the emptinesse or fulnes thereof
is perceiued: by the beating of the
pulses, the distemperature of the body
is discerned. And by the affections of
the heart, which are the pulses of the
soule, the hearts Treasure is discouered,

and where it lyeth, for God that hath
giuen men signes to know the state of
the body, the alteration of weather, and
the mindes of other men, hath also giuen
certaine notes and signes to discerne the
state of the Soule by. Yea, Christ doth
condemne them for Hypocrites, which
will not iudge of themselues, as well as
of other things. Hipocrites (saith hee)
Yee can discerne the face of the Earth,
                  Luke. 12. 56. 57.
                  and of the Skie, but why discerne yee not
this time? yea, and why iudge yee not of
your selues what is right?
               
               But how may that be (will some say)
or how may a man know by the affections
of the heart, where the hearts treasure
is? Then mark the way of wisdome,
and learne to bee wise, when the Lord
Iesus heard one answeare discreetely,
he said vnto him,Mar 12. 34 
                  Thou art not farre from
the kingdome of God, to shew that discreet
answeres in matters of religion are signes
of grace. When Zacheus did with heart
obey Christ, and with reuerence receiue
Christ, and in charitie releiue Christ, &
in conscience of his wrongs done, was
ready to restore where hee had wrongfully

receiued, the Lord Iesus said vnto
him,Luk. 19. 
                  This day Saluation is come into thy
house: to shew that true conuersion is a
certaine signe of Life and Saluation.Psa. 41. 11 
                  By
this I know (saith Dauid) that thou louest
mee O Lord, because my enimies doe not
triumph ouer mee: to shew that euen enimies
are for signes & tokens of gods
fauour.Ioh. 13. 34 
                  By this shall all men know that yee
are my Disciples (saith our sauiour Christ)

                     
                        •
                     f yee loue one another: to shew that
christian loue is for a signe of gods loue,
but not a cause thereof as Papists teach.
And by the heart a man may know whether
his part be in the booke of life, and
whether his soule shall bee bound vp in
the bundell of the righteous or no: For
where the treasure is, there will th
                        •
                      heart
bee also: that is, there will be the ioy and
delight of the heart, the loue and de
                     •
                  ire
of the heart, the care and longing of the
heart, for the heart in this place is put
for the affections of the heart or soule.
               If then thou wouldest know whether
thy Treasure bee in heauen or hell: see
where thy heart doth most 
                     •
                  aunt, and
whereabout it is most employed. If

Christ be the man & the matter whom
thy soule loueth,
                     
                        •
                     omfortable 
                        〈◊〉
                     . if his Gospell bee the
ioy of thy soule, & his commandements
thy harts delight; if for loue of his name,
and zeale to his glory, thou fearest more
to offend him then all the world besides,
and art for his sake, content to endure
with patience all the Tribulations
& crosses that the hands of wicked men
can loade vpon thy backe; if thou canst
finde thy heart resolued to drink of his
cup, and to bee baptised with his Baptisme;
& if thou bee bent to stand more
zealously for his glory, then for thy own
life; and if thy heart bee refreshed, when
thou thinkest on his death, and art hartely
desirous of his comming to Iudgement:
then happy and blessed art thou,
the king of kings hath put forth his golden
Scepter vnto thee, thou art in his
fauour, the fruitfull Tree of Grace hath
budded in thy hart, the Summer time of
thy refreshing is approching, and the
Lord delighteth in the fruit of thy faith:
thy treasure is in heauen, thy prouision
is gone before, & thou shalt follow after,
yea more, if thy heart doth mourne and

grieue for thy owne vntowardnesse, and
the sinnes of other men, thou art marked
by Gods owne Secretary, his sauing
Angell hath set thee apart,Ez
                        •
                     ch. 9▪ 4 that the destoyers

                     •
                   may not meddle with thee, if
they meete thee in their way. And as
Christ said to Nathaniel:
                  Ioh. 1. 50. 
                  Dost thou beleue
because I said I saw thee vnder the figge
Tree? thou shalt see greater things then
these: Soe do you beleeue because I say,
by the hart you shal know whether your
treasure be in heauen? you shall see greater
things then yet you doe, for now wee
see but in part, and we know but in part;
but hereafter wee shall know as wee are
knowne: in the meane time take these
things as the first fruites of the spirit,
which are but th
                     •
                   least part of the haruest,
or as an earnest penny in assurance
of millions not to bee numbred, for certainly,
where the hart is, there is the treasure,
but how great a treasure,1. Cor. 2. 9 
                  no eye hath
seene, nor eare hath heard, nor tongue can
expresse, nor hart can conceiu
                        •
                     .
               
               On the other side, if thy hart hath no
ioy in the gospell of Christ, nor delight
in the commandements of God, if thou

haue no zeale for the glory of God, no
desire to pray, nor longing for the coming
of Christ, then feare, for where thy
treasure is, there will thy heart be also.
If thou hast more felicitie in worldly
vanities, then in heauenly vertues, if
vaine company bee more welcome vnto
thee, then such as feare the Lord, if thy
study be onely how to liue heere, & thy
cares and communications be altogether

                     •
                  arthly and prophane, then suspect thy
estate not to bee good, and know that
thy hollow sound bewrayeth an emptie
vessell, thy figge tree hath nothing but
leaues, all thy Termes are but vacations,
and as for treasure in heauen thou hast
none, for they that are occupiers there,
haue their harts wholly employed there,
and as they looke for great aboundance
when they come thether, so they
finde an earnest thereof in their harts
heere, al
                     •
                   is holy, and heauenly, comfortable
and happie, for righteousnesse and
truth hath looked downe from heauen
vpon them, and mercy and peace haue
embraced each other in their soules, and
heauen holding their treasure doth also

hale and draw their harts thither likewise.
               Now then let vs see how our harts stand
affected, for there is a sure witnesse and
pledge eyther of Hell or of Heauen.
               But how shall wee know whether our
hearts be in heauen, and Gods holy spirit
be in our hearts? Surely a needfull question;
for euery one wil say as the yong man
in the Gospel,Mat 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  all these things I haue obserued
from my youth, and that he loueth God
aboue all, yea hee would be sorry else, but
the Prophet Ieremie saith,Ier. 17. 9. that the heart
is deceiptfull & wicked aboue all things, who
can know it? and therefore to be suspected
& examined as Dauid aduised:Psal. 4. Examine
your hearts vpon your beds, euen secretly
before God, and free from all lets and encombrances:
Wouldest thou then know
thy heart, examine all her attendants, and
vnder officers wherabout they are chiefly
employed, as thy Tongue, thy Eares, thy
Eyes, thy hands and feet;Mat. 12. 35 for out of the abundance
of the hart the mouth speaketh,
that is, the tongue will shew how the hart
is affected,Psal. 45. 1 
                  my hart is enditing of a good matter
(saith the Psalmist) and presently followeth,
my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
                  
Againe in another place,
                     
                        •
                     sal. 39. 2. 
                  My hart was
hot within me and I spake with my tongue.
A good man (saith our Sauiour Christ) out
of the good treasure of his hart bringeth forth
good things.
                  lat▪ 12. 35 If there be abundance of loue
to God, the tongue will still bee speaking
in commendation of his praises, and setting
forth his greatnes, his goodnes, his iustice,
his holines, his wisdome and mercy,
&c.Can. 1. 1. as the Church in the Canticles, Oh let
him kisse me with the kisses of his mouth, for
thy loue is better then wine, that is, better
then all pleasant and profitable things. If
there bee abundance of ioy and delight
in the commandements of God,Ps. 119. 13 thy lips
will declare the Iudgements of his mouth;
If there be abundance of feare to offend
against God, or the Godly, thou wilt set a
watch before thy mouth, and thy feet shall
carry thee speedely from euill company;
If there be abundance of zeale in thy hart;
then will thy tongue be enflamed with a
holy fire for the truth; If thy hart doth abound
with desire and longing for the
presence of the Lord, then thou wilt still
be wishing,Psal. 42. 1. and striuing to visit his house
here, and to meete him in the clouds. In a

word, the whole course of a mans life, his
speach, his countenance, his company, his
exercises, his watchfulnesse, his habite, his
dyet, his building, his purchasing, his children,
his seruants, his buying & 
                     •
                  elling, his
trading & sporting all wil bewray of what
country hee is, and whither his hart is trauailing,
as Iehu was knowne by his marching.
Wel may he vse the world for necessities
sake, but it shall be as though he vsed
it not, like an In to bait in▪ but not to abide
in: he may see therin, and salute those that
passe by, but the hart still holdeth on his
course to his heauenly country, and saith
as Christ said in the gospel, when he knew
that his enimies were not far off, Arise, let
vs goe hence, here is no abiding for vs, On
the contrary, if couetousnes; ambition, vncleane
lusts, pride, en
                     •
                  ie, mallice, profanenes,
or the like, doe abound in thy hart, thy
tongue, thy countenance, thy company, &
all will bewray it. Out of the mouth will
flie vnsauery Iests, thy mind will run like a
wilde horse vp and downe in the world.
When Christ is deuiding of heauenly doctrine,
then commeth the worldling and
interrupteth him,Luk. 12. 13 with Maister deuide the

inheritance between me & my brother. And
as Christ himselfe by scribling on the
ground,oh. 8. 6. shewed that hee did not regard
what the malicious Iewes said, when they
came to accuse the adultresse woman: so
at the table, when grace is in saying, or at
the temple in the holy exercises of religion;
the worldlings minde being not on
those things, wil bewray the same euen by
the very motions of their fingers, or by
their looking about vpon some other thing
               But hipocrits will make as great a shew
as any,Obiect. and spin a very fine thred, saying
also as that yong bragger in the Gospell,
willing to iustifie himselfe, all this haue we
done.
                  Answere. And so they wil, and may in pollicy,
but not in true pietie; from the braine perhaps,
but not from the heart; of the abundance
of braine, that is, wittie and cunning
inuention: the tongue of the hipocrit speaketh
good things, and keepeth good company,
and frequenteth the word & Sacraments,
not of loue, nor zeale, nor desire
to glorifie God, for that is the store of a
good heart, which hee wanteth, but onely
like a crafty Fox, and cunning pollitician,

                     •
                  asteth in his braine which way to bring

his purpose to passe, & so serueth the time
that the time may serue his turne. And
therfore as occasion serueth, hee is a right
temporizer, commending with his tongue
that which hee condemneth in his heart,
like the diuell who confessed Iesus Christ
to be the son of God, whom he loued not:
but his heart in the meane time frameth
mischiefe and deceipt, a de
                     ••
                   it is for infernall
furies, and a cage of vncleane birds; it
delighteth in vain exercises, & vaine company,
and is fraught like a ship with vile
thoughts, he is a man of Beliall that hath
lewde things in his heart, and when time,
company, and occasion serue, wil of this abundance,
both speak &do lewdly. Two
notable examples of such ware, doth the
scripture afford vs, the one is in the harlo
                     •
                  
pleading before king Salomon: the other is
in Herod.
                  1. King. 3▪
                   The holy story saith, two har
                     •
                  ots
pleaded hard, aswell to cleare themselues
of the death of that childe, that was ouerlaid,
as to iustifie the claim that was made
by each of them to the suruiuing child: wel
to decide the controuersie about the liuing
child, the king calleth for a sword, & commandeth
it to be cut in peece
                     •
                  , & diuided

betweene them, knowing right well by the
wisedome which God had giuen him, how
nature would worke in the true mother.
The dissembling monster thinking that
the King had ment as he said, said as hee
said, & yet no otherwise then as she would
haue had it: the other from the aboundance
of naturall affection was content
ra
                     •
                  her to loose her interest in her owne
childe, then that the poore infant should
innocently be depriued of his life: So hipocrites,
and true professours make both
one shew and plead both for the truth, as
they would make the world beleeue, but
vpon occasions offered in time and place,
the difference will easily appeare.
               The other example is of Herods dealing
towards the Wise men▪ which came from
the East they came in simplicity of heart,
shewing plainly the end of their comming
and confessing boldly that they had seene
Christs star in the East▪ but Herod like a
Foxe very polliti
                     •
                  ely beareth a part in
their song, but harbouring at the same instant
a bloudy Tragedy in his hart, which
hee meant to haue acted so soone as hee
should learn wher Christ was borne. The

like dissembling is to be found in another
Herod, & Herodias, in Mat. 14. 2.Mat. 14 
                  Iohn the
Baptist was great with the multitude, therfore
Herod wil seeme to heare him gladly,
yea to reu
                     •
                  rence & commend his doctrin,
this was in Herods head, but let Iohn tell
him of his perticular sinne, (as he did) and
then it will appeare what is in his hart, not
Iohn but Herodias, not holines but whoredome,
& that shall this busie controller (as
the world speaks of Preachers) well know
to, for to prison he must goe, & were it not
for feare of the multitude hee should dye
too. Herodias is as cunning as Herod, for so
long as the King doth reuerence Iohn
Baptist, she will not seeme to mislike him
greatly, especially before the King, yet she
hath a quarrell against him, & in her hart
she wisheth his head off, onely she watcheth
a fit time, which fell out iust vpon his
birthday, solemnized with all riot and excesse,
she sends in a wanton Damosell, instructed
& prepared before with a harlots
impudent face, to daunce before the King
and his company; the profane hipocrite is
so far pleased with her sport, that he (forgetting
himself, his honor, & the vnstinted

appetite of a shameles woman (whose hart
is subtill, & her waies so moueable and intricate
that they cannot bee knowen) bids
hir aske but what she wil, & it shalbe giuen
her, as the manner of all hipocrites is, for
though Herod heard Iohn gladly, & shewed
some kinde countenance to him for the
time, yet the wicked & lasciuious works of
the flesh, do please him better then all the
holy doctrines and Se
                     •
                  mons that Iohn
taught, as appeareth by his large offer. For
though he heard Iohn baptist, yet was he
neuer 
                     •
                  o f
                     •
                  ee ha
                     •
                  ted towards him, as hee
was now to a tripping Minion, but after
the manner of courting gallants, and Protestants
at large, who will perhaps sometime
inuite the Preacher to a dinner, and
tell him that he is a good man, & doth wel
to tell men of their faults, and if we do not
follow your sayings, and the good counsel
                     •
                  
(say they) it is worse for vs▪ & so with a cap
and a gentle congie they bid him farewel.
But Herodias his sweet hart, shall haue his
hart▪ and the golden Misers, and pleasant
companions shall please them so, that nothing
shal be thought too deere for them.
Well now is the time, to know both their

harts, for these pleasing placeboes, with
their tripping trulles, care not a straw for
any preaching, but in their harts wish all
(except their mealy mouthd Prophets
which neuer goe without a slickstone in
their pocket) hangd out of the way. And
till sit time serueth, they can daunce after
times pipe, but if time change his note,
they will also change their coppy, and will
make better Christians then euer. Herod
was to daunce after their pipe (if Gods
grace be not the more abounding) euen to
the bitter perfecuting and disgracing of
Gods poore Ministers and seruants, yea
they haue the skill to watch the time at a
feast, at a dauncing reuell, or a gossips
meeting, to winne their harts de
                     •
                  ire, and
make better then Herod, to doe that they
will be sorry for afterward. Therefore let
men take heed, that they be not deceiued
by such hipocrites, and that they deceiue
not themselues, whiles they professe religion
from the head, and not from the hart.
               But some will say,Obiect. a man may be religious
in hart, and yet fall away from grace,
and so come to no assurance of treasure in
heauen, because it is said in the Gospell,

that some receiued the word with ioy,Mat. 13. 20 and
yet fel away: now ioy is an affection of the
hart; and ioy in the word is a fruite of the
spirit.Gal. 5. 22. 
                  Gal. 5. therfore it seemeth y• though
a man hath a religious heart, yet hee may
fall away, & consequently one cannot tell
by his heart whether he hath any treasure
in heauen or no.
               But that ioy that S. Matthew speakes
of,Answere. is rather a liking or wondring at the
heauenly doctrine, as at some strange and
excellent thing, then any sound or setled
reioycing in God who speaketh in his
word And ioy is to be distinguished, for
it is eyther carnall and temporary, or spirituall
and permanent. A carnall man reioyceth
many times at a Sermon, for the
preachers rare inuention, or his varietie of
phrases, or the sharpnes of his wit, or the
artificiall conuaiance of the matter, or his
excellent gift of vtterance and boldnes, or
because hee heard some touched that hee
was not friends withall, but not for the
simplicitie and euidence of the truth; nor
for any reformation that he felt wrought
in himselfe; nor for any hatred of sinne; or
loue of righteusnes, that the word wrought

in him; for commonly such kinde of reioycers
or admirers of men, goe presently
from the Sermon with the dog to eat vp
their vomit, and Swine-like to tumble in
their mire again. Such were many of Iohns
auditours, such were many of Christs auditors,
such were most of Ezechiels auditours:
and such are too many of our auditours,
which flock at the first to a man
for nouelties sake, to see whether they
shall be clawed with a curry-combe▪ or
smoothed with a slik-stone. Such are they
that haue the word of God in respect of
persons: and such are those fantasticks, that
will buy a booke onely for the merry conceits,
that are in it, and not for the matter▪
like children which ioy in a booke with a
faire couer, and reioyce more at the gaies
or gawdy letters, then any thing else in the
booke▪ be it neuer so good. The spirituall
man reioyceth, for that God hath found
out his sinne, and feeleth the hand of God
reforming his heart; he reioyceth for that
he perceiueth Sathan dispossessed and his
life amended, his soule hee findeth humbled,
and his affections bridled, himselfe
won to God and his familie with him, and

for this hee reioyceth like the conuerted
Iaylor,Act. 16. 34 who reioyced for that he and all
his houshold beleeued in God.
               But now the afflicted soule is to be satisfied
who complaineth with the Spouse
of Christ in the Canticles,
                  Obiect. Cōscience afflicted. that shee hath
sought him whom her soule loueth,
                  Cant. 5. 1. 
                  euen by
night in her bed she hath sought him, but she
cannot finde him, that is, the conscience afflicted
with the wounds of sin, cannot find
in her hart any assurance of Gods fauour,
in the remission of her sinnes.
               But for answere we say,Answere. that there is an
earnest penny & pawne of Gods loue in
that hart, though as it were, sealed vp in a
bag, and in time it shall be opened, and
perceiued: for first, the very seeking after
the loue of God is a speciall fauour of
God, and an euident token that the spirit
of God is there, for that proceedeth not
of flesh and bloud,Psal. 27. 8. 
                  Seeke yee my face (saith
the Lord) my hart answered (saith Dauid)
thy fa
                        •
                     e will I seeke, hee doth not say, thy
face will I finde, but seeke, to shew that
seeking of gods fauour is a grace of God,
as well as finding of God
                     •
                   fauour, Seeke
and yee shall find (saith Christ) to shew thatMatth. 5.
                  
finding comes after seeking. Seek the Lord
(saith Esay) while he may be fouud,
                  Esa. 55. 
                  and call
vpon him while he is nigh at hand: to shew
that God is sought for by inuocation or
calling vpon his name, long before hee is
found, or felt gracious vnto vs, but euen
then he is nigh at hand, or else we could
not call vpon him: for it is euen his spirit
that sends forth our prayers, and helps
them with sighes and grones, and if hee
did not help and heaue vp our dull and
drowsie spirits, we should neuer once flutter
towards heauen, but euen lye like dead
blocks, sencelessely groueling vpon the
ground. Again,2 Christ is in the hart of the
troubled spirit, for asmuch as the loue of
Christ is there, for the saith, whom my soule
loueth, which very loue that thou bearest
to Christ, is a note of the sanctifying spirit
of God.3 Againe, thou desirest to feele the
assurance of Gods loue, which desire is
also a pledge of the spirit of grace. A man
may feare God in some sort, and ioy in the
things of God for a time, in some carnall
respect, & desire with the sluggard, Balam
                        •
                     
                  
like to dye the death of the righteous, and
yet not loue the Lord, but the loue of

God, & desire of his fauour makes all sure.
Fourthly,4 if thou feele it not yet as thou
wouldest, then vse the meanes of Preaching,
Reading, Prayer, Conference, Meditation,
and patiently waite the Lords leasure,Psal. 43.
as Dauid saith to his Soule, Waite on
God and be not so cast downe, for he is thy
present help,
                  
                     
                        •
                     imile. 
                  and thy God. As a sicke man
taketh meat & drink, and phisick, though
it goeth against the stomacke, and his stomacke
so weake that it casteth vp all againe,
yet hee hath a desire to brooke it,
and doth striue to keepe it, and at last it
worketh strength: so is it with the sick &
distempred Soule. There is a defect in the
stomacke, or in the pallat, or in some other
part of the body, which hindreth the
working of corporall phisick; so in the inward
man, there may be a defect in the
vnderstanding which may bee darkish &
cloudy, or in the vtterance which may be
slow, or in the memory which may be
obliuious, or in the Faith which may be
weak, or in the repentance which may be
dull, or in the will which may be waiward,
or in the Loue which may be cold, yet in
all these remaine a double com
                     •
                  ort: first,

these graces are in truth in thee, for thou
vnderstandest aright, and remembrest the
best things, and beleeuest the word, and repentest
in truth, with hatred of sinne, and
louest God and his word euen for themselues:
and secondly, so much as thou vnderstandest,
knowest, remembrest, beleeuest
& louest, thou affectest & embracest
in hart vnfainedly, and desirest to grow
in them, and to practise them, all which
are blessed signes of the grace of God.
               And lastly, if thou didst once feele the
forgiuenes of thy sinnes, and God fauourable
vnto thee in his sonne Christ, and
now wantest that feeling, know that for
some iust cause, it is taken from thee, either
to humble thee, or to make thee more
thankfull when thou feelest so great grace
bestowed vpon thee, or to make it come
againe vnto thee, after thy humiliation, &
tryall of thy patience, with greater ioy &
sweetnes, for ioy restored is sweeter then
ioy continued. That God that hath vouchsafed
of his great goodnesse to shew vs in
some measure, the difference betweene the
treasures of the earth, and the riches of
his kingdome, and by giuing vs the one

doth allure vs to loue and accept of the
other, giue vs grace so to seeke and vse the
one, that in the end of our race wee may
obtaine the other, and that for his infinite
mercies sake in Iesus Christ our Lord and
all sufficient Sauiour, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be giuen
all honour and glory, with power
and dominion, for euer
and euer, Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            Fol. 1. b. line 13. read thornes. fol. 23. b. l. 8. read
ballist. l. 24. r. Prayer. fol. 25. l. 24. r religions
dowry. fol. 32. b. l. 5. r. the almightie. l. 20. r. bellowing.
fol▪ 65. b. l. 12. r. such a man.
            
         
      
   