
      
         
            
            
            
               RELIGIONS PEACE
Or
A reconciliation, between princes & Peoples, & Nations (by
Leonard Busher: of the County of Glouceſter, of the towne of Wotton, and
a Cittieen, of the famous and moſt honorable Citty London, and
of the ſecond right worſhipfull Company)
            Supplicated (vnto the hygh and mighty King of great Brittayne etc: And to the
Princely and right Honorable Parliament) with all loyalty, humility
and carefull Fidelity.
            
               Eſay. 60. 1. 3. 10. 12. 16.
               ARiſe, O Sion, be bright for thy light is com, and the glory of the Lord is riſen
upon thee, and the Gentils ſhall walk in thy light, and Kings at the
brightnes of thy riſeing vp.
               And the ſonnes of ſtrangers ſhall build vp thy wals, and their Kings ſhall miniſter
vnto thee: For in my wrath I ſmought thee, but in my mercy I had
compaſſion on thee▪ Therefore thy gates ſhall bee open contynually; neyther
day nor night ſhall they bee ſhut, that men may bring vnto thee, the riches of
the Gentils, and that their Kings may be brought vnto thee.
               For the Nation and that kingdom that wil not ſerve thee, ſhal periſh: ād thoſe
nations ſhal vtterly be deſtroyed.
               The ſonnes alſo of them that afflicted thee, ſhal come and bow vnto thee: and
al they that deſpiſed thee, ſhal fall downe at the ſoales of thy feete: and they
ſhal call thee, the Citty of the Lord, Zion of the holy one of Iſraell.
               Thou ſhalt alſo ſuck the milk of the Gentils, and ſhalt ſuck the breaſts of kings
and thou ſhalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, and thy redeemer, the
mighty one of Iaacob.
            
            
               Proverbs 20. 28.
Mercy and truth preſerve the King, for his throne ſhall bee eſtabliſhed with
mercy.
            
               Eccle. 10. 22.
The feare of the Lord cauſeth that the Kingdom fayleth not, but the Kingdom
is loſt by cruelty and pride.
            Printed in Amſterdam: 1614.
         
         
            
            
            To the high & mighty King Iames, by the grace of God,
King of greate brittayne, France & Yrland: And to the princely & right Honorable
Parliamēt, Leonard Busher wisheth, the wiſdome of Salomon, the Zeale of
Ioſias, & the mercy of Chriſt:1. Cor. 5. 5. with the ſalvation of your Spirits in the day of
the Lord Ieſus.
            FOr as much, as your Maieſty and Parliament, doe ſtand for the
maintenance of the Religion wherein you are borne, and for the
ſame, doe moſt zealouſly perſequte, with fyer and ſword: I haue
thought it good, and alſo my dewty (moſt Royal ſoueraigne) to enforme
your Maieſty and Parliament thereof. In al humility therfore, I
give you to vnderſtand, that no Prince or People, cā poſſible attaine that
one true Religion of the Goſpell, which is acceptable to God by Ieſus
Chriſt, meerely by birthIoh. 3. 3 for Chriſt ſaith Except a man be borne againe, he
cannot ſee the Kingdom of God. Alſo the Apo: Iames ſaith.jam. 1. 1
                     •
                  
                
               Of his owne
wil he begat vs by the word of truth. And the Apo: Peter ſaith.1. Petr. 1. 3. 23. 
               Being borne
a new, not of mortal ſeed, but of immortal, by the word of God, who liueth & endureth
for ever.
               Matth. 28. Therfore Chriſt commanded this word to be preached to al
nations, that thereby they may attayne the new birth.Marc. 16. By which your
Maieſty and Parliament may perceaue, that the one true Religion of the
Goſpel, is not attayned by natural birth: for the all Princes and peoples,
in all nations, ſhold haue that one true Religion of the Goſpell, the which
you ſee and grant, they all haue not, yet many of them alſo wil defend
theyr Religion (wherein they are borne) by fyer and ſword, as if it were
theyr natural and earthly inheritances: or had with fyer and ſword been
gotten, and therfore wil with fyer and ſword maynteyne and defend it:
But your Maieſty and Parliament, may pleaſe to vnderſtand, that the
Scriptures doe teach,2. Cor. 10. 4. that the one true religion is gottē by a new birth,
then by the word and ſpirit of God, and therewith alſo, it is onely maynteyned
and defended.Ephe. 6. 17 
               For the word of God is liuely, & mighty in operation,
& sharper then any two edged ſword,
               Heb. 4. 12. 
               & entereth through, even vnto the deviding
aſunder of the ſoule & the ſpirit, & of the joynts & of the marrow, & is a diſcerner
of the thoughts, & the intents of the heart. Seeing then the one true Religion
of the Goſpell, is thus gotten: and thus defended and mainteyned,
namely, by the word preached onely, let it pleaſe your Maieſty and Parliament,
to be entreated, to revoke and repeale, thoſe Antychriſtian, Romish
and cruel lawes, that force al in our lād, both Prince ād people, to receaue
that Religion, wherein the King or Queen were borne, or that which is
ſtabliſhed by the law of man:Mat. 28. 19 and in ſteed thereof, enact and publiſh, that
Apoſtolick. Chriſtian,
               Mar. 16. 16▪
                
               Gentle & merciful law of Chriſt, viz: Goe teach al nations,
preach the Goſpell to every creature,
               Act. 8. 12. that is, Chriſt wil haue his miniſters to
preach and teach the people of al nations,luc. 24. 4. 7. the things that concerne the
Kingdom of God,
               act. 8. 12. 37. & 2. 4. 
               & the name of Ieſus Meſiah, repentance & remiſion of ſins, & to
baptiſe in his name, ſuch as doe beleeve. And for as much alſo that the falſe ād

Antychriſtian religion did come by the ſpirit of error & doctrine of Devils,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                ād
not by fyer and ſword:Rev. 16. 14 therfore by the ſpirit of Chriſt, ād doctryne of the
word of God, muſt it be driven out of the hearts and conſciences, both of
Prince and People, and not by fyer and ſword, as the falſe Biſhops and
miniſters haue and doe ſtill perſwade. Therfore may it pleaſe your Majeſty
and Parliament, to vnderſtand that (by fyer and ſword) to cōſtraine
Princes and peoples,Marc. 9. 38 39. to receaue that one true Religion of the Goſpell, is
wholy againſt the mynde and mercifull Law of Chriſt, dangerous both
to king and State, a meanes to decreace the Kingdom of Chriſt: and a
meanes to increace the Kingdom of Antychriſt, as theſe reaſones following
doe manifeſt: The which I humbly beſeech your Majeſty and
Parliament, carefully to conſider, and that according to the word of god,
which ſhal judge every man according to his deeds:
               Mat. 16. 27 and perſeqution, is a
worke well pleaſing to al falſe Prophets,Rev. 16. 14 and Biſhops, but it is contrary
to the minde of Chriſt,Luce 9. 55. 56. 
               who came not to judge & deſtroy mens lives, but to ſave
them: And though ſom men and women beleeue not at the firſt howre,Ioh. 12. 47.
yet may they at theMatt. 20. 6. 7. eleventh howre if they bee not perſequted to death
before: And no King nor Biſhops can, or is able to command faith,Eph. 2. 8.
               That is the gift of God, who worketh in vs both the wil & the deed of his owne
good pleaſure, ſet him not a day therefore, in which, if his creature heare
not and beleeue not,1. tim. 1. 13 you will impriſon and burne him: Paule was a blaſphemer,
Act. 26. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . and alſo a perſequter / and could not be converted by the Apoſtles
and miniſters of Chriſt, yet at laſt was receaued to mercy, and cōverted
extraordinarily by Chriſt himſelf,Iam. 5. 11. who is very pittiful & mercyful, & would
have no man to periſh,
               2. Pet. 3. 9. 
               but would that al men come to repentāce, but not by perſeqution,
2. cor. 5. 19 but by the word of reconciliation which he hath committed to his
miniſters. And as kings and Biſhops, cannot command the winde, ſo they
cannot command faith,Iohn. 3. 
               & as the winde bloweth where it liſteth, ſo is every man
that is borne of the ſpirit. You may forcemen to Church againſt their conſciences, but they wil beleeue as they did afore, when they com there, for
God giueth a bleſſing onely to his owne ordinance,1. Sam. 15. 15. 24. and abhorreth Antychriſts:
And kings are to thinck that they are men, as well as Kings ād
that Chriſt hath ordeyned the ſame meanes of faith for Kings which he
hath for ſubjects,Act. 9. 15. and that ſubjects are Chriſts freemen,
               1 tim. 2. 1. 2 
               as wel as Kings ſubjects,
               1. Cor. 7. 22. 23. 
               & Kings that beleeve are Chriſts Servants, even as ſubjects are Kings
ſervants, and both are bought with a price, therefore both ought not to bee
the ſervants of men, in matter of faith & religion: but Kings ſhal giue a greater
account at the day of judgment, then their ſubjects: And to judge mē
now for religion, is to judge afore the tyme, ād alſo to ſit in the judgement
ſeate of Chriſt,Rom. 2. 16 to whom onely it belongeth, yet not before the day appointed,
Act. 10. 42 how much leſſe to Kings and Biſhops. I read that Conſtantyne
the Emperor (called the greate) wrought to the Biſhop of Rome, that he
would not force and conſtrayne any man to the faith, but onely admoniſh
and commit the judgment to God.Ioh. 18. 36 Chriſtes Kingdom is not of this world

therefore may it not be purchaſed, nor defended with the weapons of this
world,Ephe. 6. 1
                     •
                   17. but by his word and ſpirit: no other weapons hath he giuen to his
Church which is his ſpiritual kingdom. Therfore Chriſt ſaith: He that wil
not heare the church,
               Mat. 18. 17 
               let him be to thee as a hethen & a publicane: he ſaith not
bur: ban: hang: or inpriſo: him, that is Antichriſts ordinance. And though
a man be an heretick,Tyt. 3. 10 yet ought he not to be bur: but to be rejected, after
once or twiſe admonition, that is caſt out of the Church: but as in the chur:
of Rome people of al ſorts are by perſeqution forced thereinto by the Biſhops
and miniſters therof: ſo it is in the Church of England alſo, which
ſheweth that the Bs: and min: of Rome and Eng: are of one ſpirit, in gathering
peopel to their faith and church, which is the ſpirit of Satan, who
knoweth wel that his kingdom (the falſe Church) wold greatly decay, if
perſeqution were laid downe: ſeing himſelf cannot ſtand before the word
and ſpirit of God, much leſſe his Bs: and mi: therfore he wil haue them,
for a name and ſhew, to vſe the word of God, but indeed, if the falſe interpretation
and alledging of the ſcriptures wil not help, then (ſaith he conſtrayne
them by fyer and ſword: or els (if people haue liberty of conſciēce)
they wil trye the ſpirits, which of them is of god, as the Apoſtle joh: teacheth:
and then ſaith he:1. Iohn 4. 1 the Prince as wel as people wil try all things,
& keep that which is good, and wil alſo prove themſelves (as the Apoſtle Paule
teacheth) whether they are in the Apoſtoliq faith or not:
               2. cor. 13. And as the Church of
Rome provoketh the Mageſtrats to peeſequte to death, ſuch as are excō
               municated
out of her, ſo doth the Church of England provoke the Magiſtrats
to perſequte to death ſuch as ſhe excomunicate: And as the Bs.
and min: of Ro: wil perſwade the prince and people, to heare ād read none
but themſelves, ſo doe the Bs: and min: of Eng: alſo: But the Bs: ād min:
of the Apoſtoliq Church doe perſwade al men, to prove & trye the Spirits
whether they are of God, which they cannot doe, except they heare and read
other mens doctrines, as wel as the Bs: ād their min: neither can they if
they would, ſo long as the Biſhops have power from the King and ſtate
to ſilence and impriſon etc: al preachers, ād to burne al books, which teach
not their doctines. Your Majeſty and Parliament ſhal vnderſtand that
al thoſe that confeſſe freely without compulſion, that Ieſus is the Meſſiah the
Lord,
               1. Iohn. 5. & 1. Io. 4. 
               and that he came in Flesh, are to be eſteemed the Children of God and true
Chriſtians, ſeeing ſuch are borne of God, and no man can ſay that. Ieſus is
the Lord,1 co. 12. 
                     •
                  
                but by the holy Ghoſt, therfore not to be perſequted.
            And as Abel killed not Cayne, but was killed himſelf, ād as Iſaack ād
Iacob did not perſequte Iſmael and Eſau, but was perſequted of Iſmael
and Eſau (who ād Caine were figuers of al perſequters) ſo the beleeving
doe not perſequte the vnbeleeving,Gala. 4. 29 nor the true chur: the falſe, but the beleeving
and true chur: are (as they have beene) moſt often perſequted thē
ſelves, of whom Abel, Iſaack and Iacob were figures, whoſe childrē are
al beleevers and free mē:Galat. 5. that ſtand faſt in the liberty, wherewith Chriſt hath
made thē free, ād wil not be tangled with the yoke of bondage, no not with cir-cumciſion,

much leſſe with the diſcipline and doctrijne of the Church of Rome, whoſe
Bs: are able miniſters of the fyer and ſword, both to Prince ād people, as
many Hiſtoryes doe lamentably witnes, to theyr vtter infamy and
overthrow. Alſo, if the beleving ſhould perſequte the vnbeleving to death
who ſhold remayne aliue? then none but the beleeveing ſhold liue in the
world, and the vnbeleeveing ſhold dye in theyr vnbeleeif, and ſo periſh for
ever: the Lord wil not that the beleeveing ſhold live, to the deſtructiō of
the vnbeleeveing, but vnto theyr converſion, edificatiō and ſalvation: And
by perſequting of Prince and people to death, becauſe they wil not heare
and beleeve, is no gayning of ſoules vnto God, but vnto the devill: And
whereas ignorant and wicked Bs. may thinck to wijn ſoules by killing
Prince and people for religion, they are deceaved greatly, for therby, they
looſe many ſoules, viz: their owne and the vnbeleeving, their owne they
looſe,
                  
                     •
                  e. 18. 20 becauſe they wilfully breake the Lords Commandement, that ſaith:
Thou ſhalt not kill, meaneing ſuch as are corporal malefactors: and the
others which dye in their vnbeleeif, they confeſſe themſelues are eternaly
loſt, except they (as ſom of their miniſt:) hold a redemption after this life.
And the Bs. ſhold know that error and hereſy cānot be killed by the fyer
and ſword, but by the word and ſpirit of God / that is the onely weapons
of Chriſts Bs. and Miniſters, and ſuch onely Chriſts Miniſters doe vſe,
whoſe liues and converſations are ſo harmleſſe, holy ād gentle, that therby / 
and by their deaths ād ſufferings, they wynne many ſoules vnto god:
wherby, they are knowen fro al falſe Bs. and miniſters, who like wolues
and beares (not like ſheep and lambs) make pray, and devour both Prince
and People, that are not of their kinde, if they bee able to Maſter them.
            Beſides, may it pleaſe your Majeſty and Parlia: to vnderſtand, that
the beleeveing man that hath an dnbeleeveing wyfe, and the beleeveing
woman that hath an vnbeleeveing huſband,Co. 7. 16 cannot liue together as the
ſcripture teachet, for the ſalvation of the vnbeleeveing, if they be perſequted
to death: Indeed ſom therby are forced to comfeſſe with the mouth,
that which they beleeue not in heart, and ſo are made true diſſemblers in
ſteed of true Chriſtians, wherby many men and womē are deceaved with
diſſembling huſbands and wyves, as wel as the King and State are deceaved
with diſſembling ſervants and ſubjects: but the word of God (if
permiſſion of conſcience might be granted) would procure vpright, puer,
and vnfeyned huſbands and wyves, ſervants and ſubjects, ſo that thereby
neyther Prince nor people ſhould be deceaved, for al good ſhepherds
wil devide and ſeperate, and not force, ſlay, and perſequte, for if men and
women be found hereticks, they ſhalbe ſeperated from the Church: but if
they be vnbeleevers, they ſhal not be joyned vnto it, vntil they be converted
by the word of God, much leſſe forced: Which converſion for ought
we know, may be at their death, if not afore, ſeing the Lord caleth ſom at
the elevent hower,
                  
                     •
                  att. 20. 6. ſo wel as at the firſt, and not at the King and Bs. pleaſures.
Kings and Magiſtrats are to rule tēporal affayers, by the ſwords

of their temporal Kingdoms. And Bs: ād Miniſters are to rule ſpiritual
affayers by the word and ſpirit of God, the ſword of Chriſts ſpirituall
Kingdom, and not to intermedle one with anothers authority, office, and
function: And it is a greate ſhame for the Bs. and Miniſters not to bee
able to rule in their Church, without the aſſiſtance of the King and Magiſtrat,
yea it is a greate ſigne they are none of Chriſts Biſhops and miniſters
of they were, they would not be afrayd nor aſhamed of their faith
nor yet would they perſwade Princes and people to perſequte and force
one another to beleeve them, but would uſe onely the aſſiſtance of Gods
word and ſpirit, and therwith ſuffer their faith and doctryne, to bee examined,
proved, and diſputed, both by word and writing.
            And he is a true Biſhop who is vnreproveable,Tyt. 1. 7. 9. 11. ād that is able to ſtop
the mouthes of his adverſaries, by Gods word and Spirit onely, and
whoſe faith and diſcipline agreeth with the Prophets, Chriſt and his Apoſtles,
and maketh no contracictiō, but al thoſe Biſhops that force Princes
and peoples to receaue their faith and diſcipline by perſeqution, doe
(with Iudas) goe againſt Chriſt in his members, with ſwords, ſlaues ād
halberos, who ſeing Gods word wil not help them, betake themſelues
with al haſt and hazard, vnto the authoritie of the King and Magiſtrate.
            I read that a Biſhop of Rome would haue conſtrayned a Turkiſh Emperor
to the Chriſtian faith, vnto whom the Emperor anſwered: I beleeve
that Chriſt was an excellent Prophet, but he did never (ſo far as I vnderſtand) command
that men should with the power of weapons be conſtrayned to beleeue his
law: & verely I alſo, doe force no man to beleeue Mahomets Law. Alſo I read
that Iewes, Chriſtians and Turks are tollerated in Conſtantinople, ād
yet are peaceable, though ſo contrary the one to the other. If this bee ſo
how much more ought Chriſtians, not to force one another to religion: ād
how much more ought Chriſtians to tollerate Chriſtians, when as the
Turks doe tollerate them ſhal we be leſſe merciful thē the Turks? or ſhal
we learne the Turks to perſequte Chriſtians? It is not onely vn merciful
but vnnatural and abominable, yea monſtrous for one Chriſtian to vex
and deſtroy another for difference and queſtions of Religion, and though
tares haue ouergrowen the wheate,Mat. 13. 29 30. 38. yet Chriſt wil haue them let alone
til harveſt, leaſt whyle you goe about to pluck vp the tares, you pluck vp alſo
the wheat with them, as your predeceſſors haue done, who thought they
had gathered vp the tares and burned them, but you ſee now that they
haue burned the weate in ſteed of tares. Wherfore in al humility ād Chriſtian
modeſty I doe affirme, that through the vnlaufull weedhooke of
perſecution (which your predeceſſors haue uſed, and by your maieſty and
Parliament is ſtill continued) there is ſuch a quantity of wheate plucked
vp, and ſuch a multitude of tares leaſt behinde, that the wheate which
remayne, cannot yet appeere, in any right viſſible congregation.
            
               
               And now beloved ſoueraigne and Parliament,
               Act. 3. 17. 
               I know that through
ignorance you doe perſequte, as did alſo your predeceſſor
                     •
                  s, Amend your
lives therefore, and turne, that your ſinns may bee put away, when the tyme of refreshing
shal come, from the preſence of the Lord: who before hath shewed by
the mouth of his holy ſervant Iohn, that the woman (meaning the church) shold
fleye into the wildernes for a tyme,Re. 12. 14. tymes ād half a tyme, from the preſence ād perſecution
of the Serpent: And that the wynepreſſe shold bee troden without the
Citty,Re. 14. 20. vntil 
                  •
               loud came out of the wynepreſſe, vnto the horſe brydels, by the ſpace
of a thouſand and ſixe hundred furlongs: and thus he hath fulfilled it.
            Now therefore I humbly beſeeth you, ſuffer not your Biſhops and
miniſters, any longer to perſwade, to force your ſubjects or any others,
to their faith and Church by perſeqution, neyther ſuffer them therewith
to defend their faith and Church, againſt their adverſaries: if they have
not any thing from Gods word againſt vs, let them yeld and ſubmit
themſelves: if they thinck they have any thing againſt vs, let them betake
themſelves onely to Gods word, both in word and wryteing, for
the whole Scripture is given by inſpiration of God,
               2. tim. 3. 16. 
               to that purpoſe, and is profitable
to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to inſtruct, in righteouſnes, that the Man
of God may be abſolute, being made perfect vnto al good works. With which
Scripture (and not with fyer and ſword) your Majeſtyes Biſhops and
miniſters ought to be armed and weaponed:Mat. 10. 14. 15. And whoſoeuer ſhall not
heare the words of ſuch Biſhops and miniſters: then ſuch Biſhops ād
miniſters are commanded by Chriſt (not to to impriſon:Marc. 6. 11 burne: ban: and
hang them but to shake the duſt of theyr feete againſt them, for a witnes when
they depart from them, affirming that at the day of judgment it shalbee eaſier for
Sodom and Gomorrha,
               act. 13. 51. 
               then for ſuch perſons: And this com: of Chriſt, did his
Biſhops and miniſters obey as you may read. By which and by that
which follow, your gratious may: and Princely, and honorable Parliament
may perceave, the will and mynde of our Lord and Saviour Chriſt
vnto whoſe mercy I commend you, and to the word and wiſdom of his
grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are ſanctifyed Amen.
            
               Your faithfull and loveing ſubject Leonard Busher. 
               ther is one Furbusher a preacher in this lād.
Not Furbusher.
         
      
      
         
            Certayne reaſons againſt
perſeqution.
            FIrſt, becauſe Chriſt hath not commanded any King, Biſhop, or Miniſter
to perſequte the people, for difference and judgment in matter of
Religion.
            Secondly, becauſe Chriſt hath commanded his Biſhops and miniſters

to perſwade Prince and people to heare and beleeve the goſpell, by his
                  •
               
word and ſpirit, and (as Ambaſſadors for him) to beſeech both Prince ād
people,2. Cor. 5. 20 to be reconciled vnto God, and not (as Tyrants) to force and cō
               ſtrayne
them by perſeqution.
            Thirdly,many thouſand Ambaſſadors & martyr
                     •
                   of Chriſt hath Bbs
                     •
                   cauſed to be ſlaine ſince Ch
                     •
                   aſcended. becauſe through perſeqution it wil come to paſſe that the Ambaſſadors
of the onely ſpiritual Lord & King Ieſus, may be perſequted and
inpriſoned, burned, haged or bāniſhed, for deliuering the meſſage of their
gratious Lord, ſentearly and often, both to Prince and people: which to
doe, is a more heynous fact then to perſequte the Ambaſſadors of the
greateſt King and Prince in the World: for inſteed of hereticks, they ſhal
(as they have alredy) burne, banniſh, and hang the Ambaſſadors of the
Lord Ieſus Chriſt: who doth chooſe out whom he pleaſeth, to beare his
name before Kings & Rulers, for a Teſtimonial to them.
            
            Fourthly,Marc. 13. 9▪
                becauſe then we cannot ſay, we have the liberty of the Goſpell
in our Land,
               Perſequtiō deſtroy Chriſtians, but not errors ſeing where that is, there is no perſeqution for any difference
in Religion, nor force
                  •
               ing of the conſcience to beleeve the goſpel, except by
the word and ſpirit of God onely, the which doe wound and kill the 
                  •
               rrors
of men and not their perſons.
            Fiftly,2. cor. 10. 4 becauſe Chriſt came into the world to fave ſinners, ād not to deſtroy
them,1. Tym. 1. 13. 15. though they be blaſphemers, ſeing the Lord may convert them as
he did Saule (after caled Paul) and though they have difference in Religion,
Luc. 9. 53. 55. or wil not heare nor beleeve in Chriſt, that they may be converted,
yet ought you not to perſequte them, ſeing Chriſt rebuketh ſuch and his
Father ſent him not into the world,Perſequtors rebuked of Chriſt. to condemne the world, but to ſaue it
be ye followers therefore of Chriſt, and not of Antychriſt, in gathering
people to the Faith.
            
               Sixtly,
               1. Cor. 10. 32. 
               becauſe then you shal not walke wiſely towards thē that are without
as the Scripture teacheth but shal offend alſo the Iewes▪ and al other ſtrāgers
who account it Tyranny,Col. 4. 5. 
               to have their conſciences forced to religion by perſeqution.
            
            Seaventhly, becauſe if perſeqution be not laid downe, and liberty of cō
               ſcience
ſet vp, then cannot the Iewes, nor any ſtrangers, nor others contrary
mynded be ever converted in our Land: for ſo long as they know
a forehand, that they ſhalbe forced to beleeve againſt their conſciences,
they wil never ſeeke to inhabit there: by which meanes you keep them
from the Apoſtoliq ſaith, if the Apoſtoliq faith bee onely taught where
perſeqution is.
            Eightly, becauſe if freedom of conſcience be not ſet vp, and perſeqution
laid downe, then al the Kings ſubjects, and al ſtrangers inhabiting the

Land (that ſhal beleeve the Apoſtoliq faith) muſt depart the land to ſom
free contry,Perſequtiō 
                  
                     •
                  lo make 
                     •
                  any ſtrā
                  
                  
                     •
                  ers. or els abide the danger of burning, banniſhing, hanging and
impriſoning: the firſt, will bee a great impoveriſhing and weakning of
our land, beſides a loſſe of the faithfulleſt ſubjects and freinds: the ſecōd
wil provoke the lord to wrath, by ſpilling the bloud of his faithful ſervants,
Ambaſſadors and witneſſes, and alſo open the mouthes of al ſtrā
               gers,
to ſpeake yet more lamentably, of the cruel and bloudy perſeqution
of our Land.
            Ninthly, becauſe if perſeqution contynue, then the King ād State ſhal
have (againſt their wils) many diſſemblers in Authority and office, both
in court Citty and contrye, yea no man of any degre ſhal know whether
they are al faithful and true Chriſtiās, that are about him, ād with whō
he hath to doe, ſeing moſt men wil conforme themſelves, for feare of perſeqution,
although in their harts, they hate ād deteſt the religiō wherto
they are forced by law, the which is very dangerous and hartful, both
to King and State in tyme of temtation, from bejond the ſeas, and in
rebellion at home: for they that are not faithful to God, in their Religiō
wil never bee faithful to the King and State in their alegiance, ſpecialy
being tryed by a greate reward, or by a myghty rebel: but will (to encraſe
their honors and reverennues) conforme themſelves, and fome to
ſave their honors, Lands, goods and lives) wil yeeld and ſubmit, though
againſt their wils, even as they have done in caſe of Religion: for
through forceing men to Church by perſeqution, the true hearted ſubjects,
are forced out of the Land, and out of the World, ſom banniſhed,
others burned, hanged, and impriſoned to death.
            Tenthly,
                  
                     •
                  erſequtiō 
                  
                     ••
                  uſemani 
                     ••
                  ligions. 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     •
                  hurch. becauſe then, if there be many religions in the land (as it is
wel knowen there are) it wil com to paſſe (through the continance of perſeqution)
that many religions wilbe continued in the Church, ſeeing al
are forced to Church, who bring their religions with them, as wel as
their bodies, wherby al their devotion is againſt their conſciences, and
all the Church is a confuſed Babel, ful of every vncleane & hateful bird, even
a hold of ſoule Spirits,
               
                  
                     •
                   v. 18. 2. 4 as the Scripture ſpeaketh: out of which the people of
God are Commanded to flee, leaſt (as of their ſins) they bee alſo pertakers of their
plague.
               
                  
                     ••
                  eter were to have 
                     •
                  any reli
                  
                     •
                  ōs in the 
                     •
                  nd, thē in 
                     ••
                  le Churc: And the Biſhops (the Authors of perſeqution) are very ignorant
to thinke that when they have gotten people to their Church, by perſeqution,
that then they have gotten them to their ſaith and religion, the
which is nothing ſo, for moſt people (though contrary mynded) to ſave
life and goods wil diſſemble their religion, as for example the Iewes in
Spaine and Portugale, and the Papiſts, Reformiſts, and others in England,
but when they com hether, or to ſom other free Citty or Country
(where praiſed be God is liberty of the goſpel) then they ſhew, that before
they diſſembled to avoyd the cruel perſeqution of our land.
            
               
Moreover, the Biſhops bewray great ignorance, whē they perſwade
the King and Parliament, to force Prince and people to Church by perſeqution:
for if that bee the meanes to com to the Church of Chriſt, then
Chriſt hath taught vs to fle the meanes of ſalvatiō, ſeing he hath taugt
vs to flee perſeqution:Mat. 10. 23▪
                the which the Biſhops and their Miniſters perſwade
to be a great meanes to bring men to the Church:Chriſt teacheth to flee perſequtiō ergo it cannot poſſible be good. Indeed I confeſſe,
it is the onely meanes to bring Prince and people to the falſe Chur:
and therefore Chriſt teacheth vs to flee that meanes, leaſt through perſeqution
(which is a great temtation) we be conſtrayned to go the broad
way (which is the falſe Church) that leadeth to deſtruction; & many goe in
therat: and no maxvaile, for there m
                  ••
               may be any thing, except good Chriſtians:
for (beſides Demas the worldlying, and Hymeneus the blaſphemer
and many other ſorts of indifferent Chriſtians,Mat. 7. 13 excommunicants covetous
and profane perſons) there are notale rebels ād Traytors,Note. ſee 2. tim. 3. 3 4. yea moſt
cruel and deſperate Traytors and Rebels, as Digby, Cateſby, Percy, &c: whoſe
buread and vnheard treathery wil never be forgotten, which perſons,
if they had not been forced to Church againſt their conſciēces, had never
enterpriſed, ſuch horribel and hateful treaſon.
            And the Bbs: ſhould vnderſtand that it is preaching and not perſequting,
that getteth people to the church of Chriſt, for the ſcripture ſaith
Faith is by heareing,
               Rō. 10. 17. 
               & heareing by the word of God, and not by the ſword of
Princes and Magiſtrats, as they perſwade and practiſe: And therefore
the Bbs: of our land are truly caled Antychriſts for by their beaſtly and
bloudy perſeqution, as wel as by their blaſphemous titles, erroneous
doctrines, and popiſh goverment, may they juſtly be termed Antichriſts.
            
            Eleventhly,Mat. 24. becauſe Chriſt forethou
                  •
               , that many falſe Chriſts, and falſe
Prophets shold ariſe,
               2. theſ. 2. 
                     •
                  
                
               & deceave many, yea if it were poſſible the very elect: And
the Apoſtle Paul did prophecy a departure from the faith:1. Tym. 4. And Peter
ſaid,2. Peter. 2. 
               There shold bee falſe teachers now among the people: and Iohn ſaid,
the Kings shold give their power & Authority vnto the beaſt, vntil the words of
God bee fulfilled,
               rev. 57. 13 17. therefore if perſeqution bee not laid downe, and liberty
of the goſpel ſet by, you may perſequte the true Chriſtians in ſteed of
the falſe, as your predeceſſors have done: for they are now (like as they
were then) the ſmaleſt number: and the falſe Chriſtians are now (like
as they were then) the greateſt number: and perſeqution is a notable
marke of the falſe Church and her Bbs:Gal. 2. 3. & 5. 11. 
                     •
                   6. 12. and Miniſters: and therefore
Chriſt wold have vs flee from it, who overcame the devil ād his Miniſters
by the word of God, and by a good meeke and gentle life, whoſe ſteps
his Biſhops and Miniſters ought to follow.
            Twelvthly, becauſe perſeqution of ſuch as doe preach and teach Chriſt
is a great hinderance to the liberty of the Goſpell: for thereby, are
the Iewes, Turks, and Pagans occaſioned and encouraged to
perſequte likewyſe▪ all—ſuch as preach and Teach CHRIST in

their dominions:Note Falſe Bbs: teach Turks and Pagans to perſequte Chriſtians For if Chriſtian Kings and Magiſtrats wil not ſuffer
Chriſtians to preach and preach the goſpel of Chriſt freely and peaceably
in their dominions, how ſhould you expect it of the infidels? vnto whome
Bs: and Chriſtian Kings and Magiſtrats ought to give a good exāple
and not an evil, as to burne, banniſh, hangh and impriſon peaceable and
godly Chriſtians, that are no traytors, nor theeves, nor fighters, nor mā
               ſlayers,
nor perſwearers, nor drunckards, nor whoremaſters, nor ſuch
like. And the King and Parliament may pleaſe to permit al ſorts of Chriſtians,
yea Iewes, Turks and Pagans, ſo long as they are peaceable ād
no malefactors, as is aboue mentioned: which, if they be found to be vnder
2. or. 3. witneſſes, let them be puniſhed according to Gods word: alſo
if any be found to be willing lyers, falſe accuſers, falſe ale
                  ••
               dgers and
quoters of the Scriptures, or other mens wrytings (as ſom mē willingly
doe) let them be puniſhed according right and Iuſtice, it is due deſert ād
no perſeqution, but let Gods word have his full ād free paſſage amongh
them al, even to the end of their lives, in al bountifulnes, long ſufferance
and patience, knowing that it is ordeyned of Gods ritch mercy, to lead
the infidels and ſuch as erre vnto repentance,Rom. 2. 4. and amendemēt, out of the
ſnare of the devil,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. 25. of whom they are taken and deceaved.
            Thirteenthly, becauſe perſeqution for Religion is to force the conſciēce
and to force and conſtrayne men and womens conciences to a religion againſt
their wils, is to Tyrāniſſe over the ſoule, as wel as over the body
and herein the Biſhops comit a greater ſin then if they force the bodyes
of women ād maides againſt their wils:
                  
                     •
                  . cor. 11. 2 yea herein they are more cruel
and greater Tyrans then the Turks,Falſe Bbs: worſe then Turks and pagans. who though they force the bodyes
of ſtrangers, to ſlavery and bondage yet they let the conſcience goe free,
yea to Chriſtians, that are ſo contrary to them in Religion: but theſe
Idol Biſhops wil force the conſciences of Chriſtians, their owne natural
contrymen, even vnto ſpiritual ſlavery and bondage, and herein they
commit fornication both with Prince and people,
               Note Falſs Bbs: ſpirituall 
                     •
                  ornicatiō. 
                     •
                  . theſ. 2. 4. 
               & have made al both ſmale
& greate, to receave a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, ſo that no
man may bye or ſell, ſave he that will goe to Church, and ſubmit to the Biſhops
ordinances, and name and marke of their beaſtly and bloudy perſeqution,
through which as God they ſit in, and reygne over the Conſciences
both of Prince and people,1. Cor. 6. 19. 20. & 1. cor. 6. 16 17. with 
                     •
                  ev. 18. 4 &. which is the ſpiritual ſeat and Temple
of God bought at a deere price, even with the pretious bleud of their
onely ſpirituall Lord Ieſus Meſſiah, the true Sheepheard and Biſhop of
their foules.
            And the Biſhops in forceingmen and womens conſciences, doe there
in play the Antychriſt ſo wel as the Popes:
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 2. 1. and indeed there is never
a Biſhop in the land,
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 19 but is a Pope, for Pope in Lattine is Papa, and
Papa ſignifyeth Father in Engliſh, al the Biſhops in our Land are called
reverend Fathers, therefore al the Biſhops in our land▪ are caled
reverend Popes, ſo many Lord Biſhops, ſo many reverend Fathers, ſo

many reverend Popes:If Idolaters ought to be ſlain then ought al thoſe that ſubmit & yeld ſpiritual obedience & reverēce vnto theſe Bbs) to be ſlaine, who then shold remaine in land alive? Rev. 17. 13. and theſe are all ſo many Antychriſts, ſo many
Idols, and ſo many falſe Gods o
                  •
                England, how many are thy Gods,
whom thou doeſt ſerve? For whoſe ſpirituall adoration the knee of evry
man and woman muſt bowe, or els they ſhalbe perſequted: vnto whom
the King ought not any longer to give his authority and pouwer, leaſt
he fulfil the ſcripture which ſaith, that Kings ſhould give their power
and authority vnto the beaſt.
            Fourteenthly, becauſe the burning, banniſhing, hanging and impriſoning
of men and women, by proteſtants, for difference of Religion, doe
juſtifye the burning, banniſhing and impriſoning of men and women, by
the papiſts, for difference of Religion, even as the Papiſts doe juſtify the
Turks and Pagans in ſuch like cruelty and tyranny, wherein 
                  •
               o
                  •
                is the
proteſtants more merciful then the Papiſts, or the Papiſts thē the Turks
Therefore, as the Papiſts (when they complayne of the Turks and Pagans,
for their bloudy perſeqution) doe therin condemne themſewes, becauſe
they are found to doe the ſame, yea worſe, for it is greater Tyranny
for one Chriſtian to forſe and kil one another, then for Turks and pagans
to kil a Chriſtian, for that is no ſuch great wonder, ſeeing it is a paganiſh
part, who have no better knowledge, but Chriſtians ſhould have
better knowledge and more merci then to play the Pagās againſt Chriſtians:
Note. So alſo the proteſtants, when they complaine of the papiſts for
their bloudy and beaſtly perſeqution, doe therein condemne themſelues,
ſeing they doe the ſame, for which they blame others, and ſo are rebuked
of the ſcripture,Rō. 2. 1. 3. which ſaith. Therefore thou are inexcuſable, o thou man, whoſoever
thou art that blameſt another, for in that thou judgeſt another, thou condemneſt
thy ſelf, for thou that judgeſt doeſt the ſame things: & thinkeſt thou this
o thou man (that judgeſt them which doe ſuch things, and thou doeſt the ſame)
that thou shalt eſcape the judment of God?
            
            Fifteenthly, becauſe his Majeſty and parliament would not willingly
themſelves be forcet againſt their conſciences, by the perſeqution of the
Biſhop of Rome and his Princes, ſo I beſeech them (according to the
law,Luc. 6. 31. Chriſt hath injoyned Chriſtians) not by perſeqution to force other
mens conſciences,Or provocation. againſt their wils by the irritation of the Biſhops of
our Land.
            Sixteenthly, becauſe perſeqution doe cauſe men and women to make
ſhipwrack of faith and good conſciences, by forceing a religion vpon thē,
even againſt their mindes and conſciences, and alſo doe ſend them quike
to the devil in their errors, if that be hereſy for which they are hāged ād
burned,King Edward was an enemy to perſequtiō
                which to doe, is a moſt vnChriſtian, vnnaturall, cruell and tyrannous
deed, and I am ſuer you would not bee content to be ſo dealt with
all your ſelves: but indeed the popiſh and Idol Biſhops are the authors
hereof againſt the people, as wel as of other perſequtiō againſt the princes.

For Antychriſtiā Bbs:Acts & mon: pag. 1484. doe draw Kings ād Princes hereto, againſt
their myndes, as may appeare by Edward the ſixt, that Godly King of
famous memory, who being vrged by his bloudy Bbs:, to ſubſcribe to
the burning of a womā caled Ioane Butcher,The Chriſtiā anſwer of King Edward. he anſwered. wil you have
me to ſend her quick to the devil in her error? but when his bloud thirſty Bs:
wouls have no nay, he ſaid againe to Biſhop Cranmer, I lay al the chaledg
therof on you before God, and Cranmer ſaid, he had never ſo much
to doe in al his life as to procure it,rev. 16. 14. whereby I doe perceave that godly
Kings are drawen to battel againſt the Saints, by Antychriſtian Bbs:
and falſe Prophets, who otherwyſe would rule and reigne, more agreable
to the mynde of Chriſt.
            Alſo, herby may al men perceave that the counſel and Bbs: could not
ſatiſfy the Kings conſciēce by their perſwaſiō, if they could have ſhewed
him the word of God,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                for burning that Chriſtian, it wold have prevailed
with that godly King, and he might then of faith have conſented, but
his anſwer ſheweth that he was not of their minde, for al that they had
ſaid, and therfore now, if it pleaſe you to require of your Biſhops warrant
from the word of God for the perſequting of Chriſtians, or for forceing
Prince and people to church, you ſhal find not one Biſhop, yea not
all of them together, though aſſiſted with their Miniſters, wilbe able to
ſhew warrant from Gods word, whereby to perſwade your conſciēces
therevnto: and whatſoever is not of faith is ſinne, and whatſoever is
not from Gods word, cannot be of faith.
            Seaventeenthly,Rō. 14. 23. becauſe perſeqution of Chriſtians by Chriſtians doe
not onely juſtifye papiſts, and teach the Iewes and Pagās to perſequte
Chriſtians, but alſo doe teach the papiſts and others (that know not the
mynde of Chriſt, and once get the vpperhād) to perſequte thoſe that perſequted
them:By Digby, Cateſ by &c: yea it is a meanes, (as we have had lamentable experiēce)
to ſet (ſuch as are forced to Church againſt their conſciences) at deadly
hatred againſt the King and State, and vrgeth al them to treaſon and
rebelliō,ma
                     •
                  . 11. 29. that have not truly learned Chriſt, who himſelf was perſequted
to death,Luc. 14. 27 whoſe harmles croſſe, al true Chriſtians muſt take vp, ād whoſe
gentle and humble ſteps they muſt follow ād walke in, or els they cānot
be his diſciples, nor ſheepe of his paſture. And nether can the papiſts be
perſwaded that perſeqution is a ſinne, ſo lōg as they ād other Chriſtians
are alſo perſequted by the proteſtants: ſeing the papiſts doe build their
perſeqution on the ſame ground with the proteſtants: but both ſorts of
Bbs: doe erre groſly, as ſhalbe ſhewed (Godwilling) when they make
their defence except heerewith their conſciences be convinced to yeld, as
I wiſh they may for the ſalvation of their owne foules, the peace both of
Prince and people, and the ſaftye of the King and State: In the meane
whyle it is to be obſerved, that thoſe Bbs: ād Miniſters which perſwade
the King and Parliament, to burne, banniſh, hang and impriſon, for difference

of religion are bloud-ſuckers and manſlayers, and ſuch (it cannot
be denyed) cauſed Kings and Magiſtrats, to be their excicutioners and
tormentors, in burning the Martyrs in former tymes, even in the dayes
of King Henry the eyght. & Queene Mary, as the books of Acts & Monumēts
wil witnes, if they be not burned and I aſke the Bbs: and their Mini:
if the martyrs ſhould have obeyed the King and Queene, rather thē have
ſuffered death?
            And now I muſt humbly and with al reverence doe beſeech his Maje:Act. 4. 19
and parliament,The Bbs: as the high preiſts, force men to obay man rather thē God. adviſedly to conſider among themſelves, whether the
Prince or Princeſſe (differing with the Church now in matter of cōſciēce
and religion, ſtabliſhed by law in our land (as the right noble Princeſſe
Elizabeth did, in Queene Maryes dayes) doe not incurre the danger ad cruelty
of the law now, as that worthy Princeſſe did then, ſeing that popiſh and
cruel law ſtandeth ſtil in force, in moſt points of religion? and who dare
truſt the Bbs: and ther adherēts, in ſuch a caſe, the matter lyeing in their
hands.Note wel.
            
            Let it be ſuppoſed that the Princes heart ſhould be moved by the lord
to embrace the Apoſtoliq faith & diſcipline, ſhal he be forced to beleeve as the
Biſhops doe, againſt his conſcience? ſhal he bee conſtrayned to ſubmit to
their goverment and diſcipline againſt his conſcience? ſhal he live in vexation
and perſeqution, and in danger of his life, by the Biſhops and law
ſtabliſhed as the Princeſſe Elizabeth did? yea it muſt bee thus with our
right noble Prince, except there bee partiality, yea it will bee thus with
his Princely perſon, except thoſe popiſh and cruel lawes be repealed and
extinguiſhed.
            Wherefore I meekly intreate ſeeing death is moſt certaine, though
moſt vncertayne when, that thoſe Antychriſtian and Popiſh Lawes
may bee diſſimulled and made voyd in tyme,Then 
                     •
                  ary til to morrow. leaſt wee all lament, and
bewayle it, when it wilbee to late: And I pray your Majeſty and
honors to conſider, that Kings and Princes hearts are in the hands of the
Lord (as the Ryvers of waters) to turne as he will. And the ſcripture ſaith.
The ten hornes (by which I vnderſtand ten Kings) shall hate the whore and
make her deſolate and naked.
               Rev. 17. 16 Likewyſe the Scripture ſaith to Abraham
the Father of beleeving Princes,Gen. 17 
                     •
                  6. as well as beleeving people) Alſo I
will make thee exceeding fruitful,
               Rom. 4. 17. 
               and will make Nations of thee, Yea Kings shall
proceed of thee. Which Scripture doe alſo overthrow the judgment of
thoſe men, that hould a Chriſtian may not bee a King nor Magiſtrate.
Let ſuch conſider that the Lord here ſpeaketh of Abrahams Spirituall
ſeed, and not of his naturall ſeed: Becauſe if it be vnderſtood of his Natural
ſeed, then cannot Abraham be o Father of many nations, ſeeing all
Abrahams natural ſeed, are caled Iewes, and are but one nation of the
Iewes, ſo that the covenant of God could not be performed, that ſaid: I
wil make nations of the, yea Kings 
                     ••
                  al proceed of thee. Therefore it muſt

be vnderſtood of his ſpiritual ſeed, of which may be Kings and Princes,
that are not naturaly deſcended of him, as wel as people that are not naturaly
deſcended of him / therfore beleving Kings may ſafly walke in the
ſteps of their Father Abraham, and with their ſwords defend their ſubjects
againſt their adverſaries, and redeeme their bretheren out of the
jawes of al devouring beaſts and bloudy perſequtors, for they beare not
the ſword for nought.
            And now alſo I deſier thoſe ſubjects (of what degre ſoever / that wold
deſtroy their Kings and Governors for difference in Religion) to conſider
that therin they juſtifye their Kings and Governors, which deſtroy
their ſubjects for difference of Religion. For as it is ſinne for Kings and
Governors to deſtroy their ſubjects, for difference of religion, at the perſwaſion
of their Biſhops. So is it ſinne (but in a higer degree) for ſubjects
to deſtroy their King and Governors for difference of religion, at
the perſwaſion of their Biſhops and Miniſters.Rom. 13. 4
            
            Therfore perſeqution for difference in religion is a monſtrous ād cruel
beaſt, that deſtroyeth both Prince and people, hindereth the goſpell of
Chriſt, and ſcattereth his Diſciples that profeſſe and witnes his name.
            But permiſſion of conſcience in difference of Religion ſaveth both
Prince and people, for it is a meeke and gentle lamb, which not onely furthereth
and advanceth the goſpel, but alſo foſtereth and cheriſ heth theſe
that profeſſe it, as may bee ſeene by the permiſſion of the Princeſſe Elizabeth:
and others that were permitted and foſtered in Dutchland at that
time.Permiſſiō of cōſciēce a furtherāce to the goſpel and a ſafly both to prſnce and people Alſo permiſſion of conſcience is a greate and ſuerband, and benefit
to the King and State, as may likewiſe bee ſeene in the ſame Princeſſe
Eliza: who if ſhe had not beene permitted, but had ſuffred death, as the
bloudy Biſhops earneſtly deſyred: then had not the Kingdom been ſo
ſuerly not yet ſo purely kept ād preſerved for his Mayeſty ad his Royal
iſſue, as now it is, the Lord be prayſed therfore.
            Further I beſeech his right excellent Maieſty and parliament to obſer
that perſeqution, was the occaſion that the Apoſtoliq Church was
at firſt ſcattered and driven into the wildernis, that is deſert places of
the world,Rev. 12. 6. 14 & 13. 5. 7. whether ſhe fled to ſave herſelf from the rage and Tyrannye
of Antichriſt and his Apoſtles and Miniſters, the firſt Authors of perſeqution
vnder the Goſpell. Therfore his Majeſty and Parliament may
pleaſe to conſider,2. Cor. 11. 13. that ſo long as perſeqution continue, ſo long will the
Apoſtoliq Church continue ſcattered and perſequted into the ſecret places
of this world: and no mervayle, for her faith and diſcipline is as offenſive
as odyous and as vnwelcom vnto Antychriſt and his Biſhops
and Miniſters now: as it was then, as their burning, baniſhin, hanging
and impriſoning, doe withnes even vnto this day. And it is to be noted,
that as the Apoſtoliq faith and diſcipline (in the Apoſtles dayes, when
through them true ſignes and wonders were wrought by the extraordinary
gift and power of the Holy Ghoſt) did let and hinder the miſtery
of iniquity,2. theſ. 2. 6. 7. wrought by Antychriſt his Apoſtles and Miniſters, by whō
               
the lyeing ſignes and wonders were done, through the extraordinary
ſpirit of Satan. So now the Catholiq or Antichriſtian faith and diſcipline
(haveing gotten the vpperhand by her lyeing ſignes and wonders,2. Teſ. 2. 9.
and by perſeqution) doe by the ſame,1. tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. tim. 3. 1. 4. 5. & 2. pe. 
                     •
                  . 1. 3 let and hinder the miſtery of Godlines,
wrought by Chriſt, his Apoſtles and Miniſters, by whom the true
ſignes and wonders were done, without perſeqution.
            And it is well worthy to bee obſerved,1. john. 
                     •
                  . 1 both of King, Prince, and people,
2. john. 7 that the Biſhops Miniſters of Antychriſt cannot abide, nor endure
the faith and diſcipline of the Apoſtoliq Church,Iud. 4. 11 16. 18. becauſe it willbee the
overthrow of their blaſphemous and ſpirituall Lord ſhips, and of their
Antichriſtian and bloudy Kingdome.Note wel. And therefore are they ſo fyery
hot and zealous,1. john. 4. 3 for the Catholiq or Antichriſtian faith and diſciplyne.
for by their faith they ſhew plainly, that they are ſucceeded and deſcended
from Antychriſt, VVho confeſſed not that the Meſſiah came in flesh: and
by their diſcipline or goverment, they playnly ſhew, they are Antichriſts
Biſhops and Miniſters, who perſequte with fyer and ſword, al degrees
both King, Prince, and people, that will not confeſſe their faith, and obey
their diſcipline. And it is very plaine and eaſy both for King, Prince
and people (if they wil not take vp religion oncredit, and content them
with the religion they were borne ād brought vp in (as doe the papiſts)
to diſcerne who they be that teach the Apoſtoliq faith and diſcipline, and
who they be that teach Antychriſts faith and diſciplyne, for the holy Apoſtle
ſheweth it to al men, that wil give heed therto, for he ſaith: Dearly
beloved, beleeve not evry ſpirit, but try the ſpirits, whether they are of God, for
many falſe Prophets are gone out into the world,
               The Siriah ſaith came in flesh. 
               which confeſſe not that Ieſus
Meſſiah came in flesh. Hereby shal you know the ſpirit of God, evry ſpirit that cō
                  feſſeth,
that Ieſus Meſſiah came in flesh, is of God, and evry ſpirit that confeſſeth
not, that Ieſus Meſſiah came in flesh, is not of God: but this is the ſpirit of Antychriſt,
whom ye have heard, how that he shold come, & now already is he in the
world. The ſame is the Antychriſt that denyeth the Father and the Sonne, whoſoever
denyeth the ſon,
               1. john. 2. 22. 23. 
               the ſame hath not the Father. The Apoſt: meaneth ſuch
as deny Ieſus to be Meſſiah, the Lord that came downe from Heaven, as Chriſt
and they have taught,john. 17. 3. 5. 8. ſuch have not the Father, but doe deny hem alſo,
as they have taught him, and therfore Chriſt ſaith: The tyme shal come,
that whoſoever killeth you,
               1. co. 15. 47 
               wil think that he doth God good ſervice, but theſe
things they wil doe vnto you,
               Iohn. 6. 38 42. 62. & 7. 26. 27▪
                
               becauſe they have not knowen the Father nor me,
the Father loveth ſuch as beleeve that I came out from God, thus faith Chriſt:
But Antychriſt and his Miniſters beleeve not this doctrine, neither doe
they thus teach Chriſt Ieſus the Meſſiah.
               Iohn. 16. 2. 3. 27. 21.
            
            And you may pleaſe to vnderſtand that of this Antichriſt (or rather (as
the 
                  ••
               riack) of this falſe Chriſt came the Church of Rome: whoſe biſhops
and Miniſters teach not this doctrine, ād as the Mother ſo the daughter
alſo, teacheth not this doctryne: but will likewyſe perſequte
both Prince and people, that ſhall confeſſe that Ieſus Meſſiah came

in flesh as Iohn teacheth:
               1. joh. 4. 2. 
               or that the Son of Man aſcended vp, where he was before,
               Ioh. 6. 62. & 3. 13. 
               or that he was glorified with his Father before the world was, as himſelf
ſaith: or that he was the ſecond man the lord from heaven, or that he had and
hath a heavenly body,Iohn. 17. 5. as Paule teacheth: for theſe ād ſuch like doctrynes
doe the Church of Rome ād her daughters perſequte with fyer ād ſword
being indued with the ſpirit of Antychriſt:1. Cor. 15. 47. 49. By which Antychriſt his Apoſtles
and Miniſters,1. Ioh. 4. 3. the Apoſtoliq Church was ſcattered and driven
into the wildernes,2. cor. 11. 12. 15. that is deſert and ſecret places of this world, evē by
their bloudy perſeqution. The which ſtil they continue and raiſe againſt
the members and witneſſes therof,Rev. 12. 
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  . who w
                  •
               ere and are the Martyrs,
which in al ages have and doe ſuffer death, impriſonment, and banniſhment,
ſince the firſt perſeqution: and we never reade, nor ever ſhal reade
that the Apoſtoliq Church or ſuch as have derived their faith and diſcipline
of her, did ever perſequte.
            Therfore I humbly deſier his Majeſty and Parliamēt, with al godly
carefulnes to conſider, that it is not poſſible that the Church of Rome (caled
Catholiq) or thoſe that are deſcended of her, and have decived their
faith and diſcipline frō 
               
                  •
               her, ever was, or could be the Apoſtoliq Church
(caled primitive Church) or ſhe that is deſcended frō her: ſeing the ſcripture
ſaith the Apoſtoliq church (caled in ſcripture the womā) hath a place
prepared of God in the wildernes, a thouſād twe hōdred and ſixty dayes
from the preſence of ſuch as did perſequte her.
               Rev. 12. 6. 13. 14. Now then, I beſeech you cō
               ſider,
may it be poſſible that the church of Rome (caled in ſcripture a miſtery,
great Babilon, the Mother of whoredoms, & abominations of the Earth, the
woman that ſitteth vpon a ſcarlot coulered beaſt, full of names of Blaſphemy, the
womā arayed in purple & ſcarlet, & guilded with gold & pretious ſtones & pearles,
haveing a cup of gold in her hand, ful of abominations & filtines or her fornication,
the woman that is drunken with the bloud of Saints, & with the bloud of
the martyrs or witneſſes of Ieſus, by her beaſtly perſeqution) was or could be
ever the Apoſtoliq Church, or are thoſe that are deſcended from her, ſeeing
the ſcripture ſaith she hath a Place in the wildernes, prepared of God,
where she shold be fed a thouſand two hundred & ſixty dayes,
               Rev. 12. 6. 13. 14. 
               from the preſence
of her perſequtors?
            
            If ſo be, you wil have the Church of Rome, and thoſe that are deſcended
from her,Note. to be the true Apoſtoliq Church: then it wil follow that
the Church (caled the woman, and did flye into the wildernes, from her
perſequtors) was, and is the falſe Antichriſtian Church: and alſo it will
follow that thoſe (which we account to be the Martyrs and witneſſes of
Ieſus) were not of the true Apoſtoliq church,2. The. 2. 3 6. 8. but were obſtinate perſōs
and heretiks, even as their adverſaries (in Rome, Spaine, England and
els where) did perſequte,1. Tim. 4. 1 2. 3. adjudge and execute them far.
            But if you wil have the Prophecy of the Apoſtles to be true, a
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
beleeve their holy writings,Rev. 12. 6. 11. 14. & 17. 2. 6. 17 and alſo wil have the Martyrs (that have
bene burned, ban: hanged ād impriſoned) to be of the true Apoſtoliq Chur:
then it will follow and that juſtly according and agreeable to the ſcriptures,

that the Church of Rome and thoſe that did ād doe perſequte,2. Tim. 3. 1 9. & 4. 3. 4 are
deſcended from the falſe Antichriſtian Church, caled a miſtery, great Babilō
the mother of whoredoms & abominations of the Eearth,
               2. pe. 2. 1. 3 
               &c: which was and
is druncken with the bloud of Saints & martyrs of Ieſus:
               1. joh. 2. 18 19. & 4. 
                     •
                  . ſeing they have her
Antichriſtian faith and lordly diſcipipline, and for the defence and maintenance
therof,2. Iohn. 7. wil alſo burne, banniſh, hang and impriſon / ſo hot ād fiery
zealous that therby they ſhew plainly,Iude 4. 11 16. that they walke ſo juſt and even
in the ſteps and paths of the Myſtical woman great Babilon, their bloudy parent
& mother:
               Like mother, like Daughter. ſo even I ſay, as if they ſtudied her lyeing and Hypocritical
doctrine, her deep and divelish devinity, her blaſphemous, princely and dāgerous
dignity, and her beaſtly, bloudy and deadly diſcipline. Through the continuāce
whereof,1. Tim. 4. 2 not onely the Apoſtoliq Church, is continued ſtil in the wildernes
ād deſert of this world,Rev. 2. 24▪
                but alſo the jewes and others, both in great
Brittayne, and al over the world, are kept back from the knowledge of
Gods holy word, the onely order and ordinance Chriſt hath appointed,
for the gathering of his Church together, out of al places of the world.
And ſo long as perſeqution continue, you cannot trye the ſpirits of the
many falſe prophets,
               1. joh. 4. 1. 
               that are gone out into the world, as the holy Apoſtle doth
loveingly adviſe and admoniſh you. But (like the Paſtiſts) muſt be tyed
onely to the ſpirits of your loedly Biſhops and their Miniſters,Fyer and ſword, n
                     •
                   equal we
                     •
                  
                  pons to the ſpirit & word. who wil
have alboth King, Prince and people to receave their ſpirits, and therefore
wil not have any others to preach and print with in the Land, leaſt
their lyeing doctrine and Lordly diſcipline, be diſcovered and diſclaimed.
And in ſteed of diſputing and wryting by the word and ſpirit of Chriſt
(againſt their adverſaries) they wil cruelly perſequte and fight againſt
them, by fyer and ſword, and Spirit of Antichriſt, from whom they
are deſcended and ſucceeded,Miſtically both lynealy and of great antiquite.
            
               Wherefore I humbly beſeech the King and parliament, that you will
betymes liſten vnto the holy ſpirit in the mouth of the prophet, which
faith bewyſe now therfore yee Kings,pſal. 2. 1
                     •
                  
                be learned (or inſtructed) yee judges of
the earth, ſerv the Lord in feare, & rejoyce in trembling, kiſſe the ſon of God leaſt
he be angry, and ye perish in the way of perſeqution, when his wrath shal ſuddēly
burne. Let not therfore the Kings of the earth band themſelves with the Bs: &
miniſters of Antichriſt,Pſal. 2. 2. 
                     •
                  
                nor Princes aſſemble themſelves together againſt the lord
and againſt his anointed.1. joh. 2. 2
                     •
                  
                
               That is againſt Chriſt and his church: ſeing both
he and ſhe breake your bands and caſt your coardes from them.Rev. 17. 1
                     •
                  
                
               Yea her ſeed
overcometh you, by the bloud of the lamb, & by the word of their teſtimoni, for
they love not their lives vnto death.Rev. 12. 1.
            
            Beware then in tyme leaſt you offend any more of theſe litle ones that
beleeve in Chriſt, ſeeing Chriſt ſaith it were better to have a milſtone hanged
about the neck,
               Mat. 18. 6 10. 
               & drowned in the depth of the Sea, then ſo to doe. He meaneth
that it were better for you to looſe your lives, then any way to conſent
to the offence of ſuch litle ones that beleeve in Chriſt. See then I pray
that they be not deſpiſed, burned, banniſhed, hanged ād impriſoned. For
their Angels alwayes behold the face of Chriſts Father in Heaven. And remember

he ſaith:Mat. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 38▪ 39. 
               the tree is knowen by his fruit, but perſequting of Chriſtians,
is an evil fruit. And that a good man out of the good treaſure of his heart,
bringeth foorth good things:
               Mat. 11. 35▪ 36. 
               but perſequting of Chriſtiās is no good thing. And
that for every ydle word men shal ſpeak, they shal give accounts at the day of
judgement: How much more for every wicked and cruel deed of perſeqution,
as burning, banniſhing, hanging and impriſoning of thoſe that cō
               feſſe
with the mouth,
               Rom. 10. 9▪
                
               & beleeve with the heart the Lord Ieſus, & that God rayſed
him from the dead: whoſe lawes and ordinances they are carefull to keep
and obey! Chriſt ſaith that ſuch shalbee ſaved, and yet you feare not to
burne, banniſh, hang and impriſon ſuch. But if you beleeve that God will
avendge his elect,
               Luc. 18. 7. beware of perſequting his ſervāts, that cal on his name,
ſpecialy ſuch as witnes his truth againſt the abominations of Antychriſt.
Suffer not your Biſhops to deſtroy thoſe men and women, that ſtriue
to ſerv God according to his wil in his word. Be not your Biſhops executioners,
in burning, banniſhing, hanging, and impriſoning of harmleſſe
and peaceable Chriſtians: but let them enjoy fredom of the goſpell and
liberty of conſcience: that ſo the Apoſtoliq Church (which is ſcattered and
driven into the wildernes ād deſert of this world) may be againe gathered
togather, both of Iewes and gentils, into viſible and ſtabliſhed congregations.
               2. Txſ. 2. 8▪
                And that the Catholiq and vniverſal Church of Antychriſt may bee conſumed
& abolished by his word & ſpirit,
               I pray the Lord to give ſuch grace, the Sea of Rome may 
                     〈◊〉
                   apace. 
               as the holy Apoſtle hath foretold, even
the vttermoſt of his arival, which is the Emperial & triple crowne, through the
triple ſea of Rome.
            
            And againe I humbly entreate the King and parliamēt, to vouchſafe
to heare me with patience yet a litle further: If freedom of the goſpel
and permiſſion of conſcience might be graunted, then would not Papiſ
                  •
               
nor any others diſſemble their ſoules, and to the greate danger, both 
                  〈◊〉
               
King and State, ſeeing they are forced to Church againſt their conſciences:
And may not Popiſh Prieſts and Ieſuits (vnawares to the Biſhops)
become the Biſhops Miniſters, ſeeing the change of their Religion,
and religions habit differ ſo litle, ād ſo by degrees infect the people
with more popiſh doctrine,Nota Frō popes ſubmiſſion ther is great ſuſpi
                  
                     •
                  ion. as occaſion ſhalbee? And ſuch men wil readely
imbrace the Biſhops orders, and ſo they ſhall readely have the Biſhops
favours: by which meanes, they may more eaſily ād ſpeedly, ha
                  •
               
acceſſe vnto the court, and preſence of the King and Prince, which indeed
is very dangerous, howſoever not regarded. Therefore I doe (according
to my dewty) humbly adviſe his Majeſty, not to bewtifie his cou
                  ••
               
and preſence, with any popiſh ſtones, not with one, though it be of All
                  ••
               blaſtor.
            But permiſſion of Conſcience and freedom, and liberty of the goſpe
                  •
               
will no 
                  •
               ay bee dangerous to the King or State, if ſuch like rules 
                  •
               
theſe bee obſerved.
            
            Firſt, that no people tainted with Treaſon, doe beare any office.
            That al ſorts of people tainted with Treaſō, doe (at al times frō home)
weare ab lack hat with two whire ſignes, the one before the other behinde
in open ſight.
            That no people, tainted with treaſon approach within ten myles of
the Court, without licence.
            That no people tainted with treaſon doe inhabit the Citty of London,
nor yet within ten myles thereof.
            That none tained with treaſon, doe make any aſſembly or congregation.
            That no perſon or perſons (in whatſoever difference, by reaſoning or
diſputing) doe draw any weapon, nor give any blow, ſtroke, or
puſhe, in payne and penalty, as his Majeſty and Parliament thinck
meet.
            That (for the more peace and quietnes, and for the ſatiſfyeing of the
weake and ſimple, among ſo many perſons, differing in Religion) it
bee lawfull for every perſon or perſons, yea Iewes and Papiſts, to
write, diſpute, comfer and reaſon, print en publiſh any matter touching
religiō, either for or againſt whomſoever, alwayes provided they aledge
no fathers,2. Tim. 
                     •
                  . 24. 25. for proffe of any point of religiō, but onely the holy ſcriptures
neither yet to reproch or 
                  〈◊〉
                one another, nor any other perſon or perſons,
james. 3. 1▪
                but with al love, gentlenes, and peaceablenes, enforme one another
to the glory of God, honor of the King and State, and to their owne
good and credit,Note by which meanes, both few errors and few bookes
will bee written and printed,A true ſigne of falſe Biſhops an Miniſters. ſeeing al falſe Miniſters, and moſt people,
have litle or nothing els (beſides the Fathers) to build their religion and
doctrine vpon: (or if it be once ſtabliſhed by law that none ſhal confirme
their Religion and doctrine, by the Fathers, and by priſons, burning
and banniſhing etc: but by the holy Scriptures, then error will not bee
written nor diſputed, except by obſtinate perſons, and 
                  〈◊〉
                conſciences
ſeeing the word of God will bee no ſhelter for any error. Yea I know
by experience, among the people caled Browniſts, that a Man ſhall not
draw them to wryte, though they bee deſyred, for one of their preachers
caled Maſt: Rob: hath had a wryting of myne in his hards,
above ſixe Moneths, and as yet I can get no anſwer it ſeemes he
knoweth not how better to hide his errors, then by ſilence, and this
willbee the caſe of all falſe Biſhops and Miniſters,Iohn. 3. 2. who had rather

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
be mute and dumb,Iohn. 3. 10▪
                then bee drawen into the light with their errors.
            Therefore permiſſion of conſcience, and liberty of the goſpel in our lād
of great Brittaine, wil mightily further the advancement of the Apoſtoliq
faith. And chiefly their books, whereout ſufficient matter willbee
drawen, for the convinceing of every perticuler religiō, which is againſt
the religion, ſtabliſhed by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, who by all meanes
Lawfull, ſought the converſion and ſalvation, both of Iewes and
Gentils.1. Cor. 9. 20▪ 22. And they are vnconſtant and faithles men, or at leaſt very
ignorant, that thinck error will ouercome and prevayle againſt the
truth.Act. 16. 3.
            
            For the Aboliſhing of ſuch thoughts, I deſper ſuch men to cōſider the
mighty victory and prevailing of the truth, in the tyme of Chriſt ād his
Apoſtles, which (notwithſtanding reſiſted and diſputed againſt: by the
moſt part of the Prieſts and learned men, both of Iewes and Gentils)
yet ouercame and prevayled againſt al the errors of the high prieſts and
great learned Men, both of the Iewes and gentils, and the Apoſtle ſaith
we cannot doe any thing againſt the truth,
               2. Cor. 13. 8▪
                
               but for the truth: and ſeing it is the
ſame truth, which al good men would embrace, why ſhould we not hope
the ſame victory by it! Did not King Darius ād al the people both jewes
and gentils cry out and ſay,2. Eſd. 4. 38. 41. 
               that truth is greate and ſtrongeſt? Why then
ſhould thoſe that have the truth, and thoſe that wold have the truth, be
affraid of errore ſeing truth diſcovereth dark and dangerous wayes of
error, though abroad in open books, even as light diſcovereth darke and
dangerous places, though abroad in open high wayes: And as the more
darke and dangerous the wayes be, the more neceſſary and needful will
light be found of al that travaile: So the more darke and dangerous the
errors be, the more needful and profitable wil truth be found, of all that
would travil to heaven. But ſom may ſay objection let al this be grāted, yet
it is no wiſdom we think, to bring dangerous errors into the light, that ſo many
men may ſtumble at them. Which being not brought to light, would not bee ſo
much as knowen to ſom.
            
            I anſwer,Anſwer. no more, then a Rock that lyeth hid vnder water, which (for
want of bringing into the light) many Men may make ſhipwrack thereō
and ſo ſtumble or fal nevertheleſſe, though it be not ſo much as knowen
to them before. Therfore as a ſtock in the Seas (though not ſo much as
knowen to ſom) yet (for want of being made knowen) many men ſtumble and fal theron / ād ſo
periſh both men and goods. So an error (though not ſo much as known to ſom) yet (for wan
                  •
               
of being made known) many men may ſtumble and fal theron / and ſo periſh both bodies an
                  •
               
ſoules the which is more lamētable▪ and as Roks in the ſeas / the more they manifeſt thēſelf
                     •
                  
               
the more furtherance in the way to the Heaven. So errors in the world
the more they manifeſt themſelves, the more furtherance in the way to
heaven. And you ſhal vnderſtand that errors being brought to the light
of the word of god, wil vaniſh as darknes before the light of a torch: evē
as the chaffe before the winde cannot ſtand, ſo error before truth cannot
abide: therfore it is no hinderance, but a great furtherance to haue al erroneous
Rocks in the haven to heaven, made knowen and publiſhed.
            
               
And a greate and ſuer argument it is,Another true ſigne of falſe Bishops & miniſters. that thoſe Biſhops and Miniſters
have not the truth, that publikly dare not diſpute or wryte againſt
error, as may be ſeene in the Biſhops and Miniſters in Queen Maryes
dayes, which could not abide to have books written and printed, of that
which they caled error and hereſy, but cauſed, that if any ſuch were written,
both them and the Authors to be burned, if they could com by them.
Therfore if permiſſion of conſcience and liberty of the goſpel be not granted,
and burning lawes repealed, then the Biſhops and Miniſters now
may perſwade and cauſe to be burned, both the books and the Authors,
that have the truth in ſteed of hereſy and heretiks, even as their prede
               
                  •
               ſſors
have done already,The word of God the onely defender of the faith of Chriſt. and ſo ſhed more innocent bloud, and alſo provoke
the Lord to further wrath againſt the King and State. It is not
the galloſſe, nor the priſons, nor burning, nor banniſhing, that can defend

                  〈◊〉
                Apoſtoliq faith: indeed the King ād State may defend Reliōs peace

                  〈◊〉
                their ſword and civil power, but not the faith, otherwiſe, then by the

                  •
               ord and ſpirit of God. The dutch Princes and peeres ſay, that force,
word, & galloſſe, in matter of Religion: is a good meanes to ſpil bloud, & make

                     〈◊〉
                   vprere in the land, but not to bring any man from one faith to another. The

                  •
               agans wil not perſequte one another for religion, though (as I read)

                  〈◊〉
                be aboue three thowſand ſorts among them. And you know both

                  •
               ing Henry and Queene Mary, thought themſelves defenders of the

                  ••
               ith, and thaught they burned herericks and hereſy, when they burned

                  〈◊〉
                and their books,Idol Bbs: & falſe miniſters authors of perſequtiō Rev. 16. 14▪
                but now you ſee and muſt acknowledg, that they

                  •
               ere perſequtors of the faith, inſteed of defenders therof, and alſo that

                  〈◊〉
                (through the inſtigation of their bloudy Biſhops) burned the word

                  〈◊〉
                God, and thoſe that profeſſed and wrought it, inſteed of hereſy and

                  ••
               reticks. And thus it wilbe now if the Biſhops and their Miniſters

                  •
               ay haue their wils: and therin they (as their predeceſſors) fullfill the

                  •
               ord of God, in gathering Kings of the earth to the battell of the great day of

                     •
                  od Almighty. For they perſwade Kings to force their ſubjects, to re
               
                  ••
               ave the faith, and to bee of the Church, whereas the Word of God tea
               
                  •
               eth
otherwiſe,Rom. 10. 14. 17. ſaying, Faith commeth by heareing, and hearein by the word

                     〈◊〉
                   God, and not by the Kings ſword. And Chriſt ſaith: Teach al nations &

                     〈◊〉
                   force al nations: and this teaching is to be vnderſtood by the word ād

                  ••
               iting of the Prophets and Apoſtles of our Lord and Saviour Chriſt
which is the Word of God. For they that wilbee of the true faith ād

                  •
               hurch, muſt be caled thervnto, out of the World: by the Word of God,

                  ••
               every nation, and not forced and conſtrayned in every nation, as the

                  ••
               ſhop of Rome, and al other falſe Biſhops and Miniſters have and

                  〈◊〉
                perſwade Kings, Emperors and Magiſtrats.
            
               And his Majeſty and Parliament may pleaſe to vnderſtand, that ſo

                     •
                  doe,
               Mar. 16. 
                     •
                  6. 
               is to quench the Spirit of God, in Chriſt Biſhops and miniſters, and al
                  
                     •••
                  
furſtrate the precept of Chriſt,
               1. teſ. 5. 19. 
               which ſaith: Preach the Goſpel to evry

                  〈◊〉
               , beſides, it maketh their owne office ād functiō voyd, they ought
               
to preach & inſtruct,
                  
                     •
                  . tim. 2. 24, 25. with al meeknes, them that are contrary minded, proveing
if God at any tyme wil give them repentance, that they may know the truth for
the miniſters of the Lord muſt not ſtrive, but be apt to teach, gentle towards all
men, ſuffring evil men patiently, telling Kings and Princes, that the weapons
of Chriſts Biſhops and Miniſters, are not carnal (as the weapons of all
falſe and Antichriſtian Biſhops and Miniſters are) but Spiritual, & mighty
through God, to caſt downe holds, caſting downe evry high thing, that is exalted
againſt the knowledge of God,2. Cor. 10. 3. 5. & bringing into captivity, evry thought, to the
obedience of Chriſt.
            Alſo, if all within the land be forced to be of the church, as the Biſhops
and their miniſters would ſtil have it, thē there would be no world in the
land,Rev. 11. 2. but al the land wold be the Church, which is abſurd, and contray
to the ſcriptures,Act. 2. 41. 47. and great ignorance doe the Biſhops and their miniſters
ſhew, when they thinck the whole nation of people, is the Church
of Chriſt,Note for there it cannot be ſaid, out of greate Brittayne, the Lord added
to the Church from day to day,
               Act. 2. 47. 
               ſuch as shold be ſaved: ſeeing within the land
there would be none without to be added: Alſo within that land, then
would be no perſeqution,A true Church wil not perſequte. ſeeing the Church of Chriſt doth not perſequte
at al, much leſſe it ſelf, but the Miniſters and members of that Church
doe perſequte one another, and therefore it cannot be the ſpiritual Kingdom
and Church of Chriſt, but of Antichriſt, ſeeing it is devided againſt
it ſelf,Mat. 12. 25 rev. 18. 2. 8 and perſequteth one another, and wil with her mother greate Babilon,
be conſumed and condemned, ſeeing (as ſhe) they burne, banniſh, hang,
and impriſon one another which is no Chriſtian,1. Cor. 8. 11. 12. but Antychriſt, an, monſtrous,
cruel, woulviſh, and a tyranous part ano practiſe: for Chriſt ſent hi
                     •
                  
Miniſters as lambs among wolves,
               Luc. 10. 3▪
                
               & not as wolves among lambs.
            
            Againe,Gen. 32. 28 I humbly and withal reverence doe beſeech his right excellēt
Majeſty,Rom. 13. 4 to give me leaue, to put him in mynd, of thoſe things that do
                  •
               
concerne the glory of God, the aſſurance of his owne ſalvation, the ſtabliſhment
of his throne, and the benefit both of the Church of Chriſt, and
the common wealth of al his dominions. And though as Ioſias, he find
                  •
               
(by reading in the booke of the new Teſtament) a great alteration of the
Apoſtoliq faith, & change of the lawes & ordinances of Chriſt, within his dominions.
Yet not to be diſmayed, as Henry le grand, but be encouraged a
                  •
               
Ioſiah, to labor and endevor the redreſſe therof, according to the myn
                  •
               
of Chriſt, in his new Teſtament. And I doubt not, but as Iaacob the Patriarch
prevayled with God & Men: So shal Iaacob the King prevayle both wit
                     •
                  
God & men, eſpecially being his chief ſtuard, by his new Teſtament.
            Through the zealous reading whereof wilbe found, that Antychriſt
the king of the Catholiq faith and diſcipline (caled the miſtery of iniquity)
doth ſit in the Temple of God,
               2. Tym. 2. even as the ſcripture hath foretold.1. tym. 4. 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
it is to be noted that the ſcripture hath alſo foretold,Rev. 17. 15 of the conſumatiō. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
abolition,
               2. th
                     •
                   2. 8. 
               of this Antychriſt, the man of ſin, & his miſtery of iniquity, with the
                     •
                  
moſt of his arival,
               Rev. 17. 16 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               or hygheſt top of dignity, he is come vnto▪
                and this ſhalbe
done by the ſpirit of the Lord in the mouth of his ſervants. For when 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
words of God be fulfilled, then ſhal the ſervants of the lord prevaile (by his
word and ſpirit) with ten kings that shal hate,
               Caled the Temple of God. 
               & make the whore deſolate,
which ſitteth in the hearts and conſciences of peoples, multitudes & nations, and
this whore is the woman caled the great Citty which reigneth over the Kings of
the earth,
               2. Theſa. meaning the chur: of Rtome, by her falſe faith ād diſciplin, which
is ſo faſt ſetleds in the hearts and conſciences of the Kings of the earth,
               Rev. 17. 1 15. 18. 
               that
they think they doe God good ſervice, in killing and burning his ſervants that do
ſpeak againſt her faith & diſciplyne,
               Iohn. 16. 2 
               & that wil not bay any of her wares, that is
her Antychriſtian doctrines ād ordinances. But as ſhe hath had her exaltation
and arival to the heyght and dignity of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Empire of Rome,
               Re. 17. 13 14. by the
love of kings, who have given their power and authority vnto her, and who
have fought for her againſt the Saints & ſervants of Ieſus. So ſhe ſhal have
her conſumation and abolition (from that height and dignity) by the hatred
of kings, who againe ſhal take their power and authority from her, and
therwith defend the peace and perſons of the Saints & ſervants of Ieſus: & no
                     •
                  
for religions peace, wil uſe their power and authority againſt the bloudy
perſeqution of Antychriſt and al his bloudy Biſhops and Miniſters, ād
ſo becom nurſing fathers vnto the church of Chriſt. And as it hath pleaſed
God, to give his Majeſty peace round about, as he did vnto King
Cyrus, in whoſe dayes the material Temple began to be repared (which was
a figuer of the ſpiritual temple) So I pray it may pleaſe him alſo (in the
peaceable dayes of king Iames) to begin to repayre the ſpiritual Temple) the
Apoſtoliq church ſcattered and dryven abroad into the wildernes of this
world,Eſay. 2. 4. whoſe ca
                  •
               ing and gathering together,Ezra. 4. 7. muſt be by the preaching of
the word of God,Ha. 2. 4. 10. both to jewes and gentils, and not by the ſword of the
kings of the earth, as Antychriſt and his Miniſters have now along tyme perſwaded
and prevailed, wherby not onely the jewes and infidels, but alſo
papiſts and other falſe Chriſtians, are hindred and deprived from the
knowledg of the Apoſtoliq faith. And it is be noted that David might not
build Gods temple, becauſe he had ſpilt much blood, which ſheweth, no
blood ought to be ſpilt, for the building of the ſpiritual temple. 1. Cro. 28. 3. ergo
peace in religion is a good meanes to make a vnity of religion among ſo
many Chriſtian ſects
            And it is wel worthy conſideration,Exod. 25. 
                     •
                   and 35. 5▪
                that as in the tyme of the old Teſtament,
the Lord would not have his offrings by conſtraint, but of every
man whoſe heart gave it freely:
               Act. 2. 40. 41. mat. 28 ſo now in tyme of the goſpel, he wil not have
the people conſtrayned, but as many as receave the word gladly, they are to be
added to the Church by baptiſme:
               Mar. 16. 16▪
                
               and therfore Chriſt commanded his diſciples
to teach al nations,
               Mat. 10. 11 14. 
               & baptiſe them, that is to preach the word of ſalvatiō to evry
creature, of al ſorts of natiōs, that are worthy and willing to receave it. And ſuch
as ſhal willing and gladly receave it, he hath commanded to be baptiſed
in the water, that is dipped for dead in the water, ād therfore the apoſtle
ſaith, Els what shal they do, which are baptiſed for dead, if the dead be not raiſed
why are they baptiſed for dead?
               1. Co. 1
                     •
                  . 29 And therfore alſo he ſaith: we are buried thē
with him by baptiſme &c: and it is to be wel obſerved, that when Chriſt

wold have preached the word of ſalvation to the gaderēs,
               Luc. 8. 37. he did not compel
them when they refuſed, but finding them vnwilling to receave him
and his word, he turned from them without hurting thē: alſo whē 
               Iames
and Iohn ſaw that ſom of the Samaritane
                     •
                   refuſed Chriſt▪
               
               Luc. 9. 54. 55. 
               they wold have commanded
fyer from heaven to conſume them, as Elias did. But Chriſt rebuked thē
and ſaid: ye know not of what ſpirit ye are: For the ſon of man is not come to deſtroy
mens lives, but to ſave them. By al which, it may pleaſe his Majeſty
and Parliament, to take knowledge that Chriſt wil haue none conſumed
with fyer and ſword, for not heareing and not receaveing his word: And that
(howſoever it hath bene the mynde of Antychriſt, to deſtroy mens liues
for religion, and therein haue not ſpared neither prince nor people) yet it
is not the mynde of Chriſt, that princes ſhould deſtroy their ſubiects, nor
yet that ſubiects ſhold deſtroy their Princes for difference in religion.
            
               And therfore why ſhold Biſhops perſwade Princes and people, and
why ſhold king, prince and people be perſwaded by their Biſhops and
Miniſters, to be contrary mynded to Chriſt? verily it is a notorious ād
playne token of a falſe faith and diſcipline, that is defended by fyer and
ſword, the power and authority of Princes: And they cannot be Chriſts
Bs: and preachers that perſwade princes and peoples to ſuch Antychriſtian
tyranny and cruelty.
               Chriſts Bs: wil not be lords over the conſciences. 
               And it is very evident that thoſe Bs: and
Mm: which giue ouer men and women to the Magiſtrate, to be perſwaded
by perſeqution, doe ſhew clearly that their doctrine is not good, and
that they want the word ād ſpirit of God, ād therfore flee to the Magiſt:
ſword for the forceing of them to their faith and diſciplyne, and as the
wyne is not good which we are forced to drink, ſo thoſe doctrynes are
not good which we are forced to beleeue. But it may be by this tyme, al
thoſe Biſhops (who vnfainedly feare God and truly love the king) will
haſte and make ſpeed to come vnto his Majeſty for pardon, acknowledging
the truth of this booke, confeſſeing their ignoraace and arrogance,
in the knowledge of Gods word, and in compelling the people to heare
the word preached, and for impri: burn: banniſ: and hang: for religion:
cōtrary to the minde of Chriſt, ād alſo for ſtopping the mouthes of mē ād
burning their books, that preach ād wryte contrary to their myndes ād
wils, yea it may be they wil alſo confeſſe and ſay: Oh moſt gratious king,
we beſeech your Maieſty to shew vs mercy and to forgiue vs our ſpirituall pride
and ambition, in that we haue thus long vſurped the blaſphemous titles of ſpirituallords
and lords graces,
                  
                     •
                  he Bs: do 
                     •
                  now in 
                     •
                  heir conſciences 
                     •
                  hat this 
                     〈◊〉
                   true. the which Tytles we now to the glory of God, ād honor
of the King do with Vntained hearts confeſſe, to be due and belong onely to
Chriſt himſelf: and that the name and Tytle of ſpiritual lord cannot belong to any
earthly Creature, no not to the King or Emperor, becauſe it is an heavenly name
and tytle, how much leſſe can it belōg or be due vnto vs, your Maieſtys vnworthy
ſubjects and ſchollers. And for ſo much as we now vnderſtand (the Lord be prayſed
therfore) that the holy and heavenly name and devine tytle of ſpiritual lord is
as much,
                  
                     •
                  ob. 32. 22 yea as high and greate,Phi. 2. 9. 11 as the name and tytle of a ſpiritual God, and alſo

that it is a name aboue evry name, which God the Father hath given vnto Chriſt
onely to the end, that evry knee shold bow vnto that onely and heavenly name,
and that evry tongue shold confeſſe that Ieſus is the Meſſiah, the Lord, vnto the
glory of God the Father,Col. 1. 18. that in al things Chriſt might have the preheminence,
for he alone is the head of the Chuach, which is his body: The which cannot bee
ſo long as we, or any other Biſhops, do hold and retayne that devine, high and
ſuper excellent name and tytle of ſpiritual lord: Becauſe then it cānot be ſaid that
God hath ſo highly exalted him, as to give him a name aboue evry name, ſeeing
our names and tytles are alſo ſpiritual, and are caled ſpiritual lords ſo wel as the
ſon of God,The Bs: in Tytles equal to the Son of God. Ieſus the Meſſiah. The remembrance hereof moſt gratious ſoueraigne
doe make vs to tremble before God and the king. And therfore we moſt earnſtly
deſire your ſacred Majeſty, and the whole Parliament, to diſchardge and releaſe vs
of theſe fearful names and tytles▪ that doe onely belong to the Son of God, Ieſus
the onely ſpiritual lord, that God hath given vnto his Church.
            Moreover, we doe (according to the truth) acknowledge, that if wee shold any
longer retayne theſe devine and high names of ſpiritual lords and lords graces, we
shold therin be intiteled, not onely with a name equal to our lord Ieſus, the onely
begotten Son of God,Note Gods bleſſings il expected, vnleſſe theſe Idols bee rejected, who are exalted above al earthly Gods. but alſo we shold be intytled with a name and tytle above
your right excellent Maieſty, yea above al Emperors, Kings ād Princes of the earth
The which alone we doe acknowledge to be a ſufficient cauſe to put vs downe,
and to depri
                  •
               ue vs of theſe vſu
                  •
               ped names, and blaſ
                  •
               hemous tytles. Alſo we doe
confeſſe, that our pomp and ſtate wherin we now live, is more like the Bishops of
the Catholiq Church of Antychriſt: then any way like vnto the Bishops of the
Apoſtoliq Church of Chriſt; vnto whom we acknowledge, we ought to bee made
like, and alſo to be qualified with the like gifts and graces of the ſpirit, or els in no

                  •
               aſe we can be meet Bishops for the Church of Chriſt, as the Apoſtle plainly teacheth
both to Tymothy and Tytus &c: And we muſt further acknowledge and
confeſſe, that our howſes, howsholds and revenues are more fit ād meet for princes,
Dukes and Earles, then for the Bishops of Chriſt. VVherfore (being moved and
ſtirred vp hereto by the feare of God) we earneſtly beſeech your Majeſty and parliament,
1. Tym. 3. alſo to disburden vs of this great pomp and ſtate, and of our great and
Princelyke howſes,Tit. 1. 6. 9. howshols and revenues; that ſo we may be made equal ād conformable
to the Miniſters of Chriſt, and then we shal have both hope and cōfort
of the world to come, although but litle in this, except your Majeſty and Parliament
doe grant free liberty of conſcience, the which we now do alſo with the
poore diſtreſſed Chriſtians, moſt humbly entreat and deſire: and that for theſe 4.
reaſons: Firſt, becauſe therby the goſpel of Chriſt wilbee ſet free and at liberty,
wherby al people both Iewes and Gentils wilbe gathered to the Apoſtoliq faith,
Church and diſcipline. Secondly, becauſe many of your Maj: ſubjects, both Men
and women (who now are forced to diſſēble their religion, for feare of our perſeqution)
wil be releaſed and ſet free from their ſpiritual bondage ād ſlavery, wherin
we now do hold thē againſt their conſciences, and ſo they wil becom more faith
ful Chriſtians to God, and more loyal ſubjects to your Maj: then ever they were
before, to the ſalvation of their ſoules and the ſaefty of the Crowne and State.
            
               
Thirdly, becauſe the poore diſtreſſed Chriſtians (now banniſhed and diſperſed out
of their Fatherland, over the face of the earth) wilbe redeemed frō greate miſery
and bondage, wherin now (no doubt) they live and abide, becauſe they wil not be
in bondage to any other ſpiritual lord or head, then the lord Ieſus Meſſiah alone,
whoſe faith and diſciplyne they deſier onely to learne and obey. Fourthy, becauſe
therby great benefit and comodity wil redound, both to your Majeſty and to all
your ſubjects, within your highnes dominions by the great commerce, in trade &
trafiq both of Iewes and al people, which now for
                  •
               ant of liberty of conſcience,
are forced and dryven els where: and alſo from the revennues & liveings, which
we and our glergie doe poſſeſſe, and from the courts and offiices we hold ād keep
great profit and commodity wil redound, both to your highnes, and to al your
kingdoms, we ſay more profit and commodity then we or any man is able to expreſſe.
And therfore, we alſo deſier al his maieſtyes ſubjects, both greath & ſmale
in al love ad feare of God, not to be offēded, or any way moved or grieved, when
they shal ſee ſuch a reformation of vs, as that famous King Henry the eyght, did
make of our lordly brethren the Abbots and their Clergye: For indeed ſuch a reformation
ought to come among vs and our glergy,To greate 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ods, 
                     〈◊〉
                   uſe the word, againſt gods word. ſeeing we are no way agreable
to the new Teſtament, of the onely ſpiritual lord Ieſus Meſſiah, but are limbs
and fellow members of that Antychriſtian ād Romish church, which in the ſcriptures
is Prophecyed to be abolished and deſtroyd. Now therfore we pray you all
let not King David ſay, the Sons of Seruiah are to ſtrong for him, for that wil bee
vnprofitable for you al. And for concluſion, we entreat his Ma: and Parlia:
to enact (that as our adverſaries com againſt vs, onely with the word of
God, ſo we go againſt them onely with the word of God, and not as we
have done by civil authority, for ſo our ſelves may be forced to diſſemble
Thus it may be, the lord wil perſwade and work in the hearts of ſome of
the Biſhops, who wil willingly reſigne their Antychriſtian tytles and
Popiſh pomp and State, with their princelike howſes ād lyveings into
the hands of the King, without any compulſion or conſtraint. But if they
doe not, yet if it pleaſe God to open the kings heart, to ſee their Antichriſtian
and Idol eſtate, ād the danger ād damage they cauſe both to the King
Prince and People, they wil be compelled therto, evē as their lordly brethren
the Abbots in King Henry dayes were. And howſoever it be not
regarded, or perhaps not deſcerned, yet in the ſight of God ād his people
they are greater Idols, then their lordly bretheren the Abbots: yea greater
Idols then the Images of wood and ſtoone (which that famous ād
Godly King Edward,
               The Bs: greater Idols then the Abbots 
                     •
                  mages or goldē calfe▪
                
               did pul downe and deſtroy) for they did not impriſon,
nor burne, nor hang: nor yet cauſed to be banniſhed any of the kings
ſubjects, that would not worſhip them, as theſe Idol Biſhops doe. And
out of doubt: theſe Biſhops are greater Idols then the golden calfe, Aaron
made and offred vnto: for the calfe did not perſequte nor ver, ſuch as
did not acknowledge it for their Lord as the Biſhops doe: neyther did
the Calfe reygne and rule by force over the conſciences of the people as
theſe Idol Biſhops doe.
            
            Beſides, the Calfe was ſet vp in ſteed of Moſes, who brought the people

out of Egypt,
               Ex. 32. 1▪
                
               and shewed them the wil of God, but theſe Bbs: are ſet vp in
ſteed of Chriſt, who have brought vs out of the bondage of hel, and who
ſheweth vs his Fathers wil in his new Teſtament, the which theſe jdol
Bs: wil not ſuffer vs to obey but in ſteed therof wil force vs to faldown
worſhip and obey ther Father Antychriſts wil and old teſtamēt,what greater idolatri thē to obai other ſpiritual lords, then the lord Ieſus. which
ſtinks in the noſtrels of al reformed ſtrangers that heare thereof, as wel
as in ours that have taken our flight from it. Therfore theſe ſpirituall
lords and Idol Biſhops ought to be pulled downe and ſuppreſſed, like
the Abbots their lordly brethren, though not ſacrificed vnto the Lord
in Smithfeild as the Godly king Ioſias ſacrificed the Idol Prieſts of the high places
on the Altars therof. And I doe verely beleeve, that if free liberty of cō
               ſcience
be granted,2. king. 23. 17. 20. that the ſpiritual kingdom of theſe Idol Bs: will in
tyme fal to the ground of it ſelf, as the jdol Dagon fal before the Arke
for throug the knowledge of Gods word,1. ſam. 5. 3. wil al godly people, with draw
themſelves in al peceable and godly wiſe, from the ſpiritual obedience of
theſe ſpiritual lords and Idol Bbs: and quietly betake themſelves vnto
the obedience of the onely ſpiritual lord Ieſus Meſſiah. But howſoever it be
I ſhalbe contented therewith, and ſo I wiſh al others, for we al ought
to be content, if we obtayne freedom of conſcience, and therefore to give
god prayſe cōtinualy, that hath wroght ſo bleſſed a worke in the hearts
of the King and Parliamēt, for whō as the ſcripture teacheth we ought
to make ſupplications,
               1. ty. 2. 1. 2▪
                
               prayers and interceſſions, that they may com to the knowledge
of the truth, and that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in al godlines
and honeſty. And vnto whō we ought to give (by the law of God) al earthly
honor feare and reverence,Rō. 13. 1. 7▪
                and willingly to paytribute and cuſtō, tax
and tol, ſo much and ſo often as it ſhal pleaſe his Majeſty and parliam:
to appoint and gather, by any officer or officers whatſoever. For whom
alſo, and for the whole common wealth of al his Kingdoms, we ought to
be diligent and ready to hazard and lay downe, not onely our goods, but
alſo our lives at al tymes and occaſiōs. For Chriſt hath onely ſet vs free
from al eccleſiaſtical lawes and ordinances, which himſelf hath not commanded
in his laſt wil and Teſtament. Yea from the eccleſiaſtical lawes
and commandements of the old Teſtament,Col. 2. 14. how much more hath he ſet
vs free from the eccleſiaſtical lawes and ordinances of Antichriſt,Heb. 8. 13. but he
hath not ſet vs free from the Moral and Iudicial law of God, for that
the king is bound to execute, and we are bound to obey: and for want of
the execution therof,Deut. 17▪ 18. 20. there are in our land many whores and whorekeepers,
ād many childrē murdered beſides the death ād vndoeing of many
perſons about whores. Wherfore I humbly deſier that the Morall and
and Iudicial low of God may be practiſed and executed, of al degrees
both high and low without reſpect of perſons, according the mynd of
Chriſt. For the Lord wil have that evry man ſhal love him above al, and
his neyghbor as himſelf, and Chriſt ſaith, as ye would that men ſhold do
to you,Luc. 6. 3
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                ſo do ye to them likewiſe.
            Therfore as the king wold not have his ſubjects, to take away his life

becauſe he is contrary to them in religiō. So let not the king take away
his ſubjects lives, becauſe they are contrary to the king in religion: and
as you wold not men ſhold force you to a religion againſt your conſciences,
ſo doe not you force men to a religion againſt their conſciences.
And as it is the duty of ſubjects to ſeeke the converſion of their king ād
State, by the word of God, and not his and their deſtruction by fyer ād
ſword. So it is the duty of the king and ſtate, to ſeek the converſion of
of their ſubjects by the word of God,Note and not their deſtruction by fier ād
ſword, as the Pope and his Prelats doe teach: whoſe vaſſals therin both
Emperors and Kings (as wel as people) have bene a long tyme: both to
the deſtruction of thēſelfs ād their ſubjects. For who knoweth not that
prelats and preiſts haue perſwaded ſubjects, to deſtroy their kings and
princes, as wel as kings and princes to deſtroy their ſubiects: but 
                  〈◊〉
                pray
thē both to take notice that the ſcrip:1. Cor. 3. 17 & 6. 19. 20▪
                ſaith he that deſtroyeth the Temple of
God, him wil God deſtroy. Let not therfore kings, princes nor ſubjects bee
any longer perſwaded to deſtroy one āother through the ſuttelty of Bs:
and their mi: who (moſt of thē) onely ſeeke the ſecurity of their owne pōp
and glory, ād the ſtabliſhmēt of their ſpiritual thrones therin: for ſo long
as they may confirm that, they paſſe not who periſh, whether king, prince
or people. Againe therfore I humbly pray his Ma: and par: to repeale
and make voyd al popiſh lawes and canons, and to ſee the moral and Iucial
law of god,
               Frederich & Iohn Palſgraves ſaid that vnder pretext of the holi ghoſts office of correction litle els was ſougt thē to reygne over the cōſciē
                  ces of the Magiſtrats & ſubjects like as in the accurſed popedom is cō to paſſe &c. both firmly enacted, ad carefully practiſed after the minde
of Chr: and then ſhal Chriſts ſpiritual throne be ſtablished in the hearts & conſciences
both of king, prince and people, ſo as the Chu: Chriſts ſpiritual kingdom
ſhal increace in the knowledge of faith, and obediēce therof, with al
loue, peace ād charity, one towards another. And the cōmō wealth of his
Ma: King: wil floriſh and proſper, ād alſo his throne be conſtātly ſtablished
both to him and his heyres through out al his dominions, in a ſuer land
of peace and love, tho
                  •
               e with and towards another, to the glory of God
and the cōfort of his Maj: and of al his ſubjects, ād alſo to a famous ād
excellent glorious paterne of govermēt, to al kingdōs, natiōs ād contries
round about, as in the dayes of Salomō king of Iſrael. For if the holi lawes
of Gods word be practiſed and executed after Chriſts wil, thē, ſhal neither
king, prince nor people be deſtroyed for differēce in religion: then Treaſon
& Rebelliō, as wel as burn: ban: han: and impri: for difference in religion
wil ceaſe and be laid downe, then ſhal not mē, womē and youth be hāged
for theft: then ſhal not the poore lame, ſik and weake ones, be ſtocked and
whipped, neither ſhal the poore, ſtranger, fatherleſſe ād widowes, be driven
to beg frō place to place, neither ſhal the lame, ſik ād weake perſons
ſuffer ſuch miſery ād be forſaken of their kinred, as now they be, thē ſhal
not murder, whoredō and adultry be bought out for mony: then ſhal not
the greate defraude and wrong the ſmale, neither the ritch oppreſſe the
poore by uſury and litle wages: then ſhal not men bring vp and i
                  •
               herit
others childrē in ſteed of their owne, neither ſhal an honeſt man be forced
to liue with a whore in ſteed of an honeſt wife, nor yet an honeſt women

with a whorekeeper in ſteed of an honeſt huſband 
                  〈◊〉
                ſhal not ſervāt
                  •
               
be forced from mariage by bonds, nor yet be 
                  〈◊〉
                ſervitude, longer
then ſix yeares, neither ſhal they be brought vp contrary to covenant,
nor poſted from one quarter or one yeare to another for their fredom ād
in thend be forced to buy it of their Maſters, or els to go without it two
Then ſhal neither Prince nor people be diſinherited, for not being of the
church:Note wel. neither ſhal they be held lawleſſe perſons, though excomunicated
neither ſhal any man dare kil them as now they may, and be quit by law
neither ſhall any man feare to have his mouth ſtopt for preaching the
truth, then ſhal no man need to flee out of his natiue contry and Fatherland,
for perſequtions ſake: then ſhal al mē live in peace vnder his owne
vyne, lauding and prayſing God honoring and obeying the King. Then
alſo wil no bloud be eaten among Chriſtians, wherby the Iewes ſhould
haue juſt cauſe to ſtumble or be offended, neither ſhold any reliqs of the
ceremonial law, (as Tithes and offrings etc:) be any longer in uſe, wher
by the jewes ſhold be hardned, in their vnbelief and kept from the faith
of the Meſſiah.
               Iewes kepe back from the faith by perſeqution. Then ſhal the Iewes inhabit and dwel vnder his Maieſtys
dominion, to the great profit of his Realmes, and to their furtherance
in the faith: the which we are bound to ſeeke in al loue and peace,
ſo wel as others, to our vttermoſt endevor, for Chriſt hath comanded to

                  
                     •
                  each al nations &c: and they are the firſt. Laſtly, then ſhal not ſo many mē
and Women be deceaved by falſe Miniſters, neither by their ſermons,
nor yet by their bookes, which are ful fraighted with falſe doctrines, ād
confirmed and countenāced not onely by the Kings authority ād power
but alſo by wreſting and falſe interpreting of the ſcriptures, and by aledging
of popiſh Fathers, which through the greate ignorance of the people
doe greatly prevayle: but then ſhalbe aboliſhed through the word ād
ſpirit of God (his two witneſſes) in the mouth of his ſervants,Rev. 11. 3 and 19. 10. who by

                  •
               ord ād wryting ſhal breed ſuch knowledge, that none of wiſdoms children
ſhalbee deceaved, Another reaſon, why ſo many good people are
now deceaved, is, becauſe we that have moſt truth, are moſt perſequted.
and therefore moſt poore, whereby we are vnable to wryte and print as

                  •
               e, wold, againſt the adverſaries of the truth. It is hard to get our dai
               
                  •
               y
food, with the labors of our weake bodyes and feeble hands, how thē
ſhould we have to def
                  •
               ay other chardges, and to write and print? I haue
through the help of God out of his word,2. Pet. 2. 
                     •
                  . made a ſcourge of ſmale coar
               
                  ••
               s,
wherwith Antychriſt and his Miniſters might be dryven out of the

                  •
               emple of God. Alſo a declaratiō of certaine falſe tranſlations in the new Teſtament:It is the Kings honor to ſearch out a thing. but j wāt wherwith

                  〈◊〉
                print and publiſh it, therfore it muſt reſt til the lord ſeeith good to ſup
               
                  •
               ly it:
In meane while, I humbly entreat his Ma: and Par: to give me

                  •
               ave to prove the Bs. with one queſtion, by which you may perceave the

                  ••
               orance of your Bs: it is this, how they wil bee able to proue a reſurrection
from theſe Words,Pro. 25. 
               I am the God of Abraham,
               Exod. 3. 6. 
               the God of
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
priſon. Kings and Magiſtrats are Gods miniſters and not the biſhops,
therfore I humbly beſeech you to with 
                  •
               and the bloudy mindes of your
Bs: that there be no more innocent Chriſtians perſequted to death for
religion. I read that in the Netherlands aboue a hundred thowſand perſons
have beene put to death for religion,A cryeing ſinne. but now praiſed be God, we
have no ſuch wooful tidings preached amōg vs, the lord worke as much
in our land I beſeech him, that ſo you may no longer burne and banniſh
the ſervants of Chriſt:Iohn. 16. 3 For he ſaith they that doe theſe things have not knowen
the Father nor mee: Yet I confeſſe you have the zeale of God, for you
think you do God good ſervice, in burning Chriſtiās that differ frō your
religion. But I alſo confeſſe your zeale is not according to knowledge:
for your Bs: and Min: being indued with vniverſity and high ſchoole
learning,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 10. 2. 3. devinity and doctrine, but being ignorāt of the lowly learning
heavenly divinity and doctryne of Chriſt, have and doe ſtil goe about to
ſtabliſh their owne, and haue not yet ſubmitted themſelves, to the lowly
learning devinity and doctryne of Chriſt: and therfore like their predeceſſors,
wil perſwade you to burn: ban: etc: ſuch Chriſtians as they hold
to be in error about doctrines ano queſtions of faith and religion: right
as if they had the power to rule, governe, and diſpoſe the hearts and ſpirits
of kings, princes, and people, even as they liſt, ād alſo to make them
good and righteous when they wil, and to cauſe them to vnderſtand and
beleeue the goſpel, even by a day and ho
                  •
               er apointed, which to do, belongeth
to God alone: and therfore Chriſt ſaith no man cā come to me except
the Father draw him.
               Iohn. 6. 44 And Chriſt wil haue his miniſters to preach to ſuch
as are worthy and wiling, and not as your Min: who com to them, whō
they hold vn worthy and finde vnwilling,Mat. 10. 11 14. and ſay, wil ye not com to chur:
and heare, and wil ye not beleeue our doctryne? but we wil make you, or els wee
wil burne you for heretycks. Thus wil they taunt meeke and holy Chriſtians who
are torne like sheep among the wolves. But Chriſts miniſters wil with meeknes, inſtruct
ſuch as are contrary mynded, tollerating the evil men patiently, proveing if
God at any tyme wil give them repentance,
               2. 
                     •
                  y. 2. 25. 
               that they may know the truth: wher
by they shew plainly,
               Ioh. 13. 35 
               that they are Chriſts diſciples, and have that true faith,
which worketh by loue, even as the Apoſtle ſaith, the which I pray you
to conſider, that ſo you may both know and obay the wil of Chriſt. Now
(ſaith he) abideth faith,
               1. Cor. 13 
               hope and love, but the cheyfeſt of theſe, is love, for wher
love is ther is no diſdayne, it ſeeketh not her owne things, it is not provoked to
anger, it ſuffreth al things, it hopeth al things, it indureth al things. Yea the love
of Chriſt ſo loveth, that it wil not ver nor perſequte any that cal on his
name.Heb. 13. 3. Therfore I humbly pray you to remember them that are in bonds,
as though ye were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were
alſo afflicted in the body.
               Iam. 2. 13. 
               And to shew them mercy, for mercy rejoyceth againſt
judgement, but judgment mercyles, shal be to them that shew no mercy. If ye be
friendly to your brethren onely what ſinguler thing do you, doe not the ſinners
the ſame?
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 6. 32. 
                     •
                  7. be not like vnto them, but vnto your heavenly father, whoſe wiſdom,
love and mercy, I beſeech him to grant you, that ſo you may come

to the knowledge of the truth and be ſaved: And that we (your Majeſtis
faithful ſubjects) may lead a peaceable and quiet life (even in our owne nation)
in al Godlynes and honeſty.
               1. Tym. 2 
               Amen.
            
            Now,Pet. 4. 12 them that are perſequted, I exhort with the words of the Apoſtle
Peter. dearely beloved thinck it not ſtrāge concerning the fiery trial
that is among you to prove you, as though ſom ſtrange thing were com
vnto you: but rejoyce in as much as ye are pertakers of Chriſts ſuffrings
that when his glory ſhal appeere ye may 
                  •
               e glad and rejoyce. If ye bee
rayled vpon for the name of Chriſt, bleſſed are ye for the ſpirit of glory ād
of God reſteth vpon you,2. Pet. 2. 2. which on their part is evil ſpokē of, but on your
part is glorifyed. but let no man ſuffer as an evil doer, or as a murtherer
or as a buſy body in others matters: but i
                  •
                one ſuffer as a Chriſtian, let
him not be a ſhamed,Act. 24. 14▪
                but let him glorifye God in that behalf. For al the
Mar
                     •
                  rs of the Apoſtoliq Church have ſuffered as evil doers, and as heretiks. For
the time is that judgment muſt begin at the howſe of God: If it firſt begin
at vs (ſaith the apoſtle) what ſhal the end be of them, that obey not
the goſpel of God. And if the righteous ſcarſly be ſaved, where ſhall the
vngodly and ſinner appeere? wherfore let them that ſuffer according to
the 
                  〈◊〉
                of God, commit their ſoules vnto him in weldoeing, as vnto a
faithful Creator.
            
               Read Eſay. 2. 2. 4. 11. 16.
He shal judge among the nations,Antychriſt and his perſequtiō shalbee made low. ād rebuke many people, they shal break their
ſword into mattocks and their ſpeares into ſithes: nation shal not lift vp a ſword
againſt nation, neyther shal they learne to fight any more. The high looks of man
shal be humbled, and the loftynes of man shalbe abaſed, & the lord onely shalbe
exalted in that day: for the day of the lord of hoſts is vpō al the proud and hauty
and vpon al that is exalted,2. theſ. 2. 4 and it shalbe made low.
            
               Litle David overcame great Goliah, yet not brought vp in warre. Vnlearned
Peter confuted the learned preiſts,
               Gal. 6. 6 
               yet by caling a fiſher man. Attend,
and helpe,
               1. Cor. 9. 7. 
               and you ſhal ſee the wonderful works of God. For the foolishnes
of God, is wiſer then men, & the weaknes of God is ſtronger then men.
And God hath choſen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wiſe, &
things tha
                  •
                are deſpiſed, hath God choſen, to bring to nought things that are.
1. Cor. 1. 25. 28.
            FINIS.
            
               Leonard Busher.
            
            
            
         
      
   