
      
         
            
            
            THE DVTCH
SVRVAY.
            Wherein are related
and truly diſcourſed, the chiefeſt loſſes and
acquirements, which haue paſt betweene the Dutch
and the Spaniards, in theſe laſt foure yeares Warres of the
Netherlands, with a comparatiue ballancing and eſtimation
of that which the Spaniards haue got in the Dutchies of Cleeue and
Iuliers, with that which they haue loſt vnto the
Dutch and Perſians, in Braſilia, Lima,
and Ormus.
            
            VVhereunto are annext the Mansfeldian
motiues, directed vnto all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels,
Sergeant Majors, priuate Captaines, inferiour Officers,
and Souldiers, whoſe ſeruice is engag'd in this preſent
expedition, vnder the conduct and commaund of the
moſt illuſtrious Prince ERNESTVS,
Earle of Mansfield.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by Edward All-de, for
NATHANIEL BVTTER.
            1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE THOMAS
Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oukeham
in Rutland-ſhire, Vicount Lecall in the Kingdome
of Ireland, and one of his Maieſties Honourable
Priuie Councell in that Kingdome: and Colonell of a
Regiment of Foote vnder the moſt illuſtrious Prince
ERNESTVS Earle of Mansfield, W. C. wiſheth
that happineſſe which he himſelfe
deſireth.
            
               RIght Honorable, I made bold
to conſecrate vnto your moſt
iudicious cenſure, this Dutch
Suruay or ballance, which
if it proue waight in the Ballance
of your eſtimation, and
appeare in the triall as free
from errour as it is from partiality, the Author
ſhall thinke his endeuours fortunate. The motiues
which inuited me to this Dedication, were
firſt of all your knowne zeale to equity and religion;

for the ſacred priuiledges whereof, the Netherlanders
haue fought moſt reſolutely for many
yeares together to the wonder of their friends,
to the terrour and aſtoniſhment of their mortall
Enemies: So that if we ſhall admire the greatnes
of the Heluetian Cantons raiſed out of the ruines of
the houſe of Auſtria, or the fortune of the Venetian
Cōmon-wealth, erected out of the Reliques of the
Romane Empire declining in Italy, we may iuſtly
wonder at the ſwelling power of this Eſtate, ordayned
by God in this latter age, to checke the
greatnes of Caſtile, whoſe ſeuere and rigorous
dealing made them firſt to quit the yoake, and
vindicate their liberty from Philips tyrannie and
oppreſſion. The next motiue which imboldned
me to this attempt, was your gracious promiſe
made vnto me by the mediation of a noble Gentleman,
for farthering me with a place according
to my calling, in this new intended iourney:
which if I may enioy vnder your Honors fauour
and commaund, I hope that God will ſo aſſiſt
me with his grace, that the bent of my meane
endeuours ſhall wholy tend to the ſeruice of
God, my Country, and your Honoured ſelfe.
Vnto this diſcourſe is added, beſides a briefe encouragement
vnto thoſe, who are deſigned
for vndertakers in this expedition vnder Count

               Mansfield; the which I doe not, becauſe I thinke
their reſolutions to neede the ſpurre, for ours
commonly are ſo forward, that they neede the
bridle, but that thoſe ſpirits who are either ignorant
or iealous of the motiues, may rectif
                  •
               e their
mindes by the knowledge and conſideration
of them. Thus deſiring your Honours
fauourable acceptance, I leaue
and reſt,
            
               Your moſt obliged Seruant. VV. C.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, thou maiſt behold
in this diſcourſe a true Suruay of
thoſe more remarkable loſſes and
acquirements which haue paſt betweene
the Dutch and the Spaniards,
ſince the expiration of the
laſt truce, which ended with the
beginning of the yeare 1621. Thou maiſt behold alſo a
true counterpoiſe or comparatiue ballancing of the ſame,
wherein it doth moſt plainely appeare, that the Dutch
haue not onely not beene looſers in theſe latter and time
neerer warres of the Netherlands, but for diuers aduantageous
reſpects, haue beene victorious againſt their
potent and moſt redoubted Enemies, who vnder the colourable
pretence of the Burgonian Title, ſought to infringe
the liberties of theſe Countries, contrarie to the
auncient cuſtomes, freedomes, and priuiledges of the
ſame. To this relation is annexed a briefe encouragement
vnto all thoſe, who either as voluntaries or by way
of Impreſt, are ingage in this expedition of Count

               Mansfield. In the cenſure of both theſe, let thy iudgement
be milde and fauourable, and not according to the
common Current of the diſaffected and Spaniolized
Engliſh, whoſe reports are ſo farre from truth & equity
in theſe and other traditions, that they wholy encline to
partiality and detraction: For my part I know the candour
and integritie of my owne thoughts, and how free
they are from any bending inclination or report, being
vnwilling that any knowne truth, though it were in giuing
the Diuell his due, ſhould be wronged by any fabulous
or counterfeit adumbrations. The conſcience of
this, armes me againſt the danger of their malicious aiaculations,
and makes me hopefull of the impartiall Readers
beſt conſtruction, which if I may obtaine, I
ſhall for euer reſt happy for this their
good eſtimation.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE DVTCH
SVRVAY.
            
               THat Hiſtoricall faith which proceedeth
from the irradiation of report,
as it is oftentimes grounded
vpon the Marble foundation of
truth: ſo is it many times built vpon
the ſandy baſe of miſpriſion, errour
and coniecture: and this doth
happen either through the malignity
of our owne will, which doth facilitate the beliefe
of thoſe things, which we with willing affectation doe
deſire, for qua volumus facile credimus, or through the
vanity of falſe Intelligence, which makes vs conceiue
Chimaraes for Idaeas, falſhoods for truths, doubtfull probabilities
for manifeſt and aſſured demonſtrations. A
concluſion not onely true in all Hiſtories whatſoeuer,
either auncient or moderne, whereas the Eare but not
the Eye giues information, but moſt eſpecially verifiable
in the preſent ſubiect of this relation & diſcourſe:
for although within the reuolution of theſe laſt ſixe
yeares, the ſword hath beene put into the Papall hand,
and by their powerfull inſtruments of Spaine & Auſtria,
Bohemia hath beene repoſſeſt, and contrary to the cucuſtomes

and priuiledges of the ſame, of an electiue
Kingdome, hath bin mad abſolute and ſucceſſiue, although
the Paltz by the politique ayre of their verball
treaties and illuſions, hath not onely beene taken, but
moſt iniuriouſly kept away from Frederick, the moſt
worthy and vndoubted Palatine thereof; and though the
Valtoline beſides, hath been ſpoiled, and deſpoiled from
the Griſons, a people free, and ſo acknowledged from
the preſcription of antiquity: yet let the Spaniolized
Engliſh ſay what they will, and let their rumour blaze
what it can to the contrary: the Spaniards haue not
onely not beene victorious, but haue ſuffered many and
moſt remarkable loſſes by the Dutch, in theſe latter and
time-neerer Warres of the Netherlands. In the dilucidation
whereof I meane not to inſtance in the loſſe of
men, money, munition, and ſhipping, which like our
haire growe out againe vpon euery new reinforcement
and ſupply, but in thoſe dammages, which are moſt
ſolid and ſubſtantiall, as the loſſe of Townes, Cities,
Lands, and Territories, which like an arme or legge
cut off, ſildome or neuer growe out againe, to the vſe
and intereſt of their firſt poſſeſſors, eſpecially they being
ſeized by the Dutch or Spaniards, whoſe talents are of
a ſtrong retentiue power, and who know to keepe that,
which they haue once gotten and acquired, as well as
any Nations in Chriſtendome whatſoeuer: ſo that if
we ſhall comparatiuely ballance the Spaniſh Acquiſitions
in the Dutchies of Iuliers and Cleaueland, with their
bleeding detriments, ſuſtained in Braſilia, Lima, and
Ormus: wee ſhall ſee the former to bee exceeded by
the latter, beyond the paralell and degrees of all compariſon.
For the better light and manifeſtation whereof,

we muſt vnderſtand thus much, that thoſe parcels
which Philip the 4. now holdes in Cleeue and Iuliers, were
not plumes aunciently belonging to that new ſpread
Eagles backe of Spaine, but faſtned on like Icarus wings,
vpon the halfe-naked skin of that Auſtrian Pullet now
growne bigger, then the Dam it ſelfe, by the ſticking
waxe of Philip the ſeconds policies and pretences.
            By theſe meanes following your Philippick proiects vpon
theſe now and new inthralled Seigneuries, were
brought and wrought almoſt to the full period, and
non datur vltra of his deſires. William the laſt, Duke of
Cleaues, of that name who deceaſed at Duiſſeldorp, in the
yeare of our Lord God 1592. married his ſonne Iohn
William vnto Iaqueline, the daughter of the Marqueſſe
of Baden, a woman infamouſly famous for her diſſolute
and licentious life; and the cenſure of her impriſonment
for the ſame, for bringing in of the Spaniards vnto
thoſe Countries, and for making of your Cleuian ſimplicity,
firſt acquainted with the ſnaffle of the Caſtilian
rule and gouernment. But theſe, both the Father
and the Sonne dying without heires male, the inheritance
deſcended to two pretended heires female. The
one married vnto the Marquis of Brandenburge, a reformed
Proteſtant, the other married vnto the Prince
of Newenburge, a Romane Catholique. Both theſe fight
for the bone, whilſt a third and fourth take away the
fleſh: for notwithſtanding diuers admonitions and
cautions to the contrary from ſome of their faſteſt
friends, who were iealous of their good, and ſtudious
of the common peace and tranquility of their dominions;
The Newenburger ſtrengthens himſelfe with Partiſans
of the ſame faction and religion, and drawes vnto

his ſuccours: the King of Spaine, the Emperour of Germanie,
with other Auſtrian Princes and Potentates. The
Brandeburger vſeth a draught of the ſame policie, and
inuites the States of the Lowe Countries, the Kings of
England and France vnto his ſuccour and aſſiſtance.
An experience which ſhall proue hurtfull both to the
one and to the other, as the ſequell ſhall declare: for
the Spaniards hauing ſeized vpon Weezell, Rhinebercke,
Duiſſeldorpe, and other places of the Dutchie, keepe
them vpon pretence of their charges, and aſſurance of
their Frontier. The Dutch hauing ſurpriſed Rees, Embricke,
Cleeue, Goffe, and Gulicke, man theſe Townes with
their owne Garriſons, vpon the conſideration of the
ſame and other pretences.
            
               Gulicke was a thorne in Albertus foote, and an eyeſore
in the Caſtilians light. Vanderbercke muſt plucke
this out, being Generall of the Spaniſh Forces in their
Cleuian expedition, which began vnder his command
in the midſt of Auguſt 1622. That yeare being the next
after the expiration of the truce, the Enemies were very
ſtrong, as hauing three Armies in the field, one in
Flaunders beſieging Sluce, vnder the commaund of Inigo
de Borges, and the Biſhop of Gaunt, another houering
about Goffe and Zantom, commaunded by the Marquis
Spinola, which attended the motions of our Naſſauian
Armie, lying then as in our durtie Quarters of Dornicke,
and this third which beleguerd Gulicke, vnder the conduct
of the Earle of Monts, commonly called Henry
Vanderberke. This Citie is the Metropolis of the Dutchy
of Iuliers, vnto which it giues his name ſeated vpon the
Riuer of Roer, in a fruitful Cuntry, which ſtretcheth frō
thence vnto the bankes of the Dent. It was well fortified

and defended, for beſides the olde fortifications
which were found at the firſt reducement of this place,
there were new Rauelins and halfe Moones made by
the directions of the Prince of Orange, and for their defence
there lay fourteene Companies of foote, Engliſh,
Dutch and French within the walls, vnder their Gouernour
Signieur Pethan, beſides Thomas Villers troupe
of Horſe, which was reputed to be one of the braueſt
in all the Netherlands. But although it were well manned,
and ſtrongly fortified, yet for want of victuals it
muſt yeeld to the power of the Conquerour: for the
prouiſion and ſtore of the Magazine growing tainted,
by Commiſſion from the States Pithan, makes ſale of it,
vnto thoſe Merchants that would giue moſt for it. Spinola
vnderſtanding of this by the Nuntioes of his intelligence,
before it could be re-victualed by the States,
ſends Henry Vander Barke to beſiege it with an Armie of
ſixteene thouſand men, both Horſe and Foote, conſiſting
of diuers Nations, as Italians, Spaniards, French,
and Almaines. Vpon their firſt approches, and before
all the aduenues and paſſages were blockt vp, ſome of
the Captaines, amongſt whom Captaine Haydon, and
Captaine Aiſhley, were moſt forward, preſented their
ſeruice vnto the Gouernour, and offered him vpon his
leaue to victuall the Towne aboundantly from the prouiſions
of the Country: the ſeaſon of the yeare ſeruing
fitly for it, it being as then about the beginning of Harueſt,
The counſell was good and wholſome, and might
haue wrought the preſeruation of Gulick, if it had beene
apprehended and executed in time. But Pethan obliging
himſelfe too ſtrictly to his Commiſſion, reiecteth
the proffer, pretending that hee durſt not doe it as hauing

no Warrant for this Deſigne. In the meane time
Count Henricke well husbanding this occaſion, ſits
downe before the Towne, Intrencheth himſelfe ſtrongly,
and drawes his approches cloſe to our vtter Works,
for the better planting of his Cannon. Thus Pethan
ſees his errour, and too late ſeekes to redreſſe the ſame.
Then hee reſolues vppon a ſally which might haue
wrought ſome good effect, if it had beene ſooner enterprized.
In this conflict our men ſurpriz'd and ſleighted
one of the Enemies Fortifications, charged them
home to their teeth, and hauing got ſome proportion
of ſpoiles and victuals, made their retreat good vnto
the Ports, with the loſſe only of Captaine Baſſenheime,
and ſixe and thirty of their Horſemen: amongſt the
reſt young Captaine Haydons valour was moſt remarkable;
he was Captaine of a Foote Company, yet vpon
that day he ſeru'd on Horſe-backe. One of the Enemies
aduauncing himſelfe before the groſſe of their troupes,
dares any of our ſide proudly to the Combat. Haydon
accepts it, and charging him with his Piſtoll, kill'd the
Challenger vpon the place, and after that being recharg'd
by a ſecond, he falls backe to the body of our
Troupes in ſafety. The fortune of this skirmiſh did but
tye the ſquib to the Bulls tayle, encreaſing our appetite
and their anger. Vpon this they batter our Rampiers
furiouſly with the Cannon, and ſalute the defendants
with often vollies of their Musket ſhot. Our men
anſwere them with Balls of the ſame mettall. Amongſt
the midſt of theſe Reuolets, paſſing with a doubtfull
ſucceſſe of fortune betweene the beſiegers and the beſieged,
there chanced a caſuall fire to be kindled in the
Spaniſh Quarters. Our Fire-men plye this place with

their Shotte both great and ſmall, and worke ſome remarkable
dammage vpon the Enemies. But theſe exploites
could not alay the biting ſmart of our hunger,
which now began to rage and raigne in euery Quarter:
For the Towne Prouiſions being ſpent, and the Magazins
waſted, things vnuſuall, and vnaccuſtomed to the
palate, were deuoured; as Dogs, Cats and the like. This
inforcement cauſed Pethan to demaund a Parlee about
the midſt of Ianuarie: notwithſtanding his firſt promiſe
to Vander Berke, that he would not hearken to the
motion of that accord till Eaſter.
            For this purpoſe three Captaines were ſent out of
the Ports vnto their Campe, the one an Engliſh man,
the other two French & Dutch. After ſome difficulties,
the agreement was conſummated vpon theſe conditions
following.
            Firſt, that the Spaniards ſhould not bring the Inquiſition
into the Dutchie of Iuliers▪
                nor make any alteration
in matters of Religion.
            2. That the Captaines and Souldiers ſhould depart
vpon honourable termes, with their Armes fixt, Colours
flying, Drums beating, and their Wiues, Children
and Goods.
            3. That their Ordnance and Munition ſhould remaine
in the Towne.
            4. That their Armourers, Smithes, and Gunners,
might haue liberty freely to depart with the Souldiers.
            5. That the Gouernour and Captaines might haue
Horſe and Waggons, with a ſufficient conuoy to conduct
them to Nimeghen, and that their ſick & wounded
might ſtay vntill they were recouered, and then to haue
Waggons to conduct them to the ſame place.
            
               
6. That the Captaines and Souldiers ſhould haue a
whole yeares liberty, to ſell their lands if they had any.
            7. That the Captaines and Souldiers which were in
any other place of the Dutchie, ſhould haue leaue to
come thither, and bring their Wiues and Children.
            8. That the Armes and Commodities belonging to
the Towne and Caſtle, ſhould be left behinde.
            9. That all Records and auncient Writings in the
Towne and Caſtle, ſhould remaine there ſtill.
            10. That the Souldiers ſhould not be arreſted for
debt.
            11. That the beds which the Souldiers had brought
into the Towne, ſhould be reſtored to their owners.
            12. That the Electour of Brandeburghs Officers and
Miniſters ſhould execute their Offices for the ſpace of
one whole yeare then next enſuing.
            13. That the Citizens might depart the Citie, and
diſpoſe of their goods within one yeare.
            14. That there ſhould be two Hoſtages giuen on either
ſide, vntill the Articles were performed, all which
being ſigned and ſealed by the Gouernour, hee ſhould
ſend a Copie of it to the Prince of Orange, and be bound
to yeeld the place, if they were not releeued within 12.
dayes, with 300. Waggons at the leaſt: which time being
expired, and no reliefe comming from Dornicke or
elſe-where. Vanderberke ſent 600. Waggons to tranſport
their baggage, wiſhing the Gouernour to haſten
his departure: who ſending the keyes vnto the Earle,
departed with all his Goods and Souldiers, leauing
two Hoſtages behinde, vntill the Waggons were returned.
            
               Pethan vpon his comming to the Hague, was arreſted

by order from the States, and the Prince of Orange was
confined as priſoner to his owne houſe, hauing a Guard
of Muskettiers ſet ouer him, and his dignities which he
enioyed in that Common-wealth, were ſuſpended for
a time, vntill he ſhould cleare himſelfe, and giue a iuſt
account of his actions.
            Thus you ſee the loſſe of Gulicke conquered ſome
fifteene yeares before, by the valour of the States forces,
ioyntly with the ſuccours of foure thouſand Engliſh,
vnder the commaund of that noble and well experienced
commander Generall Cecill; and now re-conquered
by the Spaniards, more by the power of hunger,
then the powerfulnes of their Armes: which loſſe came
not ſolitarie and alone, but was aggrauated with the
ſociety of another, though of leſſe conſequence and importance:
and this was the ſurpriſe of Lulſtorff, Blankenburge,
and Monawe, ſmall Garriſons held by Brandenburge,
in the Dutchie of Iuliers, and the taking of Goffe,
a little Towne in Cleaueland, ſeated vpon the South
ſide of the Rhine, almoſt oppoſite vnto Rees, which
makes the ſecond loſſe of Townes or Territories, ſuſtained
by the States, in theſe laſt Warres of the Netherlands.
            This place was of no great importance, onely it
made the Weſterne parts of Cleeue, pay ſome ſmall
Contribution to the Electour of Brandenburge. It was
meanely fortified, and but weakely manned; and therefore
vpon the Spinolians firſt approches & ſummons,
it yeelded to the ſtronger, the Souldiers of the Garriſon
departing vpon conditions of honor. Afterwards
by directions from their Counſell of Warre, they fortified

it with a Rampier, Counterſcarfe, and ſome other
outer Works, ſo that it is now become a peece of ſome
reaſonable defence.
            His Excellencie the Prince of Orange carying Argus
eyes vppon all your Spaniſh proiects; before their
Workes were well ſetled, marcht thither in the latter
end of Summer 1623. intending to take the Towne by
an Onſlate. In his Armie there were my Lord of Eſſex,
my Lord Wriotheſlie, ſonne to the Earle of Southampton,
with diuers other noble Voluntiers from England,
Fraunce, and elſe-where. But he dealt with an Enemie,
whoſe eyes were as good as his hands: for they hauing
notice of his comming, fore-layd the paſſage, and reſolued
preuention to the vtmoſt. The Prince viewing
their Forces thus facing of our Armie, and lodged beſides
in a place of aduantage: after a long Alto, wherein
he braued the foes, retired his Troupes from the enterpriſe
of Goffe, which ſtill groanes vnder the yoake of
the Caſtilian gouernement and oppreſſion.
            The third loſſe which the States of the vnited Prouinces
haue receiued, and that ſince the taking of Gulick
and Goffe, hath beene the ſurpriſall of Papenmuch, a ſtrong
Sconce, built by the Confederates in a certaine Iland
of the Rhine, betweene Coleine and Bonne, an Imperiall
Towne, heretofore ſurprized by Sir Martin Skencke, in
the yeare 1587. The Spaniards knew what a bridle
Skenks Sconce (a Fort built vpon that nooke of Land)
where the Rhine deuideth it ſelfe into two branches,
making the Peniuſula of Grauen worke, had been to their
projected deſignes vpon Cleeue, Geldres, and Friſeland,
they could not ſuffer a ſnaffle of the ſame mettall, and

making, in the mouth of the Biſhop of Colein, a creature
of Spaine, and wholly deuoted to the houſe of Auſtria.
Beſides, the poſſeſſing of it did concerne them
much, for the tranſportation of their Forces from or
into the lower circles of the Empire, and for victualing
of Rhineberke, Weezell, and other places, by the commodity
of the Riuer. Theſe motiues incited Spinola to ſend
thither an Armie of ſufficient ſtrength and number, for
the conqueſt of this important Citadell. Theſe troupes
were commaunded by the Prince of Chimay, and one
Bree, Lieutenant Generall vnto the Prince of Newenburge.
They raiſed ſmall Forts, commonly called Redouts
vpon euery paſſage, drew their approches within
a conuenient diſtance, and brought ſome Peeces
of the greater ſize from Iuliers for the battery: and beſides,
they built two ſmall Ships of Warre, not drawing
much water vpon the Rhine, to this intent that all
the land paſſages being ſtopt, & the aduenues by water
being alſo ſhut vp, time and hunger (two powerfull inſtruments,
much made vſe of by the Fabian Generals
of Spaine) might worke the conqueſt and deliuerance of
this place. The euent anſwered their expectation: for
the Defendants being preſt with this vnreſiſtable difficulty,
ſurrendred vp the Sconce about the latter end
of the yeare 1622. vpon condition to depart with bagge
and baggage.
            And thus you ſee a full ſuruay of thoſe greater and
more ſubſtantiall loſſes, which the States haue ſuffered,
ſince the expiration of the laſt twelue yeares
truce, from their ancient and ſworne Enemies of Spaine.
The relation of their victories followes, ſuparlatiue to

their dammages, both for the reſpect of honour, and
the waight of their importance: and theſe may be reduc'd
vnto two heads, vnto their victories acquired at
Riſhame and Ormus, Ilands ſeated vpon the coaſt of Perſia,
and aunciently belonging to that Kingdome, or to
their Conqueſts in Braſilia and Peru, Prouinces of the
new world, diſcouered by Americus, from whence it
tooke his name, for the vſe of Ferdinand and Iſabella,
their children, heires, and ſucceſſours. For although
in the Conqueſt of the fore-ſaid Ilands, the Dutch as
well as our Engliſh, were but auxiliaries vnto the Perſians,
yet becauſe they were pars magna laboris, they had I
ſay a great ſhare in the labour and danger of this exploit,
by way of reducement, and not improperly, it
may bee fylde amongſt the number of their atchiuements.
This Riſhame or Rhiſme is a ſmall Iland, diſtant
from Ormus ſome foure leagues, and ſeparated from
thence by a ſmall fret of the Sea, commonly called the
ſound of Balſora. The Portingals had built a ſtrong
Caſtle in it, manned with three hundred Chriſtians,
and fiue hundred Negroes, commanded by Rufero their
Gouernour. Our Fleete vpon the 24. of Ianuarie 162
                  •
               , came within ſhot of the Caſtle, and plied the Defendants
with diuers peales of Ordinance, and by the fauour
of our ſhipping and Cannon, gaue meanes to the
Perſian, to land ten thouſand of his Souldiers. Theſe
Mahometan Troupes were commaunded by one of
their Sultans, for ſo they call their Lords, a man of
great valour and conduct, as the ſequele ſhall make
good. Vpon their firſt landing they play the Terriers,
put themſelues into the earth, & bring their approches

within a neere diſtance. Rufero terrified with this ſtrait
aſſignement, as being inuironed both by land and water,
and hauing no Element to helpe him, but the all-common
Ayre, and the fire of his Cannon, demaunds
a parlee: to hinder farther effuſion of blood it was
graunted. But the conditions propoſed were diſlikt by
the Aſſailants: for the Portugall wholy ayming at the
preſeruation of Ormus, and ſleighting that of Rhiſme, becauſe
he ſaw no poſſibility to keepe it, offers preſently
to ſurrender the Caſtle, vpon condition that his men,
both Spaniards and Blacks, might haue free liberty to
paſſe ouer vnto Ormus. Any man that had but Poliphemus
eye, might ſee through the miſt of this pretence.
Our Captaines, Blight, Weddall, and Mr. Monnox, men
much honoured for this ſeruice, were apprehenſiue
enough to conceiue the aduantage of this propoſition.
Therefore they reiect it, and fall to their battery againe,
ſo that waighing neerer to the Caſtle, they beſtowe
ſeauen or eight hundred great Shot vpon the Curtin
and Bulwarkes. The Perſians likewiſe from the land
ſide, draw their rowling trenches within a ſtones caſt,
and ply the Caſtellans with vnceſſant vollies of their
ſmall Shot, who anſwered them with the like, and flung
diuers Pots of Wilde-fire and Granadoes into their
Workes, which did them much hurt. The terrour of
this cauſed a ſecond parlee; wherein Rufero offers to
ſurrender the place vpon theſe cautions following, that
he might depart to Ormus with his Armes and Munition,
and race the walls of the Caſtle downe to the
ground. This ſecond motion being reiected like as the
former, we ſaluted them afreſh with the thunder of the

ſame curteſie. But the Defendants ſeeing themſelues
thus diſtreſſed on all ſides, yeeld at the laſt vppon
theſe conditions.
            That they ſhould depart with bagge and baggage,
and all other things that they had, their Armes, Munition,
and Ordnance expected, and that the Souldiers,
as well Blackes as others, ſhould be tranſported vnto
Muskat, a Towne which the Portingals hold vpon the
Arabian ſhore, onely ſome of the Principals were to be
detayned aboord our Shippes, and to be diſpoſed of as
occaſion ſhould require; ſo the Caſtle of Rhiſme was
ſurrendred vnto the Perſians the 30. of Ianuarie 1621.
and all the Articles were performed on both ſides, ſauing
that the Sultan cauſed ſome foureſcore of the
captiue Negroes to be murdered, contrary to the dignity
and faith of his promiſe.
            After the Conqueſt of Rhiſme, the Chriſtian Fleete
ſet ſaile for Ormus, and the Perſian land forces waſted
ouer in 200. Boates, made for that purpoſe. This Iland
was made tributary to the Portugals anno 1606. who
taking aduantage of the Perſian troubles, and their neglect
of maritine affaires, fortified themſelues ſtrongly
in this place, which they kept to their great profit and
honour aboue foureſcore yeares, vntill after the death
of Sebaſtian, and the Conqueſt of Portugall, it was vnited
together with the Terceraes, Ginnie, Braſilia, and the
Eaſt Indies, vnto the Kingdome of Spaine. Although it
were barren, and had little or no freſh water, yet was it
reaſonable well inhabited, and payd for their cuſtomes
yearely to the King, being a Mahometan 140000. Seraffs,
with whom the Spaniards cried at the leaſt halfe

ſhare. It is ſeated in the Perſian Gulph, oppoſite to
Combrene, on the maine land of Perſia, and in reſpect of
the commodious ſcituation, it ſtands fitly for the traffique
of Arabia, Perſia, and India. Of this Iland the Arabians
vſe to ſay.
            
               Si terrarum orbis quaqua patet annulus eſſet,
               Illius Ormuſium gemma decuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   foret.
            
            Which we may Engliſh thus:
            
               If the world a ring were, then the precious ſtone
               Of that rich ring were Ormus Ile alone.
            
            The preſent Sophie being ſenſible of this thorne,
which ſo long had ſtucke in his predeceſſours foote, reſolues
vppon a remedy befitting the greatneſſe of his
Deſigne. And euer ſince his acquaintance with Sir
Robert Sherlie, reſoluing vpon the conqueſt of this Iland,
now vndertakes it with the auxiliarie Forces of the
Dutch and Engliſh, and that Land Armie which ſubdued
Rhiſme, now re-inforced with new ſupplies from
the Continent. The 10. of February 1621. the Perſians
landed 3000. of their men, who marched ſtraight vnto
the Towne, which being a place of no great defence,
they tooke it, without any reſiſtance at all; The Portugals
& the Moores retiring themſelues into the Caſtle
with their goods and treaſure. Vpon this the Chriſtian
Fleete plies the Forte, and the Enemies Frigats
which lay vnder the Lee thereof with their Ordnance:
and the Mahometans Land their whole Armie,
plant their Batteries, and mount their Cannon,
which they had borrowed from the Chriſtians. And
that they might with more expedition and facility,
make themſelues Maiſters of this peece: they vndervndermined

the wall at leaſt tenne foote right in,
and placed fortie Barrels of Powder in the Mine,
which being ſprung vpon Sunday, the 17. of the
ſame moneth, made a breach of ſome twentye
foote broad at leaſt. Preſently vpon this, th' Aſſailants
preſent themſelues brauely to the breach, and ſeeking
to gaine their paſſage to the top of the ruines, are as reſolutely
repuls'd by the Defendants: Who ſalute
them with Stones, Powderpots, Tarlin, and Musketſhot;
and make good the breach from noone to night,
againſt all commers; notwithſtanding the furie of the
Artillery, and the continuall vollies of Musket bullets,
which fell in as thicke as haile amongſt them. The Portugals
loſt two Cullers diſplaid one after another, with
ſome of their forwardeſt men, & their Battlements and
Barricadoes made of Cotton ſackes, were much torne
and defaced with the furie of our Ordinance. The
Perſians loſt not fortie men out-right, but ſome three
hundred or more were wounded and burnt, part of
whom afterwards periſhed. The 20. day in the morning,
there came out of the Caſtle two aged men with
a youth, and three or foure Negroes attending them,
who were preſently conueyed by Sea (to the intent
that they might not view our workes) to the houſe of
Dabul, whereas the Sultan attended by diuers Cuſhel
Baſsaes, and his Guard of Arabians, went to meete, and
treat with theſe Portugals. But this taking no effect,
they deſired leaue of him to goe ouer to Combreane to
the Sophie, which was granted them. But when they
came ouer, he would condiſcend to nothing without
the conſent of the Chriſtians. The Spaniſh Delegates

being thus diſmiſt, the Perſians ſinke thēſelues in their
Mines againe, and after they had made the vault capacious
enough, they lodged 55. Barrels of powder in it,
and ram'd vp the hole which gaue entrance to this
Mine, with Timber, Stones, and Morter. It tooke
fire about ſixe of the clocke earely in the morning, being
the 2. of Aprill, and blew vp moſt of the Weſterne
Bulworke, with ſuch violence and impetuoſitie,
that the ſtones of this worke were blowne at leaſt ſixe
hundred paces from the place.
            This mine was ſprung contrary to the intentions of
the Dutch and Engliſh in the time of the parlee, and
that by the directions of the Perſian Generall, who
was blemiſht with treacherie for doing of this acte.
For at that time there were many Portugals walking
vpon the wall where the blow was giuen; foure or fiue
of whom were blown vp and ſlaine.
            The 14. of Aprill the Perſians blew vp the 3. Mine,
vpon the eaſt ſide of the Caſtle, yet would they not as
yet enter, becauſe they were working of another on
the weſt ſide, which they ſprung the 17. of the ſame
month. The Mahometan ſouldiers vpon this entered,
and poſſeſt themſelues of the weſterne Bulworke, and
ſeeking to force the Portugals Barricadoes, were by
them repulſt with great ſlaughter. The Perſian Sultan
ſeing his men retire, comes to the foote of the breach,
and with his ſword in his hand ready drawne, makes
them renue the aſſault againe: In which conflict, the
valour of one Portugall was moſt remarkable, who
with his Sword and Buckler, fought vpon the point of
the breach, and forceably repulſt the aſſailants. But

marke how Fortune proues a Step-dame to his valour:
He charging freely vpon one of them with his Rapier,
thruſt it into one of their wooden Bucklers and before
he could free the point, hee was charged by three or
foure of the Perſians, and cut in pieces by them. Within
two or three dayes after this aſſault, the Sophie paſſed
ouet from Combreane vnto the Iland of Ormus, where
he ſhewed that magnificence & munificence (befitting
one of Iſmaels ſucceſſors) vnto the ſouldiers and Officers
of the Army.
            The beſiegded ſeeing no hope of ſuccours, and that
themſelues were diſabled in their defences, by Mines,
Batteries, and Aſſaults, yeelded the Caſtle vpon theſe
conditions.
            1 That they might depart with bagge and baggage,
without any armes, ſauing their Swords and Rapiers.
            2 That the ſicke and wounded ſhould be left in the
Towne, and lookt vnto by Chirurgions.
            3 That aſwell theſe as thoſe that were ſound, ſhould
be conueyed vnto Muskat, a Mountain town of Arabia,
by the Robert and Sherling, two Engliſh ſhips. Thus this
Caſtle and Iland the 24. of Aprill were yeelded to the
Sophie by the auxiliary meanes of the Dutch and Engliſh,
after it had bene poſſeſt by the Portugals and
Spaniards an hundred and eighty yeares.
            The ſecond loſſe which the Spaniards haue ſuffered
ſince theſe laſt warres of the Netherlands, hath beene
the taking of the towne and part of Todos los Sanctos,
in Braſilia. This Countrey is limited on the South
with Riedo la Plate and Chile, on the North with Guiana,
               
on the Eaſt with the Ocean, and on the Weſt with the
Mountaines of Peru, called the Audes, which deuideth
the Countrey of Ieru
                     •
                  aua, as the Apemine doth Italy, and
as Taurus and Caucaſus doe Aſia. The people which
inhabit theſe ſteepe and craggie Mountaines, are more
barbarous then other Americans, as being taunie all
ouer their bodies, going altogether naked, and liuing
without houſes or bedding: Thoſe of the vally are
more temperate and ciuill, as partaking the qualities
and temperature of the Climate: The Earth of the
vallies, is fatte, greene, and alwayes flouriſhing; abounding
with Sugar, Mace, and your Braſilian Wood, vſed
in Europe for your dying of reddes; the Trees wherof
are of exceeding bigneſſe, wherein Nature proues the
Architect, for diuerſe large families which dwell in
the bodies and branches of them. This land was firſt
diſcoueted by Pedro Aluari Caprioli, at the expences of
Emanuel King of Portugal, Anno 1500. afterwards it was
more exactly ſuruayed by Americus Veſpucius, next by
Giouanni de Empoli a Florentine, Anno 1503. Afterwards
by Iohn Stadius a Dutch-man, Anno. 1554. And by the
Edict of that Monſter of Man-kinde (Pope Alexander
the ſixt) it was appropriated to the Portugals; the reſt
of America being allotted to the Caſtilians.
            The chiefeſt Citties of this Prouince are,
            1 Fernambuco.
            2 Aſcenſio.
            3 Todos los Sanstos, otherwiſe called St. Saluador.
This towne ſtands vpon a Bay of the ſame name,
vnto which the Riuer of Reall diſchargeth it ſelfe, and
hath Fernambuco an hundred miles to the northward,

and it lyes from the Equinoctiall fifteen degrees to the
ſouthward. It was reaſonable ſtrong, and thought by
the Portugals (who are generally ouer-weening in their
owne conceits, both of themſelues and their owne
ſtrength) to be tenable againſt any forces whatſoeuer.
The journey being reſolued on by the Weſt Indian
Company of the Netherlands, they put to Sea the 22.
of December 1623. from Texell a Port of Holland, with
a Fleete of thirtie ſhips, well furniſhed with Armes,
Lead, Powder, Ordinance, and other warlike munition.
Iacob Willeks, a man of good experience in Maritine
matters, commanded for the ſea, and the Lord
of Dorte commanded all the Land-forces. The Lord
Generall hauing ouer-ſayled the Admirall, had beene
before the towne three dayes before, being the 6. of
May 1624. and hauing exchanged ſome ſhot with the
Caſtle, went to ſea againe, as reſolued to ſeeke out their
Admirall Willekes, and the reſt of the company. This
attempt gaue an alarum to the Spaniards, who coniecturing
as the truth was, that more numbers followed
theſe, & that for ſome deſigne vpon this p
                  ••
               ce, prepared
themſelues for their defence, with all preuention and
prouiſion poſſible.
            They mounted eight pieces of Ordinance vpon a
Battery of Free-ſtone, the Slaues of the towne (aſwell
Chriſtians as others) were commaunded to the Rampier,
and raiſed two new batteries by the direction of
the Vize-roy, who was alſo very carefull to ſee the men
muſtered and ezerciſed in their armes according to the
manner of the Caſtilian Diſcipline, the number of
whom amounted to ſome 5500. men, whereof the Intants

made 4000. and the ſouldiers 1500. They of the
Land battered our ſhippes furiouſly from the Caſtles,
and vpon one of the three was the Vize-roy himſelfe,
with his ſonne, and the greateſt part of the Gentry.
            Our Admirall in the meane time ſayled vp & downe
in the Bay, reſoluing how hee might land his Troups
with beſt aduantage; for this reſpect, he imbarks 1600.
of his beſt and choiceſt men in foure of the talleſt
ſhippes, and commanding the reſt to follow ſlowely,
he enters the Bay the 9. of May 1624. Comming neare
the Enemies Batteries, he cauſed all their Ordinance to
be diſcharged on their Caſtles and Platformes, and
landing ſome hundred men with their loug-boats, they
took the Batteries preſently: the Marriners doing very
good ſeruice in this aſſault with their Boate-hookes.
Vpon this the Defendants hang out a flagge of truce,
and moſt of them quit the foreſaid places. But the
Vize-roy, perſiſts reſolute in defence of that Breach,
whereupon himſelfe was ingag'd, and though hardly
preſt by the Dutch, he fights it out to the vtmoſt with
ſome of the braueſt Caualeroes of the town. But when
he ſaw at the laſt, himſelfe forſaken of all ſides, he fled
towards his own Pallace: but in the way our Marriners
& ſoldiers ceazed vpon his perſon; who putting his
ſword into his ſheath, deliuered theſe words vnto thē:
I haue beene faitbfull vnto my King, and if my men had
not ſo baſely forſaken me, your forces ſhould not haue
taken the Caſtle ſo ſoone. Vpon the ſurrender of the
Caſtle, all the leſſer Forts yeelded themſelues, and acknowledged
the fortune of the Canqueror; the which
was the more happy in this reſpect, becauſe it was

accompliſhed with little effuſion of Chriſtian blood,
there being not ſlaine aboue forty common Souldiers,
and one Captaine.
            The tenth day of May, the Netherlanders went to
ſurpriſe the Towne, but when they approached neere
the Ports, they perceiued that it was abandoned by the
Inhabitants, ſo that our Souldiers entred without any
reſiſtance. The pillage was great in Coyne, Plate, Iewels,
and other rich moueables, which the Souldiers
tooke out of the Houſes, Store-houſes, and Cellars.
Moreouer, there were taken 12000. Cheſts of Sugar,
thirty Ships laden with rich Marchandize, which lay in
the harbour, and eight ſhippes more of the Spaniards,
which arriued there ſince, not hauing notice of the
Dutchmens fortunes and proceedings.
            The third maine loſſe which the Spaniards haue ſuſtained
ſince the expiration of the laſt truce, hath beene
at Lima, a famous Emporian and hauen Towne in Peru.
This Prouince was firſt diſcouered by Franciſco Piſarro,
afterwards Marquis of Antillo, and Diego de Almagro, afterwards
honoured with the title of chiefe diſcouerer
by the Emperour Charles the fift; to whoſe vſe it was
firſt conquered by theſe aduentrous Spaniards from
Atapalipa and his brethren, right pretenders and inheritours
of the ſame. It hath on the Eaſt the Perunian
mountaines, on the Weſt Ma re Pacificum, or del Sur,
on the North Caſtilia Aurea, and the Riuer of Peru, from
whence the Country taketh his name, and on the South
it hath Chila for his borders. The length of it is from
the Citie of Paſto, vnto the Prouince of Chili, one thouſand
eight hundred leagues, as large as the leagues of

               Caſtilia. This Land is the ſeate of many wonders:
thence groweth that odoriferous wood, whoſe barke
being incided, diſtils a meruailous ſweet liquor, wherewith
if any annoint a dead body, the carkaſſe corrupteth
not.
            Neere to a cape or point of land, commonly called
Deſtahelena, there are found certaine Springs of Pitch or
Tarre, ſeruiceable for the calking & trimming of Ships.
Here are Riuers which runne all day, but ſtand ſtill at
night, the reaſon whereof is, becauſe their current is
maintained by the ſnowe, which melts a day time, but
freezeth againe at night. It rayneth in the mountaines,
but neuer in the Plaines of Peru, the aſſigned reaſon
whereof is, that in the Plaines, and neere the Sea coaſt,
there bloweth all the yeare long one only winde which
the Mariners call Siluester, which runneth along with
ſuch forcible violence, that the cloudes and vapours
can haue no reſt in the middle Region ouer the plaine
Country. Beſides other ſmall townes which the Chriſtians
haue in the Plaines, they haue fiue principle Cities.
The firſt is called Pi
                     •
                  to Veio, which ſtandeth very
neere the equinoctiall: this Citie is poore, and apt for
diſeaſes, yet hath it ſome Mines of Gold & Emeraulds.
Fifteene leagues within the Maine is another Citie
called St. Michael, which in the Indian ſpeech they call
Pura. This is a pleaſant ſoile and fruitfull, but there are
no Mines of Golde nor Plate. Threeſcore leagues forward
alongſt the coaſt ſtandeth another Citie in a valley
called Trugillio, being diſtant from the Sea two
leagues. This Citie is placed in a plaine plot neere to
the Reuers ſide, and is abundantly prouided of Wheat,

Maiz, and Cattell. It is alſo exceeding well built, and
in it there are three hundred houſholds of Spaniards.
            The fourth chiefe Citie is, that of Aroquipa, commonly
called the faire. The ſoile neere vnto it is healthfull,
and aboundant of all kinde of victuals, ſtanding
ſome 12. leagues from the Sea coaſt, vpon a Riuer that
is faire and Nauigable, ſo that Ships of good burthen
may come vp to the walls of the Citie, by which means
it is thought the habitation of this towne will encreaſe.
It doth not onely ſupply her owne neceſſities, but ſerues
the Citie of Cuſco, and the Prouince of Carchas, with all
things needfull; from which places there is great reſort
vnto Aroquipa, by reaſon of the frequent contractation
here, t for the golden mettall of Potoſi.
            
            The fifth principall Citie exceeding all the reſt in
beauty, ſtrength, and riches, is that of Luma ſcituated
in a valley of the ſame name, ſome foureſcore leagues
from Trugillio. The Country there-about is plentifull
of Corne, and many ſorts of fruits and cattell: the building
of this place is ſuch, that all the ſtreetes doe meete
in a faire large place, from the which a man may ſee
through euery ſtreete into the fields. The dwelling is
meruailous healthfull, becauſe it ſtandeth in a temperate
climate, not afflicted too much with extremities
of heate and colde: the hotteſt ſeaſon of the yeare being
more temperate then that of Spaine. For in the time
of their Summer heate, there falleth euery day in the
morning a ſweete and cooling dewe, which is not
hurtfull, but rather profitable for the health of man.
For it being vſed by way of Lotion, it is good for the
head aches and other diſeaſes. All Spaniſh fruit groweth

and proſpereth well in this ſoile, eſpecially Orenges,
Lemonds, Figges, Pomgranates, and Vines, wherof
there had beene great abundance, if the frequent
broyles and tumults betweene the Spaniſh Souldiers
had not hindred the labour and Plantation of the Huſbandmen.
            This Citie is iudged to be the moſt pleaſant dwelling
of all the Land, in reſpect of the commodity of the
harbour, the great contractation of Marchants, and the
generall reſort of the people of the maine Land, who
come thither from all parts, and buy their furniture
and prouiſion. From the Mines of this Prouince, is
brought great ſtore of gold and ſiluer. The ſcituation
of it is neere the midſt of the Land as yet diſcouered,
for which cauſe the Emperour Charles the fifth, placed
there a Chauncerie royall, and Iudges to decide his
ſubiects cauſes, which alſo doth encreaſe the confluence
of the people. It is ſeated two leagues from the
Roade, commonly called Callee de Lima, or the Port of
Lima. Le Hermite Generall of a Fleete vnder the States
of the vnited Prouinces, knowing how much the gaining
of this place might accommodate the Hollanders,
and incommodate the Spaniards, reſolues vpon
the attempt. And being furniſhed with a ſufficient
number of ſhipping, and men befitting ſuch an enterpriſe,
he ſets ſaile from the Netherlands, and after a tedious
Nauigation through the Straights of Magellan,
arriues at laſt in the South Sea oppoſite vnto Lima;
where hee makes his intention knowne to the Companie,
and then aduentures vpon the exploit: wherein
Fortune ſhewed her ſelfe ſo fauourable, that with little

or no loſſe, he made himſelfe Maſter of the Callee de Lime,
to the great terrour of the Citie, which as ſome men
report, hath ſince yeelded it ſelfe to the mercy of the
Hollanders. The Conquerours got a great ſpoile in
Shipping, Treaſure, and other rich commodities, and
haue ſince gotten two other places in the Prouince of
Peruana.
            
            Thus you haue ſeene a true Suruay of thoſe moſt remarkable
loſſes and victories, which haue hapned betweene
the Hollanders and the Spaniards ſince the laſt
truce, which ended with the beginning of the yeare
1621. It followes, that after their expreſſion we ſhould
iuſtly counterpoiſe, and ballance them: which if wee
doe without nationall reſpect or partiall inclination,
wee ſhall ſee the Dutch Acquiſitions to exceede the
Spaniſh, and yet their loſſes to be farre inferiour vnto
the others. For leauing out Ormus out of the ballance,
becauſe it is now peculiariz'd vnto the Perſian, although
it were won by the ſuccours of the Dutch and
Engliſh: if wee counterpoize the Conqueſt of Saint
Saluador, and the part of Lima (omitting that of the Cities
as doubtfull) with al the new Acquiſitions of Spaine,
we ſhall behold theſe to ouerway all thoſe, which this
Nation hath of late acquired in Cleeue and Iuliers; and
this aduantage doth proceede not from one, but from
diuers conditions and reſpects. For firſt of all, the profits
of Gulicke, & of the Dutchie, with their extraordinarie
Fees and Contributions, will not amount to aboue
an hundred thouſand Duckats yearely, and allowing
two thouſand Souldiers for the Garriſon of that Signeurie,
and euery man to haue fiue Shillings a weeke for

his pay, the annuall reuenue will hardly quit the charges,
wheras rating the reuenues of Braſilia at three millions
of Duckats, and allowing one third of this accrument
to riſe from Fernambuco, & another from Aſcenſio,
Todos los Sanctos, with the territorie thereto adioyning,
ſhall by this account bring a million yearely to the
Cantors of the Netherlands.
            2. Papenmuch with the tolage of the Rhine and; Goffe,
with the contribution money drawne from the Boores
of Weſt Cleaueland, did hardly pay their owne Gariſons,
but the keeping of the Port of Lima, may draw
(perhaps) a plentifull Contribution from the golden
Mines of Chili and Potoſi, beſides thoſe ſpoiles that Le
Hermite hath already gotten eſteemed to bee an ineſtimable
Maſſe, and worth many Tuns of gold.
            3. The Catholicke King payes foureſcore thouſand
Duckats vnto the Prince of Newenburge by Compoſition,
for the reſignation of theſe two Dutchies, but the
States holde thoſe new Acquiſitions in America, by the
tenure of their Sword, and by that ius acquiſitum, which
power and fortune haue giuen to the ſtronger.
            4. The Spaniſh King hath other competitours in
Cleaue & Iuliers, beſides the Confederates of the ſeauen
Prouinces, as the houſe of Brandeburge, and (perhaps)
the poſterity of the Newenburger, may rowſe themſelues
out of that Lethargie, wherein the Spaniſh Piſtolets
haue put their ſenceleſſe Father, and lay clayme to that
Inheritance, which doth belong to them, or the Brandeburger
Iure gentium: but the Hollanders haue no other
titular pretenders, to their new purchaſes in Peruana
and Braſilia, but the houſe of Spaine, vnto whom they

haue ſeldome loſt any thing, which they were once poſſeſt
of, and whereas the Sea could helpe them for many
yeares together.
            5. The loſſe of Gulicke, Goffe, and Papenmuch, giues
no other diſaduantage to the States, they hauing Rees,
Embricke, and Skenkes Sconce, betweene that and their
neereſt frontier; but the poſſeſſing of theſe two places
in the Weſt Indies, the one vpon the North, the other
vpon the South Sea, doe euen waſt in the intermediate
Continent of America, and giue an entrance vnto thoſe
Prouinces, whoſe golde hath battered the walls, and
opened the gates of the ſtrongeſt Townes of Chriſtendome,
for the Spaniards.
            6. And laſtly, the Inhabitants of Cleaue and Iuliers,
doe not well like the hard and heauy hand of your Caſtilian
gouernment, no more then doe all the lower
circles of the Empire, as well knowing how theſe Intruders
haue impaired the Germane liberty, and ſpurgall'd
Bohemia and the Palatinate almoſt to death: but
the Braſilians and Peruuians, yea the very Portugals
themſelues would willingly receiue the law from the
Dutch-men, whom they admire as much for their faire
and gentle gouernement, as they hate the others for
their rigour, tiranny, and oppreſſion.
         
         
            
            The Mansfeldian Motiues, directed
vnto all Colonels, Liuetenant-Colonels, Captaines,
Inferiour Officers and other Souldiers, which either as
Voluntiers, or by way of Impreſt, are ingaged
to ſerue in this next Expedition, intended by the
grace of God vnder the conduct and commaund
of the moſt Illuſtrous and Warlike
Prince ERNESTVS, Earle
of Mansfield.
            
               HOnourable Profeſſors of Armes,
you may ſee in this Dutch Suruay
or ballance, the ſwelling
fortune of a triumphant State:
You may beholde alſo a handful
of Netherlanders, with ſome
few Mercinary French and Engliſh,
giue the checke to that
Kingdome, which ſo long hath ſtroue for the Monarchie,
Supreame Paramount of all Chriſtendome: Let
this Preſident ſerue for our preſent encouragement;
and withall, let vs conſider, that if thoſe 7. Prouinces
(thought to be but a morſell for the Spaniards mouth,
they being not as bigge as that part of England whch
lyes Northward beyond the Trent) could make their

partie good for ſo many yeares together, againſt the
Catholique King, and his Pack-horſe the Catholique
Biſhop of Rome: What ſhall not the vnited forces
of England, France, Denmarke, and the Netherlands
doe againſt Pope, or Emperour, Auſtrian or
Bauarian, or any other Chriſtian Potentate whatſoeuer;
The expected bleſſings of God, continuall
ſupplies of meanes, and the vndoubted Iuſtice
of a good cauſe concurring therewithall? In the
proſecution whereof, let not the Papall curſes and fulminations,
the vncharitable cenſures of your Ieſuitized
Engliſh, nor the fooliſh preſages of the Speedewels ill
ſpeed, any thing deterre vs: For that Royall Ship which
ſhould haue tranſported ouer the Count, was caſt away
by the default of the Pilot, a man not well aquainted
with thoſe Seas, a ſtranger vnto Fluſhing, and poſſeſt
(as it is thought) with a malicious reſolution againſt
the perſon of Count Mansfield. So that leauing
any coniecture vpon this euent, befitting aſwell
a Colledge of Romane Augurs, as it doth a Conclaue
of Ignatius Diſciples, let vs diſcend nearer to the purpoſe,
and accommodate our ſelues to the expreſſion of
theſe Motiues, which may confirme the ſtronger, and
ſtrengthen the more doubtfull and weaker ſpirits (if
there be any ſuch) who are vndertakers in this new deſigned
Mansfeldian Expedition. And firſt, concerning
thoſe Motiues, your worthineſſe may vnderſtand that
they may fitly be reduced vnto the number of three.
            The firſt whereof, is the ſufficiency and conduct of
that Generall vnder whom you are to vndertake.
            The ſecond is the meanes of prouiſion and preparation

made for the vndertakers.
            The third motiue, is the cauſe conceaued, though
not expreſſed, for which you are to vndertake and vndergoe
this action. And firſt, concerning the Generall,
you are to fight vnder one whom neuer aduerſity could
deiect, nor euer proſperity could once erect beyond the
temper of true command. You are to fight vnder ſuch
a Commander, whom Piſtolets, promiſes, nor proſcriptions
(the powerfull Inſtruments to ſubiect ſtaggering
reſolutions) could once diuert from the tenour of his
intendments. You are to ſerue vnder his Banners, of
whom we may boldly ſay thus, Qui cum ab omnibus deſertus
erat, ſeipſum tamen non deſerit, When he was forſaken
by the two Anhalts, Ausberge, and other Princes of
the Vnion, neuer forſooke himſelfe, nor left the cauſe
of the King of Bohemia in the ſuds. Are you to encounter
with your Enemies in Campania? vnder whoſe Colours
can you ſuſtaine the ſhock of Hoſtile oppoſition
better then vnder his, who beate Leopoldus men in their
owne Quarters at Hagenawe, killed Bawer the Duke of
Bauariaes General in his lodging at Heſeldorff, & fought
that memorable battell of Fleury neere Namurs, wherein
fifteene thouſand of his men vanquiſht ſixteene thouſand
of Gonſaluo de Cordabaes troupes, & 20000. Boores
of their party beſides? Are you to make a retrait from
the purſuing enemie? Is not this that braue Conductor,
who made that famous retraite from Bohemia into the
Palatinate, and from thence vnto Breda, a tract of ſixe
hundred Engliſh miles at leaſt? which conſidering the
valour and aduantage of the purſuers, was not inferiour
vnto that retraite of Zenophons from out of Perſia,
               
nor that of Conons from Aquilia into Britannie. Are you
to beſiege Towne or Fortreſſe? Conſider then how
the Count forced Pilſen, a principall towne in Bohemia,
which Ziſcha anuo 1470. could not ſubdue, nor the Huſſites
in their ten moneths ſiege, anno 1434. could not
conquer; and this he did being weakely accompanied,
and beyond the expectation of humane reaſon. Conſider
this beſides, how that after the defeate of Zablatti,
he rallied his troupes in the Winter ſeaſon, wonne Vodian,
Prachalis, and Wintenberg, one after another, and
though detained by Chriſtian of Anhaults letters, he beſieged
Piſack, a ſtrong place, & of importance, & wonne
this Towne the ſixth of December, inforcing nature
as the ſaid Chriſtian wrote vnto him. Are you diſtreſſed
for want of meanes and victuals, ſo that you haue nothing
but the ayre and your ſwords to liue by? remember
how yee ſhall martch vnder that Generall, who
maintained an Armie conſiſting of diuers Nations and
different humours, like another Hanniball without mutinie,
yet without pay for three yeares together, filling
their panches & their purſes with the plentifull ſpoiles
of Alſatia, Metz, and Triers, and with the abundant prouiſions
of Emden, Munſter, and Weſtphalia? To be briefe,
are you to actuate or endure any thing, remember this
that you doe it vnder the fortune, valour, and good conduct
of Count Mansfield.
            
            The ſecond motiue which may ſerue to encourage
vs, is the ſufficient prouiſion of meanes prouided for
this iourney, as men, munition, victuals, and money:
the ſinewes, by which Warre is ſupported, and all
Martial enterpriſes are brought to a happy accompliſhment.

Our men are thoſe Laconian walls of bones,
which muſt make good this attempt againſt all oppoſition:
and theſe are the chiefeſt Nations, and flower of
all Chriſtendome.
            The French haue beene held the beſt Cauallerie of
the world, ſeldome or neuer beaten, except it were by
our Engliſh Bils and Bowes; of theſe we ſhall haue ſixe
thouſand Carbins, and armed Curaiciers. The Germanes
were held in the time of Guichardine, the beſt
foote of the world, and ſo much redoubted by the Italians,
that they durſt not encounter with them, except
they had foote companies of the ſame Nation: and of
theſe, we ſhall muſter eight or ten thouſand.
            Our Engliſh in theſe latter times, haue bin reputed
the beſt Battalions of Pikes in all Chriſtendome, and
whom the Spaniards in their ouer-valuing humor, will
acknowledge onely to be ſeconds vnto themſelues; and
of men fit to handle theſe Armes, England ſends forth
twelue thouſand. The vnexhauſted Mines of Britanie,
will furniſh theſe braue Troupes with Lead and Iron
for their Ammunition: our Magazins will ſupply their
wants with Serpentine and Corn-pouder for Shot and
Batterie, and our friends of the Continent will prouide
Waggons, Horſes, and other neceſſaries fit for
the conuoy of ſuch a Royall Army. Money will not
be wanting, nor I hope the mutinous ſound of Gelt will
neuer be heard in our Quarters, nor an Electo choſē to
reforme the ſame; for beſides the liberall Contribution
of diuers noblemen of England, forwarder of this enterpriſe,
and the plentifull prouiſion of our Parliament in
that behalfe, Fraunce and Sauoy, Germanie and Venice,
               
contribute towards the charges of this intended iourney.
But is there any man who doubts the want of victuals,
whoſe courage depends vpon his Colon, and
who neuer fights well, but when his paunch is full?
Let this man whoſe thoughts are ſo vnſouldierlike,
knowe, that beſides our owne prouiſions, which I
hope wil be abundant and enough, France is contracted
vnto vs with a new alliance, and the frontier of that
Kingdome, againſt the higher and lower Germanie,
runneth a tract of fiue hundred miles at leaſt: So that
in all reaſon it cannot be farre from the ſeate of our action.
And can wee dreame then of want and ſcarcities,
hauing ſuch a plentifull friend to our neighbour, who
without all peraduenture, will furniſh vs with Graine,
Beefes, Muttons, and all other neceſſaries, which are
fit for the maintenance and preſeruation of an Armie?
            In the third and laſt place follow the cauſes, which
may moue and incite vs to this enterpriſe, and theſe
are of two ſorts, either of policie or of Religion. Concerning
the politique cauſes, I will enter no farther into
their myſterie, then duty and modeſty will giue mee
leaue: For I know there is a ſanctum ſanctorum of policie;
there is an inner Court of Royall Counſell, into
which no man ought to enter, except Aſſuerus put out
the golden rod of his admiſſion. Onely I will giue this
caution to thoſe ſpirits who are ouer-curious after this
Inqueſt, and deliberate continually with themſelues,
whether the recouerie of the Palatinate, or the reuenge
of the Bauarians and Emperours wrongs be the cauſes
of this expedition, I will giue I ſay that caution which
his Maieſtie gaue in the laſt Parliament: That no man

ſhould queſtion, whether the Empire, Bauaria, or any
other determinate place, ſhould be the ſeate of this
Warre, ſince the diſcouery of this particular cannot
chuſe but preiudice the preſent ſeruice: for an Enemie
warn'd is arm'd, ſecrecie is the ſpirit of action, and this
with an expedite deliuery, crownes all warlike exploits,
with ſucceſſe and glory.
            But concerning that point of Religion, I will enlarge
my ſpeech more freely, and boldly maintaine notwithſtanding
any oppoſition to the contrary; that this
iourney is not pro focis alone, but pro aris, not for temporall
reſpects onely, but for conſcience, Religion, and
the propagation of the Goſpell concurring therewithall.
And for the vindication of their wrongs, what
task can be too hard? what danger can be too difficult?
ſo that if we were to martch ouer the ſandy Deſerts of
Arabia, ouer the vnpaſſable wildes and woulds of Scithia
or the Frozen Slowes of Swethland and Muſcouia: if we
were to encounter with famine, fire, and ſword, nay
with all the terrours of mortality, and that their fearefull
conſideration ſhould terribilize their nature and
condition, we ſhould conſider what Chriſt ſuffered for
vs, and ſuffer any thing, yea all things with patience, for
his Religion, Truth, and Goſpell. Our Enemies haue
made Religion their ſtalking horſe, and our backs their
pack-horſe: by which meanes they haue impoſed a Romiſh
Florentine tricke vpon our credulous confidence,
and open breaſted, meaning.
            It remaines for vs, that wee ſhould recollect our
ſtrengths and ſpirits, make our reuenge as ſenſible as
our iniuries are prouoking, and martch at length ouer

their bellies, who haue rid pack-ridge ſo long vpon
our backes. And to end, that our actions may pertake
of externall glory here, and after this life of eternall
glorification, let the ſeruice of God, our Country, and
the common cauſe, be the generall bent and ſcope of
all our enterpriſes, fighting for Dauids cauſe; let vs arme
our ſelues with Dauids reſolution, and let vs come
againſt them, who came againſt vs with ſhield, ſword,
and ſpeare, in the name of the Lord of Hoaſts, the God
of the Hoaſt of Iſrael; and then hee that teacheth our
fingers to fight, and our hands to wage the Battell, ſhall
breake the cheeke-bone of our Enemies, and make
them become like thoſe Princes which periſhed at
Endor, euen durt and dung vnder our feete. Quod faxit
Deus.
            
         
      
      
         
            GEntle Reader, you ſhall vnderſtand that
ſince the Writing and Imprinting of this relation,
Goch hath beene recouered by the Prince
of Oranges Forces; which makes the Dutch acquirements
by ſo much the greater, and the Spaniſh
loſſes ſince the expiration of the laſt truce, by
ſo much the more grieuous in thoſe Countries of
Cleeue and Juliers.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   