
      
         
            
            
            A
REPLIE VNTO
a certaine Libell, latelie
ſet foorth by Fa: Parſons, in the name of
vnited Prieſts, intituled, A manifestation of the great
folly and bad ſpirit, of certaine in England, calling
themſelues ſeculer Priestes.
            
            With an addition of a Table of ſuch vncharitable
words and phraſes, as by him are vttered in
the ſaid Treatiſe, aſwell againſt our parſons, as our
bookes, actions, and proceedings.
            
               ¶Pro iustitia agonizare pro anima tua, et vſque ad mortem certâ
pro iustitia, et Deus expugnabit pro te inimicos
tuos.
               Eccleſiast. cap. 4.
            
            
               ¶Noli eſſe humilis in ſapientia tua, ne humiliatus in ſtultitiam
ſeducaris.
               Ibidem. cap. 13.
            
            
               ❧ Justitiae, et innocentiae permiſſu.
Anno Dom. 1603.
         
         
            
            
            The Epiſtle to the Prieſts, ſaid to be
vnited with the Archprieſt.
*⁎*
            
            REuerend and my deere bretheren, whom with my ſoule I
loue, and honour with my hart, I cannot but be ſory to ſee
you ſo vniustly abuſed by the ſlights and cunning deuiſes of
the Ieſuits: and more, to ſee you, (whom wiſedome and
diſcretion ſhould make perfect and expert in the affaires of our
poore afflicted Church, ſo applaude their proceedings, that worke
your bane, or at the least, by holding your peace, to approoue ſuch
actions in them, as tend to the ouerthrow of your ſelues. Tell mee I
beſeech you, in your owne vnderstandings, are you not highly abuſed
in bearing the name of theſe two late Libells, viz. the Apologie,
and Manifeſtation: in both which, not onely the honour of
priesthood is impeached, and our whole Cleargie diſgraced, debaſed,
and ſought to be held in ſlauery, and ſubiection to the Ieſuits &
theyr creatures, but alſo ſuch vndutifull actions and practiſes, as
haue beene attempted by them, or any other Catholicke from the
beginning of her Maiesties raigne, vntill this day, are maintained,
defended, excuſed, or iustified: whereby your liues are engaged,
as acceſſary to all treaſons, plots, & practiſes done, or attempted
against our Soueraigne and Country, by ſuch parſons: in that
to approue, defend, or maintaine any action, is (as you knowe) to
make the approuer, defender, and maintainer, acceſſary thereto:
iudge then what cauſe you haue to thanke ſuch Maisters, for this
theyr good office, in laying ſnares to entrappe you withall: and
thinke whether this deuiſe be not a plot of purpoſe to bring you into
as great obloquy with your Prince, (as through theyr own vndutifull
practiſes) they haue brought themſelues, thereby to turne the
ſword of perſecution vpon all (as heeretofore) for ſome particuler
mens offences. Deere brethren, if you regard not the wrongs, and
oppreſſions doone to vs your brethren, and neerer vnto you in all
right of reaſon, then the Ieſuits are; if you regard not the deiection
and oppreſſion of your Cleargie, which they violently ſeeke; if you
reſpect not theyr actions, and attempts against your natiue country,
and neerest friends: yet regard your ſelues, reſpect your owne
liues, haue a care to the common, and generall good of altogether,
inſiduated, and betrayed by them: diſclaime from ſuch actions,

wherein you haue no part, neither deſire (I thinke) to haue. I
know your harts to be loyall, let them not be ſtained by a falſe imputation
from a deceitfull Ieſuit. Beleeue me, her Maieſtie dooth
make difference betwixt practiſers in matters of state, and religion,
and therefore ſuffer not your names to be brought into question
for ſuch odious dealings, by the cunning policies of Fa. Parſons, inrowling
thē to the approbations of ſuch hatefull trecheries. And if
there were n
                  •
                difference at all made (as I know there is) yet were
it glorious to die a Cath: priest, in profeſſion of the Cath: fayth,
without taint, or imputation of thoſe foule crimes. But ſome of you
happily may be ignorant, how farre you are abuſed in this kinde:
vouchſafe but the reading ouer of this reply to the latter Libell, &
you ſhall eaſily perceiue more danger to be couched therein, then
you are aware of, and thereby ſee the better what wrong is offered
you, in publiſhing the ſame in your names. If in the peruſing hereof
any word may ſeeme ouer-ſharpe, which yet I haue endeuoured
to auoyde, conſider I beſeech you the deformity of ſome matters
vniuſtly & vncharitably auerred againſt vs, & that all ſuch ſharpe
words touch onely one man, the Author of theſe iniurious Libels,
and Architect of this whole buſineſſe, and then I hope you will
with more eaſe yeeld pardon to ſuch exceſſe: If any other faults eyther
in ſtile, or defectiue handling of matters obiected occur, beare
with the author, this beeing his first worke, and hudled vp in hast,
without ſuch helpes, as longer time might haue affoorded him, yeelding
him in all things as fauourable a cenſure as you may: who is
ready to protest in the ſincerity of a Catholicke priest, that neyther
malice, anger, paſſion, nor deſire of reuenge, drew him to vndertake
this worke, but onely a ſincere opinion of iustice, and innocencie,
ſo much impugned by Fa: Parſons, in defence wherof hee
thought himſelfe bound (as well in reſpect of the common cauſe, as
his owne particuler interest therein) to ſhew his best indeuours.
            
               Your friend and brother
VV. C.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Preface generall to
Catholickes.
            COurteous, and beneuolent Catholicks, I preſent here
vnto you a reply vnto a certaine Libell, intituled, A
manifestation of the great folly, and bad ſpirit of certaine in
England, calling themſelues ſeculer Priests: which happening
into my hands, I diligently red ouer, & hauing without
paſſion peruſed it, and with indifferencie (as to my ſelfe
ſeemed) poyſing and conſidering as well the matter deliuered,
with the forme and manner of the deliuery, as alſo the
verity thereof, I could not but a little wonder, to ſee a man ſo
mightily inueigh againſt paſſion, and bitter writing in others,
ſhewing ſo much choler, paſſion, yea and impatience, as hee
doth here. And did I not deſcry the Author thereof to be
one particuler Parſon, not many prieſts, (vnder whoſe names
falſly, yea and vncharitably it is publiſhed, thereby to bring
them into obloquy with their Prince, and ſtate, vnto whom
the Ieſuits practiſes in ſtate matters, heere defended, are odious)
I ſhould much admire to ſee ſo palpable vntruths defended,
ſo manifeſt vniuſt actions maintained, and ſuch apparant
verities with ſuch boldnes denied: but the worke proceeding
frō the party it doth, hammered in the forge it was, I
could expect no other, then I found; & therefore my wonder
was the leſſe, and my admiration ſooner at an end. For
why, the man is well knowne to be of ſuch a naturall diſpoſition,
as that if he once enter into any courſe, he will with infinite
violence proſecute the ſame. Vpon which headſtrong
cariage, & irremouable wilfulnes, many ſtraines (you know)
and ouerſtrainings, muſt needs follow, and many fained inuentions,
with concealements of truthes, yea and in the end,
open impugnations of verities, the better to iuſtifie former
proceedings, leaſt happily otherwiſe, the fault might
ſeeme too light, where it may in no caſe be indured. Pardon
mee deere Catholickes, in deliuering the truth with ſuch

plainenes: let not your antecedent conceits of Fa: Parſons
worthines, preiudicate your cenſ
                  ••
               es in matters ſo apparant,
and ſuch, as will admit no refuge, for that were to blind your
ſelues wilfully with affection beyond reaſon. I remit the
iudgement of this my diſcourſe wholy vnto your diſcreet &
indifferent cenſure; if you find not iuſt cauſe to condemne
the aforeſaid Libell, and author thereof, for the faults aboue
cited, then blame me iuſtly of wrong done, and I will yeeld
to ſatisfie at your diſcretions: if you do find true, this which
I haue ſaid, giue not ouer your ſelues heereafter to be abuſed
with too much credulitie in father Parſons proceedings. And
heere I muſt a little craue pardon, if in this my diſcourſe you
find me more plaine, and bold with the ſaid Father, then you
would wiſh, imputing the ſame to the extremity of matters
falſely, and vniuſtly by him deliuered; and to the deſert of
his actions, as beeing in very deede, the Arch-plotter of all
ſuch diſguſtfull affaires, as haue cauſed all theſe troubles,
and garboyles from time to time amongſt vs: which thing
enforced me a little to preſume to diſplay and diſcouer him
plainly vnto himſelfe, and the world, if happily thereby eyther
hee may reduce himſelfe vnto better courſes, or otherwiſe
remaine loathed, & reiected of all good Engliſh Catho:
(as he deſerueth) whereby he ſhall be no more able henceforward
to deceiue (through vndeſerued opinion) the beſt meaning
minds: nor plot heereafter againſt our Prince & country
with the conuivence of any. If herein my deſires may either
way take effect, I ſhall reſt ſatisfied, and thinke theſe my
firſt labours happily beſtowed.
            
               Your affectionate ſeruaunt in Christ
to the ſhedding of his blood.
W. C.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               An aunſwer to the firſt chap: concerning
our pretended manifest folly, & apparent bad ſpirit, in
chuſing the argument and ſubiect of our
former Bookes.
               
                  IT is a world to ſee the boldneſſe of F. Parſons
in all his writings, concerning theſe our
late garboyles in England, but eſpecially in
this his laſt rayling Treatiſe, intituled A manifestation
of follies, &c. I muſt needs lay the
worke vnto his charge, ſo euidently doth it
ſhew it ſelfe, both in the manner of ſtyle, phraſes, particuler
words, vſuall in other his writings, as alſo diuers things related
and excuſed, which could proceede from no other forge,
then 
                     Ʋulcans.
               
               In this his Treatiſe, as he immodeſtly, and moſt falſly dealeth
againſt vs, yea and contrary to his owne knowledge, and
conſcience, (as you ſhall moſt euidently perceiue by this reply)
ſo alſo, after his accuſtomed manner, doth he deale with
no ſmall cunning, as well in concealing of truths, ſometimes
totally, ſometimes in part, as alſo by couert, and fine colouring,
and faſhioning of the falſhoods hee deliuereth in ſuch
ſugred, and pleaſing manner, as with eaſe hee may deceiue
the well-meaning minde, eſpecially drawne by affection towards
his habite, and religion, from whence nought els, but
veritie and iuſtice ſhould flowe. But as this kinde of poyſon
is moſt dangerous, and infectiue, becauſe tempered vvith
ſweete mixtures, and ſhewe of compaſſion, where indeede
nought els but deceite lurketh; ſo I hope it wil be with more
care, and diligence auoyded, and reiected of all ſorts, when by
this our reply, his cunning deceits ſhall euidently appeare in
theyr proper colours, the poyſon beeing extracted from the
hony, and the ſubtile deceauing vntruths, ſequeſtred frō the
ſugred and ſmooth ſentences,Declaratio motuum. wherewith they are cloked.
               Firſt therefore concerning our firſt booke intituled Declaratio

motuum et turbarum, he ſayth it containeth nothing, but
a certaine intemperate inuectiue against many good, and worthie
men, &c. and is prooued by no other reaſons, authorities, or testimonies,
but the wordes of paſſionate writers, &c. Let euery indifferent
man, that vnderſtandeth the Latine tongue, reade
our aforeſaid diſcourſe, and but indifferently iudge thereof,
whether it be without proofe, authoritie, or teſtimonie. Firſt
it was publiſhed not by one man, but by diuers, and in the
right and name of many, which were men woorthy to be
thought ſufficient, whoſe teſtimonies might paſſe currant in
law.
               Secondly, the matters related, were matters of fact, and
euen then in practiſe, and too too well knowne vnto all our
Country at home, if not to all the world abroade. For proofe
whereof, I refer my ſelfe to all Cath: in England, concerning
the matter of ſchiſme maintained by the Ieſuits, & Archpriest
againſt vs, with infinite violence, much infamy for the time,
and innumerable particuler wrongs therupon, not vnknown
to the meaneſt Cath: in England. All which ſeuerall iniuries
are touched in that diſcourſe, beſides diuers other particulers,
as of intermedling in matters of ſtate, diſcouer'd by theyr
owne fooliſh bookes, pamphlets, euident practiſes, letters, &
meſſages, which I omit as needleſſe to rehearſe, referring the
Reader to the booke it ſelfe.
               Thirdly, that booke was but a declaration, or ſetting
downe of many things in generall to be particulerly proued
in time, and place conuenient, where reformation was expected:
as I doubt not, but they haue found to no great aduantage
ſince; and therfore not to cōtaine particuler proofes
of euery aſſertion, though for the moſt part they be euident
(as I haue ſayd) in themſelues.
               Fourthly, I wiſh the Reader to conſider the weakeneſſe of
this Calumniation, beſides the vntruth, and folly thereof by
this one Conſideration, that the booke was dedicated to his
Holines, in a quarrell which wee meant to purſue (as you ſee
we haue doone) and therefore not like to containe ſuch iniurious,
and manifest falſe ſlaunders, with an intemperate inuectiue
against good men, (as this good Father affirmeth) vnleſſe

we were mad men, and cleane depriued of wit, and common
ſence. For in ſo dooing, wee ſhould haue prouided whips &
ſcourges for our ſelues, and ouerthrowne our cau
                     •
                  e (though
otherwiſe neuer ſo iuſt, and honeſt:) when wee had come to
the tribunall of his holines. Add to this, that the booke hauing
beene preſented to his holines, and peruſed, and by vs
iuſtified ſtill: no condemnation thereof hath yet come
from thence, but it paſſeth currantly without imputation of
ſuch ſlaunderous falſhoods, and inuectiues against good men, as
this man would make you belieue. See by this what weight
his aſſertions carry, and marke how worthy of credit hee will
proue heereafter.
               Of the ſecond booke,The copies of diſcourſes. intituled The copies of diſcourſes, &c.
he affirmeth that the firſt part is contrary to the ſecond, & ſo doth
both aunſwer and confound it ſelfe, &c. And why (forſooth) are
they contrarie to themſelues? Becauſe (ſaith hee) in the former
diſcourſes, we ſtoode onely vpon the Popes owne Letters
to cōfirme thoſe of Cardinall Caietane, aſſuring them that
when any ſuch ſhould come from his holines, there ſhould be
no more controuerſie; and yet in the next enſuing diſcourſes,
his holines breve of approbation beeing then publiſhed, he ſaith
wee were much farther of from obeying the Archpriest, then before.
This is the worthy contradiction which aunſwereth and
confoundeth all therein written.
               Beleeue me I doe ſtand heere at a non plus, doubting whether
I ſhould excuſe this poore man, by imputing ſome
ſtrange weaknes of braine, or diſtemperature in his head of
late befallen him, which bereaueth him eyther totally of his
wit, or partly impayreth his iudgement, or wholy depriueth
him of his memory: or whether I ſhould flatly condemne
him of ouer-much impudencie. Faine I would that ſome of
the former defects in nature might excuſe his folly: but I
feare me, that if I ſhould goe about ſo to excuſe him, I ſhould
not be beleeued. Wherefore I muſt of neceſſity leaue him to
himſelfe, as hee is, and let the burden light vppon his ſhoulders,
as it may. For hauing vndertaken it, I muſt needs open
the truth, though to his ſhame and loſſe.
               You ſhall therefore vnderſtand, that in very deede the firſt

occaſion of our ſtanding out from the Archpriest, was the
ſtrange and vnuſuall bringing of him in vppon vs by the Ieſuits,
and the iuſt doubts, and difficulties which wee conceiued
in his pretended authoritie, as well concerning the manner,
as the ſubſtance thereof: yet were we content, and offered
(though to our wrong) to ſubmit our ſelues, when by any
Apostolicall writ wee might be aſſured of his holines pleaſure
that ſo he had appointed, & would haue it ſo to be. And
to be informed heereof with more ſpeed, we ſent two of our
brethren to Rome, to propoſe our difficulties to his holines, &
expect his reſolution.
               VVee will omit heere to ſpeake of their good entertainment
by Fa: Parſons, theyr Iaylor, being els where ſufficientlie
diſcourſed. In the interim how we were vſed at home, you
both ſaw with your eyes, & haue heard often related. Whilſt
our brethren were in durance in Rome, Fa: Parſons procured
this Breve hee ſpeaketh of. To the which wee all preſentlie
without delay (as himſelfe knoweth, and in the Apologie profeſſeth,
though with vncharitable interpretation) ſubmitted
our ſelues, as we had promiſed: but that there would be no
more controuerſie, neither could wee, neither euer did vvee
promiſe; for that was more in the Archpriest, & the Ieſuits
to hinder or performe, then in vs. All cauſe of former controuerſie
had beene occaſioned by them by intermedling in
our affaires, and appointing Superuiſors for vs, and in rayſing,
and maintaining the note of ſchiſme againſt vs moſt vniuſtly,
as all the world now ſeeth. And therefore, although
we might promiſe for our ſelues, yet could wee not make any
ſuch abſolute aſſurance, the greateſt ſtroke thereof lying
in them, and ſo little hope giuen vs of true performance of
ſincere peace indeede.
               But to proceede, hauing thus ſubmitted our ſelues, a generall
peace (as we thought) was concluded by each partie, and
order taken, that the note of ſchiſme ſhould perpetuallie be
buried in obliuion, and no more vrged againſt vs. This the
Archpriest promiſed, both for himſelfe and the Ieſuits, aſwell
at the attonement, as alſo to ſome afterwards in particuler.
But yet ſo wel was this performed on his, & the Ieſuits parts,

that within one month, or ſix weekes, the ſame was a freſh ſet
a flote againſt vs, as well in places, where we conuerſed, as in
other places alſo where we neuer had beene. And to cōfirme,
and concurre with theſe proceedings, the Archpriest ſent
his directions into all parts, that none of vs ſhould be admitted
to the ſacrament, without ſpeciall acknowledging that
we had been Schiſmatiques. Whereuppon we were indeede
refuſed in ſacraments, reiected from the Alter, and accounted
as infamous perſons: and Listers Libell was defended, as
ſound and true doctrine, which charged vs with diſobedience,
rebellion, and I know not what.
               The Archpriest ſpred Letters againſt vs, made Decrees,
refuſed conference, commaunded vs ſilence, and forbad vs
to appeale, &c. All theſe things are not vnknowne to Father
Parſons, and that by theſe vncharitable courſes, wee were enforced
againſt our wills, to ſeeke for remedy to the Sea Apostolicke,
by courſe of lawe, and iuſtice: from the which notwithſtanding
the Archpriest, and Ieſuits ſought againſt all
law and order of iuſtice to hinder and forbid vs. How can it
then iuſtly be ſaide, that the enſuing diſcourſes, which proceeded
vppon this ſecond wrong, were contrary to the firſt,
that proceeded onely vppon difficulties of the inſtitution of
the Archpriests office: or how doe they ſhew, that we were
much further from obeying the Archpriest then before? or
doe they not rather ſhew the vniuſt & yncharitable proceeding
of the Ieſuits, and Archp: in reuiuing after the attonement
their old calumniations of ſchiſme &c. againſt innocent
prieſts, and their obſtinate violence in proſecuting the ſame,
notwithſtanding the euidence of the matter, and the reſolution
of the moſt famous Vniuerſitie of Paris againſt them?
Where were then this mans wits, or his honeſtie, that hee
coulde ſhufle vp ſuch contradictions, and gather out of our
due proceedings, ſuch great repugnancie in vs from obedience?
What way in the world I beſeech you, (if you be of any
iudgement or capacitie) could Catho: prieſts rather take
in theſe ſo great difficulties, and controuerſies, to ſhew theyr
dutie and obedience to Gods Church, then by ſeeking humbly
vnto her boſome and lap, for euidence & reformation in

ſuch doubts and troubles? And nowe add to this the effect
therof, clearing vs from all note of diſobedience in thoſe proceedings,
which may giue ſufficient teſtimonie of our ſinceritie,
and of their iugling.
               To the other two bookes, viz. The hope of peace, and Relatio
Turbarum to the Inquiſition:
                  The hope of peace. hee ſaith ſo little, but yet ſo
vncharitably,Relatio turbarum. as it well diſcouereth more enuie, (of which he
ſpeaketh ſo much in the Preface) then either ſufficiencie, or
modeſtie. For well he might haue left the approbation, or
condemnation of the booke to the holy Inquiſition, vnto the
iudgement and cenſure of thoſe woorthy perſons (whom his
holines hath made preſidents, and Iudges in ſuch affaires) and
not haue arrogated the ſame by preuention vnto himſelfe.
But the poore man ſawe well enough, that the acceptance
thereof was not ſo vngratefull or hatefull vnto the wiſedome
of thoſe Fathers, (who proceede not ordinarily in ſuch caſes
after his will, but maturely, with iudgement, iuſtice, and diſcretion)
and that no ſuch cenſure or reprehenſion was likely
to come from thence againſt the booke; and therefore hee
thought it good to beginne betime to play his part, leaſt the
Comedie ſhould die for want of Actors.
               For the hope of peace, let them of iudgement, that haue read
it, cenſure whether it be nothing but vanity & ſcurrility, or doth
not rather open much bad dealing of the Archpriest, in thoſe
Letters. Now let vs come to the diſcourſe of the ſtirrs begun
at Wiſh: concerning which matters, as hee refers you to the
6. chapter of his Apologie, ſo to countermaunde him therein,
we refer you to our relation, being more large and perſpicuous.
But (ſaith hee) in the ſixt chapter of the Apologie, matters
are ſet downe plainly, ſincerely, with order and perſpicuitie,
without amplifications, or exaggerations, as in our diſcourſe hapneth.
To this wee retort the ſame in effect for our aunſwer:
that in our diſcourſe, howſoeuer the method miſliketh his
Maſterſhip, there is more ſinceritie, more plaine dealing, &
perſpicuitie vſed, then in his Apologie, and not ſo much amplification
and exaggeration as the matter it ſelfe required.
Who now ſhall be iudge in this, whether this good Fa: or
we ſay trueſt? But (ſaith hee) wee haue this with approbation by

Letters vnder the Priests owne handes and testimonie: Yea but
(ſay we) this is but good Fa: Parſons owne ſaying, and to vs
vnknowne, howſoeuer belieued. But to controll this vanitie,
wee ſay that our relation was writ by the Prieſts themſelues
that liued in theſe garboyles, and are yet aliue, and readie to
proue, what they haue writ. Yea but (ſaith hee) they be of the
contrarie part, and partiall relaters. And who I pray you (good
Fa:) were your informers? were they not of the other ſide, and
as partiall in theyr owne cauſe, as the other? Beſides, your
informations were in fragments from this man, and that man
by flying Letters; in which it is probable men will ſpeak the
beſt for themſelues, and excuſe the worſt; which others will
be aduiſed, how they doe in publiſhing things to the worlds
view, that euery man may controll as they finde occaſion.
               And it partly appeareth, that our friendes dealt ſomewhat
more faithfully then this Fa: would haue you to thinke; in
that they omit no wordes, or circumſtance, or action in the
aduerſe part, which might make ſhew of any excuſe for thē:
as appeareth in that this Fa: collecteth ſome matters thereby
to excuſe his friends intentions, euen out of the diſcourſe it
ſelfe, which might haue beene either omitted, or otherwiſe
related, if our friends had ſtudied falſhoods, as he affirmeth.
Furthermore, we haue teſtimonies of thoſe proceedings by
ſuch, as were dealers in the compoſing of matters there, and
heard both parties; which this good Fa: wanteth. And for
my ſelfe, I can ſay ſomewhat in that behalfe, both for the
proofe of that diſcourſe, as alſo the detecting of this Gentlemans
ſhufflings in the ſetting downe of matters, (as yee ſhall
heereafter ſee) hauing beene my ſelfe preſent, and a dealer
with my poore indeuours to haue helpt forward, the compoſing
of matters there, by which both hee, and you ſhal eaſily
ſee (if you will ſee) where the truth goeth, and where the
diſcredite will lie.
               And now to his firſt queſtion: That if all had been true, that
Fa: Weston had ſought, or accepted the Agencie, how that odious
conſequence might be inferred: that, if they had preuayled
heerein, by the ſame platforme they would haue gouerned
the prieſt abroad. To this queſtion: becauſe the good Fa:
                  
will make himſelfe ignorant in his owne plots, and policies,
I will helpe him forth, to put him in minde thereof, that you
may ſee a little into their dealings, and the cunning of theyr
proceedings. Firſt you muſt vnderſtand (as I imagine you
will eaſily conceiue) that no Statiſt in the worlde (in which
degree the Ieſuits will giue place to none) will openlie ſet
forth to all mens view, the laſt end, and intentions of theyr
workings, or plots: For that were to diſcouer their drifts to
their oppoſers, & to procure preuention, which no man that
intends a worke would willingly finde. Suppoſe then, that
the Ieſuits ſhould haue had ſuch an intention (as I will eaſilie
demonſtrate them to haue had) would you thinke them ſo
ſimple (beeing ſuch exact polititians) as to make known this
theyr drift and intention vnto vs? VVell then meanes they
muſt finde fitteſt, and moſt conuenient for the ſecret compaſſing
of this deſigne, that their policie might not preſently
be ſpied, before the matter were cock ſure.
               Now let me but aske you in your reaſonable ſetled iudgement
without partialitie; could there be a better meanes deuiſed,
then firſt to begin in that place, where the graueſt, and
beſt deſeruing Prieſts of our Country were in durance for
Gods cauſe; by the preſence of whom, the very houſe was a
Sion vnto our Country, and a Lanterne vnto all Catholicks
abroad? For why; if once they had ſetled their gouernment
there without checke, or controll, what Prieſt durſt to haue
gainſaid their dominion abroad, but ſtraight way hee ſhould
haue had his mouth ſtopped with the voluntary ſubmiſſion
of thoſe graue prieſts, and deſigned Martyrs? Which, how
great a checke it would haue beene to any contradiction in
that caſe, and how ſufficient a reproofe vnto the contradictor,
I leaue to euery indifferent man to iudge. And he which
is not willing to conceiue heereof, let him but read the annales
of the Primitiue Church, and he ſhall finde what authoritie
the actions, and examples of Confeſſors in priſon carried with
the Chriſtians in thoſe daies: inſomuch that what was done
by them, was helde as inviolable, yea haynous to be contradicted
of the Bp: himſelfe, as may well appeare by the diſſention
in Affrica, about the receauing of ſome lapſed Chriſtians

by the Confeſſors, & examples of peace deliuered them,
and the reiecting of the ſame by S. Cyprian & other Biſhops:
whereupon grew great garboyles, both in the Clergie, and
Laïtie, with parts-taking, and running, and writing to Rome
about the matter. But you will ſay, that although indeede this
had beene a probable courſe, to haue attained vnto that ſcope: yet
doth it not proue, that the Ieſuits had any ſuch intention, neyther
is it likely they ſhould goe about any ſuch matter, beeing indeed odious
in the ſight of any indifferent man, as alſo Fa: Parſons heere
confeſſeth. To this I aunſwer, that not my words, but their
owne actions, and words ſhall diſcouer their intentions. And
by the way I requeſt of you, but open eares, and indifferent
iudgements to thinke, but what you ſhall ſee more then probable,
yea euident, and iudge accordingly. Let not the conceit
of a religious habite abuſe your vnderſtanding, where
reaſon conuinceth the contrarie. The habite is not to be blamed
if men abuſe it, but rather the man to be cōdemned, that
abuſeth the habite. Wee iudge all thoſe to be ſheepe, which
carrie vvoll on their backs: yet experience ſaith, that ſomtimes
the fox clothes himſelfe in the ſheepeskinne. Shal we
therefore cry out againſt the vvooll, or not rather chaſten the
fox, which abuſet the pelt? If then an exorbitant religious
perſon be found, condemne not his habite: for that is innocent;
but correct his manners, which proceede not from his
clothes, or profeſſion, but his perſon: neither let your iudgments
fall, where experience is too manifeſt: for that vvere
but ouermuch ſimplicitie, and to giue place to all hypocriſies.
               Conſider therefore two thinges, the religion with the habite,
and the man inueſted in both. The religion, & habite,
challengeth reuerence, but the perſon, as he deſerueth. He is
a mad man, I thinke, which ſhould deeme ambition, to be no
ambition, becauſe it is couered with ragges: ſo ſhall he be no
leſſe fooliſh, who thinketh a man to be no man, becauſe he is
a religious man. No no, they are men, and therefore may
erre, & erroneous were the contrarie conceit, yea meere fooliſhnes.
Wherefore, I requeſt but indifferencie, to meaſure
their intentions by their manifeſt actions, and open wordes;

and then if you finde not the ſpirit of a Monarchie to haue
raigned amongſt them in theſe their endeuours, blame me of
raſh iudgement, and no vnderſtanding at all.
               Firſt then (as I haue manifeſted vnto you) Wiſbitch was the
fitteſt place to aſſay this enterpiſe, and to lay the ſureſt foundation
of ſuch intentions. Nowe would I but faine knowe,
what other intention, then gouernment, & ſoueraigntie they
could haue in that practiſe? You will aunſwere (I dare ſay)
as this good Father doth, that they were requeſted vnto it:
yea, and ouer-preſſed too, by the importunitie of the reſt, liuing
in that place, and that Fa: Weston vnwillingly accepted
therof, yea alſo refuſed to be any Superiour, but onely a ſpirituall
directer vnto the reſt, and therfore reiected all names of
ſuperioritie. Oh Sir, let me come a little neerer vnto you: you
may not run away with this faire ſmooth tale; there is more
in the winde then ſo. I pray you good Fa: if dominion were
not heereby affected in your fellowes, how chaunced it, that
your ſubiect Fa: Weston, when hee was ſcarce well warme in
the houſe, at his firſt comming thether, had dealing ſecretlie
vnderhand for ſuffrages to get the gouernment of the reſt?
If you will not belieue there was any ſuch matter, let them
ſpeake which gaue their names, and your ſubiect Ma. Pond
the Collector: let Ma. Wigs ghoſt come in againſt you, who
perceiuing the drift thereof, after he had giuen his name, called
to ſee the paper againe, and tare it in peeces, and ſo ouerthrew
that firſt practiſe. What els could this ſhewe, but an
affectation of rule and gouernment? But you wil ſay to coū
                  termaund
this illation, that Fa: Weston beeing named afterwards
one of the three, which ſhould gouerne the reſt, vtterly
refuſed it, as a thing againſt his inſtitute and order, which argueth
that he affected no ſuch matter.
               Alas, hee ſhould haue had copartners, which is no ſmall
checke to ſoueraigntie, ioyned with ambition: and therefore
refuſed not the thing, but the manner of the thing, not ſuting
his humour. Yea, ſay you, theſe are but wordes: vvhat
proofe, or iudgements haue you, to drawe you into this conceite?
Marry ſir I haue his owne actions ſithence, in the laſt
garboyle, more then manifeſting his former intentions,

wherein he not onely ſought the ſoueraignty, but maintained
it with ſuch violence, that no man might alter, or moue him
to let fall thoſe deſperate attempts, begun with the ſcandall of
all the world. Witneſſe this, a Gentleman or two that came
vnto him vpon their knees, intreating him with great griefe
of mind, to reſpect the generall ſcandall ariſing by thoſe proceedings,
and to forgoe and reiect that courſe; whom he anſwered
in peremptorie manner, wiſhing them to content
themſelues, for that it was gone further, then could be recalled:
& that ſhortly it ſhould be ſeene confirmed vnder hands,
and ſeales. Witnes this the directions giuen by his Prouinciall
Fa: Garnet, that he ſhould not begin the ſeparation, but ſuffer
his aſſociats firſt to begin, that the enuie (ſo it pleaſed him
to ſay) might not fall vpon him, but his followers. Witneſſe
his ouermuch haſt in beginning the ſeparation himſelfe, contrary
to his directions; which ſhewed ouer-much deſire of
rule. Witnes his backwardnes to be drawne to any indifferent
compoſition, beeing moued thereunto by ſuch, as dealt
about the compoſing of ſuch ſtirres; of which my ſelfe can
and will witnes vppon my oath. Witnes his reſiſting of his
owne Superiour, beeing commaunded by him to ſurceaſe:
which commaundement he refuſed to obey, affirming that
he was not bound therein to obey him, vntill ſuch time, as his
owne aſſociats beganne to draw backe from him, and miſlike
him therein: Let Ma: Muſh, and Ma: Dudley teſtifie this
point, and the reſt there preſent. If all theſe proceedings ſo
euident, doe not manifeſt both his, and their deſire, of ruling
their brethren, iudge you.
               But you will ſay, that this affectation of rule, if it were affected
by him, was not generall ouer all in the houſe, but only
ouer ſome voluntaries, who choſe willingly to ſubmit thē
                  ſelues
vnto his direction, and not to inforce any to ſubmit
themſelues. To this I aunſwer you, that in this lay more ſubtiltie,
and craft, then you will ſeeme to perceiue. Here indeed
was couched the chiefeſt policie, and cunning of their plot,
and intention. For although they made ſhewe onely of a voluntarie
retire, leauing the reſt to themſelues, yet had they ſo
involued them with calumniations, and ſlaunders, (which is

a common ground of the Ieſuits building) that, without manifeſt
note of infamie, they could not, but ſubmit their necks
vnto the Ieſuits new gouernment; which you ſhal eaſily perceiue,
if you but conſider all circūſtances. For before they had
made their ſeparatiō, they gaue out many rumors of haynous
offences, practiſed in that houſe without ſpecifying any particuler
perſon. And whē they burſt out into their ſeparation,
they publiſhed theſe cauſes in excuſe of their fact; ſct: propter
ſcandala, ſiue peccata mortalia, &c. for ſcandals, & mortall ſins
cōmitted, or like to happen amongſt thē, they were enforced
vnto that ſeparation, & retyre of gouernment. Now would I
but aske of you this one queſtion; VVhen ſuch things are
ſpred of a communitie, or houſe in generall, and thereuppon
a retyred life preſcribed, and vndertaken of ſome and refuſed
of others, whom you would iudge in your conceit, like to be
thoſe diſordered companions, amongſt whom ſuch enormities
were frequent? I doubt not but you will preſently ſuppoſe
the refuſing part, to be of that bad diſpoſition: for that
louing libertie, they refuſed to ſubmit themſelues to diſcipline.
This I aſſure my ſelfe you would aunſwer, vvithout
ſcruple; and to confirme this to be ſo, euen when theſe things
fell out firſt, it ſo hapned, the generall voyce condemning the
refuſing part vpon the foreſaid grounds.
               Iudge now (I beſeech you) whether this was not a pretie
policie to haue enforced the reſt to ſubmit themſelues, being
drawne within theſe ſtreights by this plot: and then had the
breach been made, and way to the ſequell we ſpeake of. But
you wil yet ſay, that happily ſuch diſorders were in the houſe,
yea, and amongſt thoſe men alſo, as they had not onely reaſon,
but were in a ſort conſtrained vnto that ſeparation. To
this I aunſwer: firſt that ſuch a ſeparation from Cōmunion
at the table, and at diuine offices vpon ſuch reaſons, is not verie
far from Donatus the Arch-hereticks caſe, who at the firſt
vpon the like reaſons, refuſed (as hee ſaid) to communicate
with other Biſhops of Affrica.
               
               Secondly, I ſay, that if ſuch things had beene, yet were they
bound in conſcience to haue concealed them, becauſe they
were ſecret, and vnknowne abroade, as I appeale vnto all the

Catholicks of England for proofe hereof, whether any fame
of ſuch matters were heard, before the beginning of this ambitious
ſeperation. Thirdly, I anſwer, that of mine own knowledge,
being preſent at the ripping vp of theſe matters, generall
leaue was giuen by the vnited part vnto the ſeparated, to
ſay what they could, & accuſe whom they could of any ſuch
crime, ſub pena talionis, and they would admit any competent
or indifferent iudge, to haue the hearing & cenſuring of the
delinquents; and they refuſed to ioyne any ſuch iſſue vvith
them. Furthermore, my ſelfe being preſent, and witnes vnto
all this, I went vnto Fa: Weston, and asked him, if hee would
accuſe any man in particuler, and he refuſed: wheruppon I
told him, that hee, and the reſt of his company, were then
bound, to cleere them of ſuch iniuſt ſuſpicions; which if they
would doe, either by word before witneſſe, or vnder their
hands, the refuſing part would ſuffer them, to goe forwards
with their courſe begun, which if they refuſed to doe, beeing
in conſcience bound thereto, (as I told him my opinion was
they were) then could not they ſuffer them to proceed in that
maner, vnleſſe they would willingly vndergo ſuch infamie, as
thereby redounded vnto thē, which none (vnleſſe they were
cruell to themſelues) would permit. But all was in vaine; hee
refuſed & reiected all offers, without regard to my motion.
               By this you may ſee how guiltie theſe poore men were of
ſuch crimes imputed vnto them, & how iniuriouſly forſooth
the Ieſuits were charged with a purpoſe and policy, to compaſſe
a monarchiall dominion, and gouernment ouer them.
And yet will the Ieſuits go about (as Fa: Weston then did vnto
me) to defend that no wrong heereby was doone vnto any,
in that no man was named in particuler. A cunning policie
(which yet is common vnto the Ieſuits) to ſpread generall
ſuſpicions, and infamies abroad; and when they come to
the touch, to excuſe thēſelues by certaine generalities. Did
they not ſo in the matter of ſchiſme, firſt ſpread the infamie,
and then excuſe themſelues, becauſe no man was named in
particuler. Howſoeuer this ſhift may ſeeme cunning, yet I am
ſure no man of iudgement, or reaſon, wil think it very honeſt.
               
                  But ſaith Fa: Parſons, all that ſhould haue been in Fa: Weſton,

was but by way of direction, not by way of commaund, or ſuperioritie.
Firſt, if it were onely ſo, then would I aske you, why he
ſhould ſo earneſtly affect to direct others? had hee not enough
to direct himſelfe, but he muſt needes intrude vppon
his brethren? Or muſt he needes thinke, that all the reſt were
either ſo ſimple men, or imperfect perſons, as that none of thē
could direct themſelues in ſpirituall matters, without the help
of a Ieſuite? What arrogancie is this? If he obiect their congregations
in Italy, Spayne, and els where, vnto which Cardinals,
and great men reſort: I aunſwer, that there is no neceſſitie,
to inferre an inſufficiencie in thoſe parties, to direct
themſelues, or others, but rather a voluntary acceptance of
ſuch occaſions, to exerciſe themſelues in thoſe places which
they might elſe where performe, if it pleaſed them? But for a
Ieſuit to challenge that peculiar prerogatiue vnto himſelfe, is
not tolerable. And yet that this was more then arrogating a
direction of others, yea a formall dominion & gouernment
ouer them, is not onely manifeſt, by what we haue heere before
reheaſed; but alſo by the very rules of this affected inſtitution,
or Agencie.
               For amongſt others, one rule was, that matters of greater
weight ſhould be cenſured by common Suffrages, but thoſe
matters of leſſe moment, by the Agent himſelfe. And to
iudge which matters were of great moment, and which of
ſmall; that ſhould be in Ma: Agent to determine. VVhat
greater priuiledge can a ſuperiour haue, then to determine
of matters, what they be, and how they ſhall be ordered? If
this be not to giue ſuperioritie and gouernment, I muſt confeſſe
my wit is but ſhallow. For I would but aske you what
he might not doe by authoritie giuen him by this rule within
the compaſſe of that ſocietie, or brother-hood? or what
partialitie might he not vſe towards his affected pupils, and
rigour towards his not well affectionated by this rule; ſith
the power was in him to iudge what matters were of moment,
or not of moment, and ſo to draw within his own managing
what delinquents hee would, and ſmother vp theyr
crimes in corners, and bring to publique barre what pettie
matter he liſt, if the partie delinquent were not of his affectionated?

VVould any man require more ſoueraignty then
this, to bring all men vnder his check and controle? Be iudges
heerein with indifferencie I beſeech you. But ſaith Fa:
Parſons, is it likely that Fa: Weston, a man of thoſe parts, and
looking euery day for martyrdome, & one (as you ſay) who
had beene Prouinciall for the time in England, ſhould ſeeke
ſo greedily for ſo poore a preferment, as to be ſeruaunt and
Agent to a few of his fellow priſoners? I confeſſe there was
no reaſon he ſhould ſeeke it; but that hee did ſeeke it, let the
reaſons alledged ſhew the truth. And for his hauing beene
Prouinciall, it more confirmeth the matter to ſuch, as know
the natures of the Ieſuits: who hauing once beene Gouernours,
loue not to be depriued of their ſoueraigntie in no
ſauce. This by experience is beſt knowne to them that haue
liued amongſt them. Witnes all thoſe that liued in the time
of the expulſions of Fa: Alphonſo Agazara, Fa: Creſwell,
Fa: Hieronimo Fierouante, out of the gouernment of the Romane
Colledge, how heauily, and vnwillingly they tooke
their depriuations. Of which number one of them making
a ſpeech at his departure vnto the ſcholers, vſed theſe
words: Decedendum est, immó cras decedendum, and burſt
out ſo into teares, that he could hardly proceed in his ſpeech.
Witnes this Fa: Parſons ſhufling in Paris, (when he came out
of England from his Prouincialſhip) to get himſelfe deliuered
from ſubiection, to the Rector of their Colledge
there.
               Now would I requeſt the indifferent reader, to iudge, whether
theſe practiſes in Wiſbich were ambitious or not; & whether
the vnited Prieſts had not reaſō to ſtand out, & controle
ſuch exorbitant and peeuiſh inſultations, which were acted
with ſuch a ſhew of hipocriſie on fa: Westons behalf, as it hath
made me often to wonder at his follies & puritane oſtentations.
A hobby-horſe in time of Chriſtmas, went to his hart
forſooth, the publike & bitter reprehenſiō whereof, this father
will haue to be ſuch zeale of vertue. I ſurely think he would
alſo haue found fault at a May-pole in Whitſontide; if this
be not a right imitation of puritanizme, let the world iudge.
And yet if you knew as much as I doe; you would ſcarſe excuſe

it from groſſe oſtentation and hypocriſie; eſpecially if
you vnderſtood how frequent ſuch ſhowes of hobby-horſes,
and mountebankes &c. are with them in their Colledges in
Rome. Witnes this all ſuch as haue liued there, eſpecially in
Fa: Hieronimo Fierouante his time. Add to this Fa: Westons
eating but one meale a day, ſo long as there was hope of his
Agencie; but when his hopes were fruſtrate, he could finde
a ſtomack to eate 3. meales ordinarily in one day, and thoſe
ſound ones too. As for Fa: Parſons inſulting vpon Ma: Bluets
ſpeech to Fa: Weston, concerning th'vſe of Sacraments, and
his diuers comments there-vpon; It is but the ſuperfluitie of
his owne vanity. Ma: Bluets ſpeech was both graue, and iudiciall
in any reaſonable mans iudgement. For if the ſacrament,
and good counſell of the Confeſſarins, would not, or
could not reforme a Prieſt liuing in priſon for conſcience, &
Religion; how ſhould we thinke that Ma: Westons Agencie
was like to effect it? vvhere-vnto no man could be tyed in
theſe times by force, but of free will, & ſo might refuſe thoſe
remedies at his pleaſure; his Agencie hauing neyther power
of life nor death, impriſonment, nor chaines, and therefore
not to be compared (as wiſe Ma: Parſons ſeemeth he would
haue it) with a common wealth or publique authority, where
iuſtice may be executed in foro contentioſo. But you will yet
happily call me to reckoning further for my firſt aſſertion;
wherein I affirmed, that the Ieſuits intended a generall dominion
ouer all the prieſts of England, by their attempt at
Wiſbich, for the truth of which aſſertion, although I haue alreadie
giuen you ſufficient reaſon, yet wil I further ſatisfie you
heerein by obſeruation of that which hath followed ſince.
               You know (I ſuppoſe) how the Prieſts were about a Sodalitie
amongſt themſelues, which was chiefly intended (as by
the rules thereof you may gather) for the prouiſion of ſuch
as came newly, and rawly ouer: for the diſpoſing of them abroad
to their better ſecuritie; for the prouiſion of priſoners
in durance; for the better reliefe to Cath: abroade in matters
ſpirituall; for the particuler good of euery prieſt; and for the
checking of ſome exorbitant, and vnnaturall courſes, taken
by the Ieſuits againſt their Prince and Country: to aboliſh

ſuch medlings in thoſe affaires, as impertinent to our function,
and vocation, and to ſtrengthen and inable our ſelues in
theſe matters by a mutuall vnion: this I ſay, was the end of
our ſodalitie, which we imparted vnto the Ieſuits, that they
ſhould ſee our ſinceritie and honeſty in thoſe proceedings:
but we were too ſincere, and plaine, to deale with ſuch craftie
crowders; for they well perceiued, that this courſe would
diſcouer much of their iuglings in matter of ſtate, & alſo put
an euerlaſting blocke, or bulwarke againſt their intended ſuperioritie.
So that although openly they ſeemed to like of
the courſe, (becauſe for ſhame they durſt do none other) yet
they thought it high time to worke ſome cunning meanes to
delude our indeuours. Whereupon they ſecretly addreſſed
Ma: Standiſh, (one that had been moſt forward for the aſſociation,
(but a ſecret Traytor vnto all the reſt) vnto Rome,
and there by the working of Fa: Parſons, he was brought before
the Pope, as hauing great affaires, concerning the Clergie
of our Countrie. Wherein an oration furtiue, vniuſtly,
and vntruly, in the names of all the Prieſts of our Countrie,
he deſired a gouernment, and ſubordination. Which falſe office
being by him performed, Fa: Parſons himſelfe buſily folowed
the matter, with many vntrue ſuggeſtions vnto his holines,
of great diſcord betweene the Prieſts, and Catholicks in
England, and we wot not what: for the ſuppreſſing and reformation
whereof, ſome ſubordination & gouernment was
forſooth neceſſary.
               Vpon theſe, and many other ſuch like vntrue ſuggeſtions,
his holines referred (as ſithence wee haue learned) the whole
diſpoſition of this affaire, vnto Cardinall Caietane theyr Protector.
Whereby Fa: Parſons had in effect as much as he deſired,
or could haue wiſhed. For the Cardinall euer ſtood at
the Ieſuits direction in all matters concerning our affaires, as
all the world knoweth. Thus vvas Ma: Blackwell, by the
Card: commaundement, and through Fa: Parſons practicall
deuiſes, inueſted in his authoritie; a man wholy proſtrated at
the feete of Fa: Garnet, and ſtanding meerely at his deuotions,
and directions in all matters of moment, as by all his violent
courſes againſt vs in their behalfe, the world may ſee.
               
                  
But to manifeſt this point more palpably vnto you, that
you may ſee, wee ſpeake not of paſſion or emulation againſt
the Ieſuits, but directly, as the truth is. In the inſtructions
ſent vnto the Archpriest concerning the execution of his office,
one and the chiefeſt prouiſo, was that hee ſhould in all
matters of weight, be aduiſed by the Prouinciall of the Ieſuits
Fa: Garnet. Doe but thinke hereby how matters were like to
be managed heere, when all the controuerſie was onely betweene
vs the ſeculer Prieſts, and the Ieſuits, & not between
Prieſts and Catholicks, (as falſly Fa: Parſons ſuggeſted) and
that our Archprieſt muſt be taught by the Ieſuits Prouinciall
what he ſhall doe in any matter of moment. Iudge indifferently
I beſeech you, whether this was not a trick to keep the
managing of all matters in their owne handes; and hold the
Prieſts in ſlauerie and ſubiection vnto them. Which becauſe
they ſaw by experience they could not obtaine imediatly to
themſelues, they deuiſed to procure it more cunningly by a
third perſon, hauing a Secular prieſt in a corner wholie depending
vppon them. So that our ſuperiour beeing to be directed
by their ſuperiour, all the ſoueraigntie & gouernment,
ſhould indeed haue reſted in the Ieſuits.
               Adde vnto this fa: Garnets owne words, deliuered before
Ma: Muſh, & Ma: Dudley, when they came vnto him about
the appeaſing of the broyles in Wiſbich, vnto whom ſhewing
himſelfe diſcontented, that they had not cōcurred to the
confirming of fa: Westons Agencie, he vſed theſe or the like
words to this effect; That hee ſaw no reaſon why the priests in
England, ſhould not as well be gouerned by the Ieſuits here, as they
were, and had beene in the Colledges beyond the Seas.
               
               Now let any man that is not ouermuch blinded with affection
towards the Ieſuits, (of which ſort I know there be many,
who will belieue nothing that maketh againſt any of thē)
indifferently iudge, whether all their indeuours and intentions
from the beginning, were not to attaine vnto a monarchiall
gouernment ouer the Clergie of England. And yet this
inference ſeemed ſtrange vnto good Fa: Parſons. Beleeue
me, I thinke he ſo much preſumes vpon his wit, and policies
together, that he thinketh he may walke in a Net, and not be

ſeene. But ſoftly good Fa: other men haue eyes aſwell as
your ſelfe, and can diſcerne ſuch groſſe colours, eſpeciallie
when the ſunne ſhineth ſo cleerely. But yet before I proceed
any further, I cannot let paſſe an admirable ſhew of a detracting
ſpirit in Fa: Parſons, who in the cloſe of his quipping, &
carping againſt the foreſaid diſcourſe of the ſtirrs raiſed at
Wiſbich, is not aſhamed to note certaine particuler accuſations,
as whoredome, drunkenneſſe, dycing, pewter ſtolne,
which Mary the maide found in ones Chamber, &c. ſpoken
of in the foreſaid Relation. Which he ſo cunningly ſhuffleth
vp, and leaueth hanging ſo ſuſpiciouſly, as if they were
things euident without controle, condemning the parties accuſed.
Whereas in the aforeſaid diſcourſe, and place, vvhere
they are deliuered, as accuſations by his faction, they are ſo
apparantly, and inuincibly confuted, as that I admire much
at the mans braſen forehead, that he durſt ſo palpably lay open
his follies, if not his malice.
               Touching the pewter ſtolne, that matter was publiquelie
conuinced for a notorious calumnie before Ma: Muſh, and
Ma: Dudley, with great ſhame and checke to his Pupill Ma:
Pond, who vrged the matter againſt Ma. Potter, and others.
So that S. Paules ſentence brought by himſelfe, may iuſtlie
be retorted againſt him, ſet. Inſipientia eius manifesta erit omnibus.
I pray God in place of inſipientia, I may not iuſtly ſay malitia.
               
               By this time we are come vnto the Memoriall giuen vp in
Rome againſt the Ieſuits,The Memoriall. by one Fiſher, which is printed in
the end of the foreſaid Diſcourſe of Wiſbich: and at which this
honeſt Father ſeemeth much agreeued, taxing the publiſhers
of it with excommunication, and the Memoriall it ſelfe as
moſt falſe and calumnious by Fiſhers owne depoſition, &c.
As concerning this Memoriall, all men know that it was
generally publiſhed heere in England by the Ieſuits themſelues,
at vvhat time they ſought for ſuffrages abroad in
theyr owne behalfe againſt it. Now therefore, if any excommunication
or cenſure depend thereuppon, not the Printers,
but the Ieſuits, father Garnet, and others, the firſt publiſhers
thereof, are within that compaſſe. For I hope Fa: Parſons is

not ſo ſimple a Canoniſt, or Caſuist, but that he knoweth, that
when any report is famous and already publick to the world,
he that ſhall afterward ſpeake or write thereof, incurreth not
the offence of a Detractor, or ſpreader of calumnies, nor by
conſequence any cenſure of the Church. For if that were ſo,
then could no Hiſtoriographer relate the euill actions of any
Eccleſiaſticall perſon, though neuer ſo pertinent and neceſſarie
to his hiſtorie. Which is contrary to the practiſe of all
Writers, both in prophane and Eccleſiaſticall ſtories: yea the
old Fathers themſelues, as S. Ierome, Caſſian, S. Bernard, and
others. Secondly, the printing of thoſe thinges, was but the
bare ſetting downe onely of ſuch accuſations, as were ſpred
abroad by themſelues, without either gloſſe or comment vppon
them, but left indifferent, as themſelues publiſhed them,
vnknown to vs certainly, whether any ſuch matter was deliuered
vp againſt them, but by their owne reports.
               Thirdly, that they are printed, as giuen vp by ſome Engliſh
reſiding in Flaunders, is but their owne report heere: for
I will teſtifie vpon my oath, & ſo will diuers others alſo, that
they layde the burden thereof vpon certaine there reſident, as
Ma. D. Gifford, Ma. Char. Paget, and others. Fourthly, that
it was alſo reported here by ſome of themſelues and their fauorits
(of which report I am alſo an eare-witnes) that Fiſher
ſhould confeſſe, that himſelfe not onely penned the foreſaid
Memoriall, but alſo collected diuers of the accuſations. Which
report they gaue out, when they were preſſed with the iniurie
done to D. Gifford, to lay the matter from him. Somtimes
alſo they would report, that the inſtructions were giuen by
ſome in England. So various and vnconſtant they were in
their reports at that time, as vnſetled (it ſeemed) in their opinions
thereof.
               Now whereas Fa: Parſons ſaith, that by Fiſhers examination,
and depoſition, as alſo by Letters of the Aſſiſtants, and
diuers other, the matters were prooued meere ſlaunders and
vntruths. To the firſt I aunſwer, that Fiſher being ſuiiuris, at
libertie, (according to this Fa: owne report) exhibited this
Memoriall into the Court againſt them as true accuſations,
but his denials thereof were at ſuch times as he was impriſoned,

where happily for feare of torture, he might be drawne
to ſay or denie any thing, to procure thereby his libertie and
ſafety. Add to this Fa: Parſons own words, ſpoken in the hearing
of diuers ſcholers in Rome, concerning the ſaid Fiſhers
examination, viz. that he thought in his conſcience the fellow lied
in many things. If this be true, and that Fa: Parſons may not
be accounted a lyar heerein, then iudge you whether the fellow
was not drawne to ſay any thing through perſwaſions &
feare together, ſith that in this good fa: opinion, yea and conſcience,
many of his depoſitions were vntrue. Beſides conſider
the Fa: ſinceritie, in that hee is content heere to bring his
depoſition and examination, be it what it ſhal be, to be a bulwarke,
and conuincing teſtimonie in the behalfe of himſelfe,
and his fellowes innocencie. But this is but an ordinary trick
with him, and his complices: that euery man, be he neuer ſo
honeſt, if he once ſpeake againſt a Ieſuit, muſt be eſteemed a
bad man, and a ſuſpected companion; mary if hee run along
with them in their courſes, let him be neuer ſo lewd a varlet,
he ſhal be reputed for moſt honeſt. Witnes this, Tomſon, Coulſon,
Tunsteed, and many others of that rable which I could
name.
               Moreouer, to confirme a very probable opinion of ſome
iugling with this poore man, Fiſher in his examinations:
Fa: Parſons (as himſelfe affirmeth) put him into very good
apparell, being but in ragges before, and gaue him money
in his purſe, and diſmiſſed him his troubles with great ſhew
of kindnes, as they can witnes, who were then in Rome. Iudge
you but what ſuſpitions this kinde and ouer-kind dealing of
Fa: Parſons, with this lewd companion (as he often tearmeth
him) may giue to the world of bad dealing in his examinations,
and depoſitions. Seldome I think ſhall you finde a man
that will performe ſuch extraordinary effects of loue and
kindnes towards one, that came about ſuch an hatefull office,
as to informe in publique and open Court againſt him: neither
can I yet be induced to think Fa: Parſons charity ſo ſuperaboundant
towards his enemies, by any former example
in his proceedings. But letting Fiſhers action paſſe, and the
rather becauſe he is about, as I heare, to ſpeake for himſelfe:

I will come a little nearer vnto him, and canuaſe his other teſtimonies
of the aſſiſtants and other letters. Firſt, what letters
the aſſiſtants writ concerning that memoriall, I know not,
onely I had the view of one writ by Ma: Doctor Bauand, in
their behalfe, which was ſent abroad into the Country together
with the memoriall. Which letter did not onely free the
Ieſuits, from matters imputed vnto them in the ſaid memoriall,
but alſo concerning thoſe ſtirres in Wiſbich, and whatſoeuer
in England layed vnto their charge. Vnto which generall,
and free example, many were vrged to ſubſcribe; and
diuers did it diuerſly: ſome generally freeing thē of all matters,
others excuſing themſelues; onely as vnguilty of the
concurring to the fore-ſaid accuſations. But what verity or
iuſtice was in the fore-ſaid letters excuſatorie, giue me leaue
a little to ſearch. Firſt, you ſhall vnderſtand, that no one man
liuing in England, could in conſcience write ſuch a generall
excuſing letter, neither could any generally without exceptions
ſubſcribe thereto (as but few generally did or had done,
when the ſaid letters came to my hands. For the moſt part
of the ſubſcribers vſed the ſubſcription of the 2. claſſe (as I
remember) viz: Dicti memorialis conſcius non fui, nec habeo 
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
accuſem: Although ſome were drawne by fauours, feares,
or perſwaſions, to ſubſcribe generally vnto the letter; which
thing, that neither the vvriter Ma: Doctor Bauand, nor ſubſcribers
in conſcience could doe, I will manifeſtly ſhew you.
I ſuppoſe you will eaſily vnderſtand this one generality; that
no man may iuſtly in conſcience hinder publique iuſtice,
whereby an innocent party may be oppreſſed and vniuſtly
vexed. This then being a iuſt and moſt true ground, no ſuch
generall teſtimonie could be giuen in the behalfe of the Ieſuits,
to free them from all ſuch accuſations. For what one man
in England, could tell whether any Ieſuite in England had
wronged any particuler perſon, Prieſt, or Catholique, or
were faulty in any the fore-ſaid obiections or no? If then no
one man could be certaine of this; how could any in conſcience
giue ſo generall a teſtimonie in their behalfes, ſith therby
he expoſeth himſelfe at the leaſt to probability of wronging
ſome innocent or other, that might haue iuſt accuſations

againſt the Ieſuits, or ſome of them, in that by the credite of
ſuch a generall patronizing example, fortified with teſtimonies,
and ſubſcriptions of prieſts, the hearing of a iuſt cauſe
might be deferred, delayed, or denied? And yet who knoweth
not that an affirmatiue teſtimonie ſufficientlie proued,
de iure is auaileable to ouerthrow, & controle 20. negatiues.
As for example: if I will ſay that ſuch a man hath defamed
me, and bring 2. or 3. ſufficient witneſſes, & his owne words,
wrytings, or actions, ſhall they not conuince againſt an hundred,
that ſhall denie the ſame in all law and iuſtice in the
world? ſith that a wrong may be done in the ſight, or hearing
of 2. or 3. of the which an hundred may otherwiſe be
ignorant, and yet deeme the contrarie, eyther through good
opinion, and conceite of the parties offending (as happened
in this caſe) or deluded by ſome other circumſtance, ſeemed
probable to them. Seeing then that this might happen in
this affaire (as I will ſhew it hath) neither could Ma: Doctor
Bauand write ſuch a generall letter, to free them from all ſuch
imputations; nor any other ſubſcribe generally thereto. For
no man may giue witnes in any thing more then he hath of
knowledge, and is able to depoſe. But no one man in England
was able to depoſe, that no ſuch crimes imputed, were
in any Ieſuit liuing in England; becauſe he could not be priuie
to all, and euery action of theirs, and euery one of
them: therefore no man in England could ſo generally and
peremptorily free them frō all ſuch matters obiected againſt
them.
               Conſider now I beſeech you, how raſh Ma. Doctor Bauand
was in writing this generall teſtimonie: as alſo the other
Aſſiſtants (of whom Fa: Parſons heere ſpeaketh, if they did
the like, as this Doctor did) and how vnaduiſed thoſe Prieſts
were, who generally ſubſcribed without any limitation at all.
And this Poſition of ours, ſhall more euidently appeare in the
examination of the particuler accuſations, layd vnto theyr
charge; where we ſhall ſhew you moſt euidently, that many
things were, & are moſt true, whatſoeuer the parties were, that
exhibited, & framed the Memoriall againſt thē. And this I wil
performe, not becauſe I am ouer-willing to enter into other

mens actions, or to take the burden of others vpon my back:
but leauing euery man to aunſwer for his owne actions, I will
onely ſet downe ſome proofes of certaine particulers, which
my ſelfe know, & wil auouch before any Iudge in the world,
that all men may ſee how this mans haſtie poſting ouer theſe
matters, maketh more ſhew of cōfidence, then there is cauſe
a parte rei, and that theyr actions haue beene, and are ſuch, as
cannot be iuſtified, either in law, or conſcience.
               But firſt concerning the ſubſcriptions vnto Doctor Bauands
letter: I remember there were three teſtimonies of 3.
Prieſts woorthy to be heard, which gaue no ſuch gloſing
prayſe vnto the Ieſuits actions, as freeing them from all ſuch
imputations, but manifeſtly inſinuating the contrarie. Marie
for ought I could heare, theyr teſtimonies were neuer preſented
in Rome, or if they were, I ſee no reaſon, why they
ſhould not haue taken ſo much effect, as eyther to be belieued,
or farther examined; neither of which followed as I
trow. The reaſon perhaps was, becauſe two of the aforeſaid
Prieſts dealt plainly and charitably with them in particuler
letters, after their ſubſcriptions making Fa: Garnet acquainted
with ſuch things, as were amiſſe both in them, and theyr
followers, which diſcontented diuers.
               Now to the particulers of the Memoriall. The firſt paragraph
cited by fa: Parſons, is this. They holde no doctrine to be
Catholicke and ſound, that commeth not frō themſelues, no diſpenſation
auaileable, that is not graunted by them: and (which) is
worſe, they haue beaten into the heads of most, that the maſſe is not
rightly celebrated by any, but a Ieſuit. Becauſe fa: Parſons ſayth
no more vnto this point, but only asketh a queſtion: whether
we belieue this to be true. I will note ſome things not far vnlike
vnto theſe, wherby you may geſſe the probabilitie of thē.
At what time Maiſter Iohn Gerard liued in the Eaſt parts of
England, ſuch fame, and ſinguler reſpect was had of him, becauſe
he was a Ieſuit, (for no other parts in this kinde could
make him famous, whoſe talents are known to be far inferiour
to the moſt of his time, as Ma. Oldcorne a Ieſuit likewiſe
reported vnto a Prieſt) as that vvhen any caſe of difficultie
came in queſtion to be reſolued in thoſe parts, it was ſcant

currant, vntill Ma. Gerards ſentence had paſſed in the matter.
And ſometimes it happened, that when Ma. Blunt (now
a Ieſuit, but then a ſecular Prieſt onely) had reſolued a caſe;
there wanted not ſuch, as would make ſtand thereat, vntill
Ma. Gerards opinion was demaunded therein. Vpon what
ground theſe fantaſticall conceits ſhould ariſe, I know not,
vnleſſe it were ſome ſuggeſted opinions, that nothing vvas
currant, which had not vigor from a Ieſuits determination.
For otherwiſe I thinke there be many, who know that there
is ſo great difference betwixt Ma. Blunt, and Ma. Gerard,
in matters of learning, as Ma. Blunt might well be a Reader
in Diuinitie, where Ma. Gerard were fit to be a ſcholer. And
as for diſpenſations graunted by any Prieſt in any caſe whatſoeuer,
it hath beene a common practiſe amongſt the Ieſuits,
and theyr followers, to call ſuch things in queſtion, whether
the prieſts (for example) had any ſuch authoritie: yea, ſometimes
giuing ſuſpitious doubts abroad, whether they haue any
faculties at all, or not.
               This hath happened ſo often, & onely towards ſuch, whom
they haue had ſome auerſion from; that I ſuppoſe few to be
ignorant thereof. Witneſſe theyr dealing with Ma. Clarke
at his firſt comming ouer, & ſome others ſince the laſt ſtirrs
in Rome. VVitneſſe alſo to this poynt, theyr drawing of diuers
matters within the compaſſe of particuler faculties, and
extraordinary diſpenſations, which are proper to all paſtors
in generall: As for example, to giue leaue to eate white meats
in Lent, or at other times, to diſpence with ſuch as haue reaſonable
cauſe for faſting. VVhich caſes they had drawn vnto
themſelues, making Prieſts to ſeeke for theyr faculties
yeerely at theyr hands, when as in very deede, this faculty belongeth
vnto the Prieſts, ex ordinaria potestate, quatenus ſunt
pastores, and not to the Ieſuits, but extraordinarily onely, by
way of indulgence, as coadiutors vnto vs, as happeneth in all
other exemptions or faculties which they poſſeſſe.
               As touching the third part of the firſt Paragraffe: that it is
beaten into the heads of diuers, that Maſſe is not rightly ſayd, but
of a Ieſuit: ſure I am, and I thinke all the world knoweth it to
be true, that they haue ſuch tricks, and pollicies to put ſome

ſuch extraordinarie conceits into Catholicks heads, that I ſee
not, but in ſome part this aſſertion may be verified. For they
haue theyr men, and followers or precurſors in places where
they come, who muſt ſuggeſt it for a ſtrange and extraordinarie
matter to be preſent at theyr Maſſes; and that euery
Cath: that ſhall come vnto any of them to confeſſe, & communicate,
ſhall haue (I know not what) plenatie indulgences
for the firſt time. Let but the indifferent Reader iudge, whether
this kinde of practiſe be not a prety Ieſuiticall tricke, to
ſuggeſt ſuch ſtrange conceits of them, and theyr adminiſtrations
of Sacraments, or ſaying of Maſſes aboue others. And
whether they haue any ſuch extraordinary indulgences, or
no graunted vnto them, I know not. But this I am ſure, that
if there be any ſuch, it ſauoureth ſomewhat of too much pollicie,
as thereby to draw a greater opinion of men towards
them then to others. VVhich might giue ſufficient occaſion
to ſuſpect the verity of any ſuch peculier graunt vnto thē
from the Sea Apoſtolicke. Yet this muſt be more then petie-treaſon,
to call any faculty of theyrs into queſtion, though
great reaſon may moue me thereto, which in them to do by
others, muſt be accounted but a religious care, and prouidence
to auoyd impoſture.
               I might heere alſo alledge the ſeditious Treatiſe of Wiſeman,
called The three farwells, tending to no other end, but to
draw mens conceits wholy to this one point, that nothing is
ſufficiently done, which proceedeth not from a Ieſuit, or ſuch an
one as is gouerned in all things by them. But becauſe this is
more particulerly intreated of in the late booke of Quodlibets,
writ by Ma. Watſon, I refer the Reader thether. Now
will I leaue you to iudge, whether wee haue not ſome cauſe
to belieue the accuſations of Fiſher, (if the Memoriall was
of his deuiſe) in part to be true, and not ſo voyd of ground,
or reaſon as Ma. Parſons would haue you beleeue. But to
proceed yet farther with this confident Fa: in his own cauſe.
Perhaps hee thinketh euery bare aſſertion that comes from
his Maſterſhip ſhould be had, as an Oracle with all men,
though otherwiſe neuer ſo abſurd and vntrue. Howbeit, let
vs track him in his folly, and ſee what hee can ſay to the Accuſations

following.
               
                  No Ieſuit goeth to viſite anie in England,
                  The fourth paragraph of the Memoriall. 
                  or trauaileth from one
place to another, but he is richly apparelled, and attended on with
a great traine of ſeruants, as if hee were a Baron or an Earle.
This paragraph alſo our good Fa: ſhufleth off with an interrogation,
ſct: vvhether in our conſcience this be true? Would
you not think by this kinde of confident oſtentation in Ma:
Parſons; that this imputation were more then ſottiſh, yea
malitious without all ground, or ſhowe of ground in the
world? Yet if by ſome examples I doe not manifeſtly ſhew
this, to be grounded vpon ſome true, and reall experience;
beleeue me not in the reſt. Firſt I will but referre you vnto
all the Prieſts & Cath: that liued in England in Fa: Hawoods
time of liberty, and knew him, and his manners, and faſhions
well: and if they doe not aſſure you that his port, and
carriage was more Baronlike, then prieſtlike, all the world
will condemne them for moſt partiall, and impudent deniers
of the truth. Was he not wont to ride vp, and downe the
Country in his Coach? had he not both ſeruants, and prieſts
attendants that did hang on his ſleeue in great numbers? did
he not indict Counſels, make, and abrogate lawes? vvas not
his pompe ſuch, as the places where he came ſeemed petie-Courts
by his preſence, his traine, and followers? See whether
heere be not one notable example of exceſſe, at which
Fa: Parſons himſelfe was wont to carpe, there being emulation
betweene them about his ſuperiority, and the others exemption.Fa: Parſons claimed the Prouincialſhip, & Fa: Haywood an exemption, beeing ſent immediatly from his holines.
Againe, for preſent I referre you vnto Fa: Garnets
pompe, and expences, of which I haue heard ſome honeſt
prieſts (who haue beene much with him) report that he
cannot ſpend leſſe then 500. pound by the yeere. But wee
will not much ſtand vpon his pompe or expences, becauſe
being prouinciall of his order, he will claime a prelacie, and
therefore more honour, and more pompe, although our
times, and caſe (well conſidered,) will ſcant tolerate ſuch exceſſe.
But let vs come, I pray you, vnto ſome priuate men of
their order, and his ſubiects. The mighty, and extraordinarie
exceſſe of Ma: Iohn Gerard hath beene ſuch, and ſo notorious,
that I ſuppoſe few prieſts (beſides other Cath:) to be

ignorant thereof. His apparrell at one time hath beene valued
at a higher rate then I will for ſhame ſpeake of, which
he hath had in ſtore, as it hath been reported by ſuch, as were
well acquainted there-with;One Gentlewoman gaue him a veſt: of needle-worke valued at an 100. marks at one time. his church ſtuffe was worth no
leſſe then 200. marks, and the laſt time he was taken, loſing
but ſuch ſtuffe, as was onely portable, I referre me to the officers,
that ſeazed thereon for the value thereof; his horſes
were many, and of no ſmall price. My ſelfe haue knowne
him to haue two Geldings in a Gentlemans ſtable at 30.
pound a Gelding, beſides others elſe-where, and horſes of
good vſe.
               S. Ambroſe in times of neceſſity would breake Chalices,
and other precious veſſels of the Church, to relieue the wants
of poore Chriſtians, but theſe men in the great afflictions,
miſeries, & wants of afflicted poore Cath: may poſſeſſe not
onely ſuperaboundance of Church ſtuffe, but alſo great exceſſe
of apparell, horſes, iewels; et quid non? Whileſt others
ſtarue in priſon, and abroad without ſcruple of conſcience,
and this quia Dominus opus habet. You will imagine that the
expences of this man could not be very ſmall; that was thus
richly furniſhed: and I beleeue as much, and for experience
thereof, I will ſet downe his expences, during his impriſonment
in the Clincke, well knowne to diuers that liued there
with him, by which you may geſſe at the reſt.
               During his being there in durance (liuing as a cloſe priſoner
in ſhew, though with more fauour, then any other) howſoeuer
the matter hapned (which we will not wreſt vnto the
worſt ſence, as Ma: Parſons dealeth with vs) he kept a priuate
Table, continually with great ſtore of dainties, & much
reſort daily. Beſides, he payed his ordinary commons at the
common table, and chamber rent: let them which haue liued
in the Clinck, but iudge what this would come vnto in
the yeare. But he will ſay that the company reſorting vnto
him, prouided the meates and wines: Be it ſo, that we may
beleeue him in this (which is more credit, then we owe him,)
yet the exceſſe was no one iot the leſſe, & continuall. Which
I think any man of iudgement will imagine, that he might
haue (in ſome good portion at the leaſt) imployed better, and

with more merit, and edification. But that you may not
think this to haue beene the vttermoſt of his exceſſe, and ſo
excuſe him as aboue; you ſhall vnderſtand that he ordinarily
kept his Geldings in towne, and his man, which I ſuppoſe
to be ſome round charge vnto him. He alſo ſo wrought the
matter, that he rode into the Country at his pleaſure, and returned:
which I thinke you will ſuppoſe coſt his purſe well
in bribes to ſuch, as were his Keepers, if to no other. He alſo
maintained two houſes in the towne, with ſeruants in them,
and not this without great expences, I weene. Now if you
can ſpell, put all this together, and iudge what it might coſt
this Gentleman by the yeare, whilſt he liued in Durance, and
by that geſſe at his expences abroad, of the which there want
not diuers, who can ſufficiently informe you. Sure I am, that
ſuch as liued with him in the Clincke, were of opinion, that
he could not maintaine all this, I haue ſpoken of, vnder 400.
or 500. pounds by the yeare: See the pompe of a young Baronet
at the leaſt.
               I may not omit Ma: Oldcorne, though but a petty Ieſuit in
this kinde; I know that his apparrell is ſeldome leſſe worth,
then 30. or 40 pound. Hee is alwaies extraordinarily well
prouided for horſes, and thoſe of the beſt. An honeſt Gentleman,
and one whom I think you will iudge to be no lyer,
(beſides that he is not euill affected towards the Ieſuits,) told
me that he had 8. good Geldings at one time. I could alleadge
you diuers other examples in particuler of their exceſſe;
but I eſteeme it very needleſſe, to ſpend time in a matter
ſo euident to the world. But at all aduentures, I wiſh that
euery 5. of our ordinary brethren, had but as much to maintaine
them yeerely, as an ordinary Ieſuit commonly ſpendeth
by the yeere. As for their traine, few of them are vnwayted
vpon, whereſoeuer they goe; which ordinarily is but to places
of account, where their entertainment may be good, and
with the beſt. This is a thing ſo vſuall, that all the Cath: in
England of any account, as I ſuppoſe, do both ſee, & know it
well. And ſuch as haue heeretofore been ſecular prieſts, and
were then wont to goe on foot ſometimes, & viſit poore people
willingly, to relieue and comfort them: becōming afterwards

Ieſuits, haue beene ſo a cockhorſe, that it muſt be
thought no ſmall fauour to be worthy of their preſence, and
that not without their attendants, & other ceremonies; Witnes
this Ma: Bancks, Ma: Blunt, and others now Ieſuits.
               
                  They neuer ſend one Scholler out of England, to the Colledge of
Doway,The 5. paragraph. 
                  to ſt
                        •••
                     y there, &c. Nay, they haue laboured by all
meanes vtterly to diſſolue it. After his accuſtomed manner, he
asketh vs, whether this be true, and referreth vs to the Preſident,
and bookes of the Colledge. But by his leaue, whatſoeuer
he may coyne out of the Colledge bookes, and father
vpon the Preſident; hee muſt giue vs leaue by the effects to
iudge the cauſe, and intention. Wee know that they neuer
haue beene willing to ſend any vnto Doway, that had anie
maintenance of his owne to liue on, but haue alwayes perſwaded
them to Saint Odemars. And this I can witnes to be
ſo. Beſides, Doctor Barret did much complaine, that ſuch
as had where-with to maintaine themſelues, neuer came thether,
and others who had nothing, were continually ſent to
him. Moreouer, the opinion of all men of iudgement is, and
hath beene from the beginning; that the firſt inſtitution of
Saint Odemars, would be the ruine, & ouerthrow of Doway.
And their opinion was grounded vpon good, and forcible
reaſons: for knowing by experience (as we doe know) that
in euery thing the Ieſuits draw all they can vnto themſelues;
we could not but aſſure our ſelues, that they would hold the
like manner of proceeding in this, as the ſequell hath made
manifeſt. For ſince the erecting of this Seminarie, what Gentlemans
ſonne hath been ſent ouer by any Ieſuit in England,
but to that houſe? So that, vnder the pretence of a Colledge
with penſion, they haue drawne thither all the prime youths
of our Country, and ſuch as liue of themſelues. Whereby
now it is come to that paſſe, that (notwithſtanding all their
penſions from the King, or others) there be few Engliſh
youths there, whoſe parents doe not largely pay for their educations;
neither can any poore youth be admitted thether
(for all the penſions) but he muſt eyther haue anuall ſtipend
of 20. marks plus minis by the yeere, or 40. 50. or 60. pound
portion in groſſe ſumme. And ſuch will they foyſt into

Spaine, or Rome, within one yeere, or thereabouts, to giue
place to others. This is ſo common, and ſo well known, to all
our brethren, and others alſo, that I need not to inculcate the
ſame ouermuch. And I would ſet down a Catalogue of many
names, were it not to diſcouer them, to the hurt of themſelues,
and their friends.
               Now iudge you, whether the drawing of able youths, and
ſuch, as haue to maintaine themſelues (& were wont in times
paſt to be an eaſe vnto the Seminarie at Rhemes) from the
Colledge of Doway, vnto this new Seminary, be not a means
to impoueriſh and vtterly begger that Colledge. And euen
ſo hath it hapned, as is manifeſt, and the laſt Preſident, Docter
Barret, was wont to lament it. Add vnto this the ſtopping of
the Colledge penſions in Docter Barrets time. Conſider alſo
the bringing in of a Ieſuit Confeſſarins ouer all the houſe:
which was the firſt practiſe of theyr entrance into the gouernment
of the Romane Colledge. Behold their putting
downe of the Lectures euer vſually read with great credite,
and applauſe in that Colledge: Marke but the turning out
of the houſe of all the Docters, Readers, and Seniors, the
chiefe pillers, and countenaunce of that houſe. What can any
man think this tendeth vnto els, but to intrude themſelues
into the gouernment thereof, & vtterly to diſſolue it, as they
haue already not onely beggerd it, but diſgraced, & diſcountenaunced
it? Beſides, as now it is, who knoweth not that it
wholy ſtandeth at theyr deuotion, & that the Preſident dare
not creake, but as they would haue him to pipe, vnleſſe hee
will not onely loſe his place, but alſo depart with reproch, infamie,
and diſgrace? Into which extremities Doctor Barret
was brought by them (as all the world knoweth) and had ſo
departed vnto his Canonrie at Rhemes, if he had liued: howſoeuer
this good fellow in his Apologie, laboureth to make
him their friend, & fauorite at his death. The contrarie wherof,
thoſe that were at his laſt end, beſt know, when hee cried
they had burſt his backe, and that he could no longer beare,
and this not long before he died.
               The ſeuenth paragraph is,The 7. 
                  that women alſo are induced by
them to become Nunnes, and to leaue ſuch goods as they haue vnto

them. How much need ſoeuer Nunnes haue of their own
dowries, there be ſome that both haue, and will taxe them
with this kinde of fiſhing. For the which I refer you to what
is writ of late in the diſcoueries of ſuch their proceedings. But
thus much I can ſay, that there haue been Gentlewomen ſent
ouer by them, who haue returned back, as wiſe as they went,
with no ſmall waſte of their portions. I muſt conceale theyr
names of neceſſitie, to auoyd their daungers.
               
                  All Ʋniuerſity men, & ſuch as haue takē any degree in ſchooles,
the Ieſuits hate, deſpiſe, & contemne. Howſoeuer Ma. Parſons
asketh you, whether this be true, or verifiable, we can aſſure
you, that they ſo little eſteeme of any, who haue taken degrees
in ſchooles, that often-times in open words, they will
derogate both from the men, and their degree. Witnes their
dealing with D. Bagſhaw, tearming him Docter erraticus, et
per ſaltum: Witnes their repyning at D. Norris, and D. Hills
taking degree, for preuenting the like whereof heereafter in
others, Fa: Parſons (as he ſaid) procured a Breve againſt taking
of that degree: Witnes their contempt of the reu: Doct:
of Paris, concerning their cenſure & iudgement in our matter
of ſchiſme, for which they derogated moſt diſgracefullie
from them, as all men know: Witneſſe their contemptuous
dealing with the Vniuerſitie of Louaine: Witnes their arrogancie
in all Vniuerſities where they come, and their inſulting
againſt all auncient cuſtoms and priuiledges, for the
which neuer Vniuerſitie did, or could affect them, as they do
other orders of Religion.
               
                  To conclude, Catholicks stand in more feare of Ieſuits, then of
the hereticks, &c. and that indirectly they cauſe Priests to be apprehended.
This he remitteth vnto all good Catholicks iudgement.
Which although I meane not to draw vpon my ſelfe,
as an accuſer: yet muſt you giue me leaue to ſhew you, vppon
what grounds or reaſons ſuch thinges might in part be
obiected againſt them. It is not vnknowne vnto our world
heere, how vncharitably the Ieſuits haue dealt, and doe continually
deale with all ſorts of perſons, as well prieſts, as lay;
noble, as meane; if in any ſort they ſtande in their waies, or
ſeem to diſlike any courſe of theirs. For manifeſtation wherof

I will ſet you downe ſome particuler examples, by which
you may geſſe, whether ſufficient cauſe be not daily giuen by
them, to make all ſorts of Catholicks ſtand in feare of them.
I neede not here to ſtand much vpon their practiſes in countries
beyond the ſeas; how, and in what ſort they haue dealt
with all our Countrimen abroad, aſwell Prieſts, as lay, ſeculer
as religious; the fame thereof beeing ſo loude, that almoſt
the whole world doth ring therof: Witnes their dealing with
Docter Barret, in moſt notorious and infamous ſort: Witnes
their dealings with the worthy Biſhop of Caſana, Doctor
Lewes: vvitnes their proceedings with Ma. Doctor Gifford, of
which we ſhall haue cauſe heereafter to ſpeake more at large:
vvitnes their continuall infamies caſt vpon Ma. Charles Paget,
Ma. Robert Markham, Ma. Tho: Throgmorton, Ma. Nicholas
Fitzherbert, Ma. Fran: Roper, Ma. Charles Browne, Ma.
Treſham, Ma. Godfrey Foulgeam, whoſe vntimely death was
occaſioned by Fa: Holt, as many men affirme. But to conclude,
becauſe a whole volume would be little enough to cō
                  prehend
the Catalogue of ſuch Gentlemen, & prieſts, as haue
taſted of this kinde of whip from the Ieſuits, and theyr followers,
beeing ſometimes reputed for eſpialls, ſomtimes termed
ſeditious, other-ſome taxed with ambition, others noted
as factious, and ſome worſe. So that belieue me, I know
no one eminent man or perſon of ſort, and qualitie liuing beyond
the ſeas, whom they haue not wronged in ſome degree,
or other, by way of calumniation, eſpecially if they haue but
ſo much as made any ſhew of diſlike in their proceedings.
Let vs ſee ſome examples within our Country: amongſt the
multitude whereof onely ſome few I will name, well known
to many: that thereby you may haue a further taſt of theyr
proceedings in this ſort. And firſt for ſuch as haue lately died
Martyrs (as I thinke:) notorious were the Ieſuits calumniations
againſt the Franciſcan Frier Ma. Iones, alias Buckley, I
my ſelfe was particulerly acquainted therewith, and his letters
writ to Fa: Garnet after his condemnation, may be a ſufficient
teſtimonie thereof.
               Ma. Harrington was ſo oppreſſed with ſuch calumnies in
like ſort, that hauing honeſt meanes for his libertie offered

him, he reiected it; ſaying, that then he ſhould be accounted
for no honeſt man, and that he muſt be hanged to proue him
ſelfe honeſt, and free from ſuch calumniations. Ma. Fixar
was in ſuch ſort ſlaundered by them, that hee was forced to
leaue England, and they afterwards forced him with theyr
bad vſage in Spaine, to looſe his life, with griefe and ſorrow.
Ma. Pibuſh, during his remaine in Glouceſter priſon, was calumniated
by them as vnconſtant in his fayth, and ſuſpitious
of reuolt: my ſelfe am witnes thereto. It is not vnknowne,
that Ma. Plaſden was ſo wronged by Ma. Iohn Gerards dealing,
and others of them in this kind, that he could not be receiued
amongſt his old acquaintance in London. By which
meanes he fell into the officers hands, and was executed. Ma.
George Beeſley, was notoriouly abuſed by them.
               The day would faile me to recite all I could, for proofe of
this one point. As for men yet liuing, how many be there,
whom they haue of late touched with defamations, both in
Wiſbich, and other priſons, as well as abroade? Witneſſe this
Ma. Wingfield, called into ſuſpition for Ma. Southwell his apprehenſion:
Witnes this all the Prieſts whō they haue charged
with ſchiſme, diſobedience, and mortall ſinne: Witnes
this all the Prieſts that came from Rome during the time of
the ſtirrs there, defamed, and held as ſpies by them. Verilie,
I thinke the third prieſt now in England hath not eſcaped
theyr ſpightfull tongues.
               And as touching lay men, what man is there, that hath in any
matter taken courſe againſt any of theyr proceedings, and
hath not felt theyr bitter ſharpe calumniating tongues: beſides
others of woorth, not huing any dealings with them?
VVitnes this their invectiues againſt my old Lo: Mountacute,
when hee liued: vvitnes theyr diſgracefull ſpeeches againſt
my Lo. Dacres of the North, my Lo. Paget in Flaunders,
Sir Thomas Treſham, Ma. Talbot, Ma. Sheldon, and others,
whom they haue not ſpared to detract in very vnciuill
ſort. Witnes this Ma. Aſhfielde now in the Tower, vvhom
openly they made a ſpy. Witnes this Ma. Antho: Copley defamed
in the ſame manner. It were an infinite labour to ſet
downe all particuler wrongs done by them in this kind. Aſſuredly

to me it ſeemeth a common practiſe amongſt them,
to ſlaunder, defame, & detract whomſoeuer they affect not,
or that oppoſeth their proceedings; which is no leſſe then a
Machiuillian practiſe. And that I haue no ſmall reaſon to
preſſe them heere-with, one of theyr owne ſpeeches vnto a
Prieſt, complayning of the wrongs, doone to Ma. Edward
Bennet in this kinde, import no leſſe, which were theſe, or to
this effect, that it was neceſſary or conuenient he ſhould be diſgraced,
becauſe he was against theyr ſocietie. Iudge of the honeſtie
of this neceſſitie or conueniencie, and then thinke you, whether
Catholicks, & prieſts both, may not iuſtly ſtand in feare
of them, holding ſuch diueliſh principles whereby they may
at pleaſure defame; whom they pleaſe; and (theyr ſway and
power being ſo great at it is) may alſo driue the ſame into the
heads of many, and infinite their followers, who are ready to
belieue, whatſoeuer they affirme, yea to affirme whatſoeuer
they ſuſpect. And this I thinke in my conſcience maketh
many of both ſorts to feare to encounter with them. I know
it to be true in ſome, who will ſpare to open no mans faults,
(if he haue any they know of) & inuent or exaggerate, what
they can deuiſe againſt ſuch as oppoſe them, as you may ſee
by theſe laſt bookes of Fa: Parſons. Yet haue not we dealt ſo
with them, as to enter into theyr particuler liues, and diſcouer
their imperfections (as you may not thinke, they be all
Saints, vnleſſe you affect to be deceiued) but onely preſſe
them with theyr vniuſt proceedings, (which beeing not priuate
to their owne particuler hurt onely, as ſecret infirmities
are, but tend to the hurt and ruine of many, yea the generall
damage of both our Country and Clergie) may no way be
tolerated, becauſe euery man is more bound to prouide for a
generall, then a particuler good, and more bound to hinder
a generall, then a particuler miſchiefe.
               But to come at length to the ſecond part of the cōcluſion,
which is, that they indirectly cauſe priests to be apprehended, let
the example of Ma. Plaſden before cited, be duly conſidered,
and their dealing with Ma. Edward Bennet, whom they ſo defamed
with the note of eſpiall, and the like, that he was thruſt
out of his reſidence, and the calumniation ſo generally ſpred

in the Country about him, that had not a good old Gentlewoman
been, he could not haue told whether to haue gone;
being not very well acquainted in the Country. Beſides, at
that time he was ſo ill of an hurt receaued in his legge, that if
he had one day rode, he had not beene able to haue ſtirred of
a fortnight, or three weekes after at the leaſt (as they can teſtifie,
who had the curing thereof.) Iudge you then what
might haue beene likely to haue followed, (if he had been reiected
of that old Gentlewoman) through thoſe reports, being
but ſlenderly ſtored with mony at that time, nor very wel
prouided for his horſe. Furthermore, I think there is no man
ſo ſimple, but he muſt needs imagine that this kind of courſe
of defaming prieſts for ſpies, &c. can doe no leſſe then hazard
their liberties, and lyues both; when as thereby they
ſhall be reiected of Cath: and driuen to ſhift for themſelues
at ſix, and ſeauen, in theſe dangerous times. And thus wee
will end the purſuite of Fiſhers Memoriall, and leaue the indifferent
Reader to iudge, whether there were not ſomewhat
á parte rei, to occaſionate ſuch accuſations againſt them.
And heere I cannot chooſe but a little note good Fa: Parſons
folly, (which he ſo much vrgeth againſt vs) in that he would
call in queſtion ſo ſleightly (beſides ſimply) thoſe accuſations
of Fiſher onely ſet forth ſimply, and barely by vs, as themſelues
had divulged them, without further exaggerations;
leauing the truth thereof vnſifted; thereby to cauſe vs to open
thoſe dealings, and practiſes in him, and his, which they
will neuer be able to cleare, whileſt they liue, and there-withall
to giue that light vnto all men, not onely to looke into the
grounds of theſe accuſations, but alſo to looke further into
other their dealings heereafter.
               Now to the 2. and 3. Catalogue of chiefe points of accuſations,
where-with many Engliſh men haue iuſtly charged
the Ieſuits. Theſe accuſations (Ma: Parſons ſaith) were written
by ſome of our friends, and ſent to Rome vnderhand, to increaſe
the flame of ſedition there, when it was on fire, and that wee haue
divulged them without ſcruple of conſcience (being notoriouſlie
falſe) or respect to our friends credite, who were authors thereof.
As touching the falſhood or verity thereof, (whoſoeuer was

the author) wee will examine by leyſure. But for our divulging
them, they were firſt publiſhed (as wee haue ſaid) by
themſelues, & put in print by vs, but as they came from their
hands. And therefore for quotations, let good Ma: Parſons
impute the blame thereof vnto his owne ſubiects, that ſent
copies abroad, without quotations of either the parties, or
their letters, and not impute iugling or cunning ſhifting vnto
them, that printed but what they receau
                     •
                  d from his pupills.
For that kinde of iugling is not ſo common with any,
as with his maiſterſhip, and his Schollers. Neither would it
haue made againſt vs, or the verity of the accuſations, to haue
named Ma: Doctor Gifford, or Ma: Charles Paget, for authors
thereof, as hee cunningly deciphereth in letters, with a ſeeming
vnwillingnes to reueale them, though his characters
make them no more knowne, then the noſe vpon a mans
face. For if it may goe current, that they were the authors
thereof: I ſuppoſe that all men of wit, and iudgement, that
euer haue eyther known, or heard of thoſe two parties, would
begin (at the leaſt) to ſuſpect ſomething, when they ſhould
ſee ſuch matters deliuered by men of their ſort, and calling.
For whatſoeuer this Fa: pretendeth, the credites of theſe men
will extend as farre as his, in any place in the world, where all
parts are knowne; and therefore there was no reaſon at all
to haue concealed their teſtimonies, if it had beene knowne
that they were authors of theſe accuſations.
               But to ſpeake a little of the imputation layde vppon theſe
two worthy men, cōcerning theſe Memorialls. I would faine
know of this honeſt Father, if Ma. Doctor Gifford were acceſſarie
hereto, how chaunced it then, that maſter Blackwell,
our Archpriest, publiquely before witnes cleered him, affirming
that he was not Authour thereof? Againe, how happened
it, that a commiſſion being procured for his examination,
nothing could be proued, Fa: Baldwine comming in againſt
him in the behalfe of Ma. Parſons, and all the Ieſuits?
Furthermore, how came it to paſſe, that you Ma: Parſons
wrote to Fa: Baldwyne to make an end with the Doctor, and
in any caſe to procure peace with him? Wherupon he with
great and earneſt intreatie, vrged the Nuncio to ſend for the

Doctor againe when hee was gone, and perſwade a mutuall
peace. Which the Nuncio performing, your Factor Fa: Baldwyne
vpon his knees asked forgiuenes of the Doctor, both in
your name (good Fa:) and in the name of the whole Societie;
and the Doctor afterwards in ſome ſort, performed the
like to him of humilitie, not as hauing offended, but if in any
thing he had wronged any of you. Although it pleaſed you afterwards,
againſt the Nuncio his commaundement of ſilence,
to publiſh the act out of the pulpit in Rome, as though the
Doct. had asked you forgiuenes, and not you him: & writ
ſo both into Spaine, England, and into other places, whilſt
the good Doct. kept ſilence vpon conſcience, which in ſuch
caſes was yet neuer found in you. Theſe are the ordinarie
iugling tricks which are too too familiar with you, good Fa.
Now (my good Sir) was Ma. Doct. Gifford authour of theſe
accuſations? If he were, why did you not then take your pennyworths
of him, and make him to doe publique ſatisfaction,
theſe things beeing ſo notoriouſlie falſe? I am ſure you
might haue had iuſtice, when the matter came to hearing before
his holines his Nuncio.
               
               Beleeue it, good Fa: theſe circumſtances will make all the
world thinke theſe accuſations true, if you maintaine the D.
to be Authour of them, ſith that he not onely went vnpuniſhed,
but that you alſo by your Proctor asked him forgiuenes.
And as for Ma. Charles Paget, the world knowes, you would
neuer haue ſpared him one iot, if you had found the leaſt
hole that might be in his coate. But (to let this paſſe) it skilleth
not much from whom the accuſations come, the author
muſt beare his owne burden. Yet will wee performe our office,
and ſincerelie examine the truth of euery particuler accuſation.
               The firſt article is this.Artic. 1. 
                  The Ieſuits are ſo ambitious, as not
content with the bounds theyr Fathers had placed, they haue in
theyr inſatiable deſire, alreadie ſwallowed vp kingdoms and Monarchies.
Ma: Parſons in a marginall note termeth this an
abſurd contumelious ſpeech: and in the text asketh with what
conſcience we could publiſh this ſlaunder to the world, &c. To
this I ſay, that being but printed, as themſelues divulged thē,

whether the words may be ſtretched in worſe ſence, then in
the originall in Latine (if any ſuch be) wee know not, and
might ſuſpect (perhaps not without reaſon) the worſt at their
hands; yet, as they are, I will not ſay, that this is ſo abſurd &
falſe as Ma. Parſons affirmeth. For if you will but indifferently
conſider what we haue ſaid concerning their practiſes
with vs heere, both in Wiſbich and abroad, as alſo theyr plots
and practiſes concerning matters of ſtate, apparant by theyr
owne bookes, letters, and open actions, diſcouered in part,
both in the Important conſiderations, & in the booke of Quodlibets,
and others of late printed; I do not ſee how a man can
well auoyde the ſuſpition of a deſire in them of the whole
Monarchie of England. Which ſuſpition is not a little fortified,
by their forecaſting of matters, both for generall & particuler
affaires to be ordered by them, or at their diſcretion &
directions, when the time ſerueth: as appeareth by Fa: Parſons
proude pamphlet of Reformation, intermedling with all
eſtates. See more thereof in the Quodlibets. VVhich points
conſidered, may not a man reaſonably ſuſpect, that they haue
ſwallowed alreadie in their deſires the kingdome, & Monarchie
of England. Doe not their late attempts in Ireland ſhew
as much for that kingdome?
               I will omit their ſtratagems in Fraunce, and Scotland, and
that which is reported of Iapona, and other places in the Indies:
where they keepe to themſelues the ſole dominion, &
will admit no other Clergie, but play Biſhop, prieſt, and
Munck themſelues. Neither is it a ſufficient aunſwer to reply,
that they take not vpon them the name or title of King. For
that importeth not, ſo they may gouerne and direct Kings,
Nobles, Biſhops, prelates, and others. Therein conſiſts theyr
ambition,Artic. 6. and ſwallowing of kingdoms here ſpoken of. And
by this you may ſee the truth and veritie of the ſixt article of
accuſation againſt them. ſct. That if this ambition do remain
vnpuniſhed, the age that is to come, ſhall ſee that it wil bring
bondage, not onely to Prelates, but to Princes & Monarches
themſelues. &c. Iudge whether this doe not probably, yea
euidently follow vpon the firſt. And for the ſubiecting of
Prelats, it is too too well knowne by experience, that manie

Biſhops haue much to doe with them, their force is ſo great,
and they ſtand ſo much vpon their priuiledges. Beſides, the
foundation layd by Ma. Parſons, in the forenamed Treatiſe
of Reformation,
                  Artic. 7. ſct. of making all Biſhops & Prelates penſioners,
doth conuince no leſſe. For which they had cauſe (whoſoeuer
they were that dealt in this matter) to beſeech his holines,
that he would lay the axe to the tree, and cut of the pride of
this Societie, &c. which we likewiſe pray & beſeech (for their
good) may be done by the axe of Reformation; that beeing
brought within order, as other Friers and religious men be,
they may attend vnto the quier, and their deuotions, and not
to kingdoms, and Monarchies; which muſt needes eyther
breed their own ouerthrow, or the deſtruction of kingdoms,
and ſedition to all Chriſtian common welths, as by many examples
in Fraunce, Swethland, England, and elſe where they
haue alreadie wrought.
               
                  The Pope can commaund nothing in all his Mandates,
                  Artic. 9. 
                  but the
Ieſuits finde meanes to frustrate it by ſeculer power. This is the
9. article of accuſation, of which this our Fa: asketh whether
it can be true, or probable. Hee hath forgot belike the notorious
fact at Louaine, where the Ieſuits, by the power, and authority
of the King of Spaine, forbad the publiſhing of the
Popes order for the Vniuerſitie againſt the Ieſuits. This fact
belike this good father thought to haue beene ſo ſecret, as it
was vnknown to the world, or at the leaſt forgotten. He likewiſe
thinketh, that the world tooke no notice of their dilation
euen in Rome it ſelfe to admit the Popes Breve againſt
vti ſcientia habita in confeſſione, making vſe of any thing,
which was learnt by confeſſion (which al other religious men
preſently admitted without reply,) vntill ſuch time as his holineſſe
ſent them a new Mandate, in virtute ſanctae obedientiae,
ſub cenſuris ipſo facto incurrendis, preſentlie without delay
to admit thereof. Many more examples in this kinde
might be produced, to ſhew their aptnes to reſiſt the Popes
Mandates, and the little eſteeme, or reuerence they beare towards
ſuch of them as check, or cōtrole their diſorders. Witnes
this their irreligious irreuerence towards Sixtus quintus,
and open preaching againſt him in Spaine: and rayling againſt

him elſe where, vſing approbrious, & irreuerent ſpeeches
of him in Rome it ſelfe.
               
                  That the Ieſuits doe eagerly waite for the death of the Pope, and
of the renowned Cardinall Toled,Artic. 
                        •
                     0. 
                  that they may bring ſlaughter
vpon all, &c. What their deſires haue been concerning the
death of his Holines, I cannot affirme, but ſure I am, they affected
him but a little in the beginning of his raigne, both for
his proceedings againſt them, in the behalfe of the Scholers
in the Engliſh Colledge in Rome, (as by the Hiſtory thereof
you ſhall ſhortly ſee at large) as alſo for his ioyning with his
Maieſtie of Fraunce, that now is againſt the Spaniſh intentions,
and deſignes, wherein their fingers were deepely plunged
(as all men know) and they yet feele: but as for the worthie
Prelate Card: Toled, I thinke few men be ignorant of
their clamours againſt him of ambition, and partiality for his
dealings in the affaires of the Engliſh Colledge. VVhich
might giue a probable conceite of their deſire, or expectance
of his death. For they vſe not much to lament the death of
their enemies. And if any man ſhall goe about to denie, that
any clamours or detracting ſpeeches were euer vſed by them
againſt this worthy Card: I will ſay, hee is impudent, and
hath a face of braſſe, and is as ſhameleſſe as Ma. Parſons;
who wil affirme, or denie any thing. For my ſelfe haue heard
the fore-ſaid irreuerent ſpeeches from ſome of their owne
mouthes. Now for the ſequell of ſlaughter, or blood-ſhed,
I leaue it as divulged by themſelues, and to the proofe of the
author, if any ſuch thing were laid to their charge by anie.
And for the truth thereof, their owne conſciences muſt aunſwer,
though they giue no great occaſion of our good conceite
towards them, for their future actions by their former
dealings, touching the 23. 24. and 25. art: of the Ieſuits, ſeeking
the gouernment of the Colledge of Doway, or diſſolution
thereof; we haue ſaid ſufficiently already. As concerning
the 13. art: prepoſterouſly brought in heere, that it is a
knowne maxime among the Ieſuits diuide et impera, ſet diuiſion,
and them you ſhall gouerne at your pleaſure. I thinke no man
that is not wilfully blind can excuſe them heerein, if he doe
but halfe indifferently conſider their proceedings from time

to time, as well in the Colledge at Rome, and amongſt the
Engliſh in Flaunders, as alſo in England at Wiſbich Caſtle, and
in theſe late generall garboiles. In all which ſtirres, their chiefeſt
buſines hath beene to ſet men firſt together by the eares,
by ſtrange ſlanders, calumniations, and other Machiauilian
policies, and then to attempt their purpoſes, and deſignes of
rule, and dominion. He that readeth what is already ſhewed
in this reply, and what hath beene ſaid in former diſcourſes,
concerning their proceedings both at home, & abroad, muſt
needes confeſſe as much, vnleſſe he will denie apparent effects
to proceed from their proper and vnknowne cauſes.
               
                  That the Ieſuits vſe to intercept all manner of letters,
                  Artic. 10. is ſo generall
an acclamation in forraine Countries, that it ſeemeth
not to be clean void of verity, though for my own part I cannot
ſay that I haue ſeene them intercept any Card: or Princes
packets. But for experience of this matter, concerning
meaner mens letters, many a ſcore will beare witnes with me,
that it is too too vſuall amongſt them, not onely in Rome, but
alſo in the low Countries, and in England to, and ſome letters
cited by this good Fa: in his Apologie approue as much.
               As concerning the atteſtation in the 12. article,Art. 12. ſee what
we haue ſaid before to the concluſion of Fiſhers Memoriall,
as alſo for the 13. article following.Art. 13. For more proofe▪ and
verity whereof, conſider but their late dealings both in the
Romaine Colledge, low Countries, Wisbich, & now generally
throughout England. Which I omit heere to recite, becauſe
you may read more at large thereof in the former treatiſes,
heeretofore publiſhed.
               For the verity of the 19. article, touching the contempt of
the Preſident, & the renowned Card: we referre you to what
is ſaid before to the 20 article.
               To ſpeake much to the 17. article of the reuolt of eyther
prieſts or Ieſuits,Art. 17. I am not willing, pittying, and lamenting
as well the fact of the one, as the other. Yet this I muſt tell
Fa: Parſons, that it is a very common practiſe amongſt his
people, and their followers, to note not onely the reuolt of
any prieſts, but alſo whatſoeuer infirmity they can imagine
to be in them: and this of purpoſe to the diſgracing of

prieſts, euery where ſuggeſting, that neuer any of their order
fainted in the leaſt ſort. Which how contrarie to truth it is,
we know, & are rather ſorie for them, then purpoſe in vaunting
manner to preſſe them with the ignominie thereof. But
if they will needes proſecute ſuch vncharitable courſes to our
diſgraces, I promiſe this good Father, that I will note him aboue
eyght of his order that haue incurred this diſgrace, and
bring him teſtimonie thereof, ſed qui ſtat videat, ne cadat. I
pray GOD hartily neuer any of them may reuolt.
               And by the way, I muſt tell you that it is but a iugling trick
to delude your eyes, when they ſay that neuer any, ſent in obedience
of his ſuperiour, fell. For hereby will they exclude any
one that ſhal incur this diſgrace; either affirming that they
had diſmiſſed him before he fell, or that they came not from
their ſuperiours, but of their owne heads. This is a politick
ſhift which they haue in their order, aboue all other religious
ſocieties; that they may diſmiſſe any out of their order before
his laſt vow, which fewe, in reſpect of the multitude of them,
are admitted vnto. Where-vpon it happeneth, that ſometimes
a man is 20. or 30. yeeres a Ieſuit, and afterwards is diſmiſſed.
By which ſhift they put of many notorious things
committed by them; diſmiſſing the perſons delinquent out
of theyr order ſecretly, to auoyde the note of their crimes,
which other Religious orders cannot doe. Yet cannot this iuſtifie
them neither, if wee would enter the liſts with them in
this point. Now to the other articles of Engliſh matters, and
Engliſh Ieſuits, the firſt is of their diſſenſion, and particulerly
of Fa: Garnet, and Fa: Weston, which this Fa: ſaith we contradict
in our latter bookes, complayning that Fa: Garnet, Father
Weston, Fa: Parſons, and the rest, are too much vnited, the one
obeying the others becke.
               
               You haue read I ſuppoſe the hiſtory of Sampſons Foxes,
who were all tied together by the tayles, running with their
heads diuers courſes, yet all into the Philiſtians corne. To
let you therefore vnderſtand more, both of their owne contradictions,
& of theyr vnitie, it is with them, as it often times
happeneth amongſt children of one familie, ſ
                     •
                  t. brothers and
ſiſters, who will very ordinarily fall out amongſt themſelues,

but when they come to a third controuerſie, or conflict, to
wit, that any one of them falleth out with a third perſon, a
ſtranger vnto them, they will all take part together, and fall
vpon the forrainer: like as the ſeditious in Heruſalem quarrelled
daily, and hourely one againſt another, to theyr miſerable
deſtruction by ciuill mutinie, yet would they alvvayes
ioyne together againſt the Romans. So the Ieſuits, howſoeuer
they iarre amongſt themſelues, yet are they all bent together,
& vnited againſt all others that oppoſe any one of thē,
or their proceedings. Heereupon Sixtus quintus, of famous
memory, was wont to ſay of them (as diuers of credit in Rome
reported) Qui tangit vnum, tangit omnes, and themſelues many
times haue affirmed no leſſe, in the late ſtirrs of the Romane
Colledge. But for this Fa: or any other to ſay, that they haue
not many and often iarres, and thoſe no ſmall ones neither, is
to fall into the depth of impudencie. Witnes the great controuerſie
betwixt the Spaniſh and Italian Ieſuits not manie
yeeres paſt: vvitnes the iarrs betweene fa: Crighton and father
Parſons, for Scottiſh, and Spaniſh affaires: the like betwixt
him and fa: Haywood in England; him and fa: Holt, & diuers
others of them, as fa: Creſſwell, and fa: Edmund Harwood, againſt
fa: Hieronimo Fierouante, and fa: Iulio, the Confeſſor
of the Engliſh Colledge in Rome; whereupon the remooue
of the two latter followed, as all know, who were then in the
Colledge. This poynt is ſo euident to all the world, as I aſſure
my ſelfe no one religious Order in Gods Church commeth
neere vnto them therein: witnes their daily expulſions
out of theyr order, and the multitude departing from them
yeerely.
               The 3. 5. and 7. articles are, that the Ieſuits be firebrands of
all ſedition, enemies to all ſecular priests: ſuch notable lyers as
none will belieue them, no not when they ſweare: that by the ſchiſmaticks
in England, they are called Horſleeches. &c. For the two
firſt poynts, theyr late actions both at home, and abroad, do
witnes ſo euidently, that none, who are therwith acquainted,
can iudge any otherwiſe of them. For the laſt, concerning the
imputation of lying, ſo famous and notorious are theyr equiuocations,
& ſo ſcandalous, that the very Proteſtants take notice

thereof, to the great preiudice of our profeſſion, alwaies heretofore
famous for our truth and ſincerity. But ſuch iuglings
and ſhiftings of late haue beene vſed by them, that not onely
Proteſtants, but alſo Catholicks, yea Prieſts can ſcarce tell,
when they ſpeake ſincerely, when otherwiſe.
               I know they will vſually make great ſhewes of kindnes,
where they leaſt affect: vvitnes this a pretie cunning policie
of one of them,Ma. Iones. not long ſince practiſed vpon an honeſt gentleman:
who beeing to haue entertainement in a certaine
place, before his repaire thether, this Ieſuit vſing great ſhew
of kindnes towards him, would needes of curteſie beſtow his
Letters vpon him for his better credit, and kinder entertainment:
which the honeſt gentleman, receiuing as a kindnes,
departed. But by the way (beeing ſomewhat acquainted with
their tricks, and hauing no great cauſe to put ouer-much cō
                  fidence
in their dealings) hee thought good to ſee, whether
hee caried not hote coales, to burne his owne coate. Wherevppon
opening the Letter, he found ſuch ſtuffe againſt him
ſelfe, as had I not ſeene the ſame, I ſhould hardly haue belieued
it to haue beene true. But this tricke of honeſtie was borowed
of worthy father Parſons, the cunningeſt polititian in
theſe practiſes aliue, I thinke.
               Witnes this his dealing with Robert Shepheard, in his commendations
to Doctor Eley in Muſepont: Witnes this his dealing
with diuers ſcholers after the attonement in Rome. How
ſoeuer this kinde of dealing may ſeeme excuſable vnto them,
vnder the name of honeſt equiuocations: ſure I am that fewe
honeſt men will excuſe it from diſhoneſt lying. I remember
that a reuerendMa. A. R. honeſt Prieſt once told me, that he diſcourſed
aboue an houre with aMa. Ioh. Gerard. Ieſuit, and many complements
paſſed, but not on reall intended veritie from the good Father.
A worthy practiſe in Religious men to affect ſuch diſhoneſt
dealings, which tendeth to nought els, but to take away
all ſocietie & conuerſation amongſt men, which is hatefull
euen vnto Pagans and Turkes. For howe ſhould a man
conuerſe with ſuch a one, whoſe conceits and meanings hee
ſhall neuer vnderſtand, whereby he ſhal often conceiue moſt
good, when the other intendeth moſt knauery and villanie.
               
                  
But to make an end of theſe articles. Fa: Parſons collecteth
one (in cloſe and end of all) to make you laugh, to wit, that
he, and his companions (as is reported) gathered fiftie thouſand
pounds out of England to their owne vſe. But Fa: Parſons merry
ieſt is, the multiplication of this ſumme to 200. millions of
Italian ſcudi. Heere forſooth he telleth you the people muſt
laugh. I know ſome perſons ſo merrily diſpoſed, that eftſoones
they can laugh at a feather; but if wiſedome with diſcretion,
and grauitie, conſider this multiplication, I verily
think no ſuch merry mood will moue their conceits, but rather
iudge that error to haue beene either in the tranſcription
to the preſſe, or in the Printer, then of malice which were too
too blind, or ignorance (which were as groſſe,) to miſtake ſo
much the alteration of the ſumme out of one kind of coyne
into an other. See now whether there were more malice or
ignorance in the error, or more folly in the carping exceptions.
But we muſt giue him leaue to ſnatch at the leaſt aduantage;
for all will be too little to iuſtifie themſelues, or excuſe
their actions. But let vs come a little to the accuſation
about their collections. It is well knowne that collections in
England haue not been ſmall, yet haue the diſtributions been
ſo ſcant, and ſparing, that poore priſoners neuer liued in the
like want, as of late yeeres they haue done: let them ſpeake
heereof, that haue felt the ſmart; yet all the world knoweth,
that ſuch Collections haue paſſed generally thorow theyr
hands, what becommeth thereof God knoweth. But ſure I
am that for themſelues, (howſoeuer priſoners are pincht) they
liue in aboundance, and exceſſe, (as before I haue noted ſome
examples thereof, and ſomething by the way I will tell you.
It is not long ſithence 22. hundred pounds in gold were taken
going ouer the Seas, which being confiſcate to her Maieſtie,
neuer any came to claime the ſame, neither could it be
knowne whoſe it was, and more then this; by ſome of the
higheſt it was thought verily to be the Ieſuits money. I will
not ſay abſolutely it was theirs, becauſe I was not of their
counſaile: but it was a wonder that the owners (if it belonged
to any others) would make no meanes by way of ſuite, or ſupplication,
to haue got (at the leaſt) ſome part thereof backe

againe, ſith the chiefeſt penalty was but the confiſcation of
the money taken; which no man going about, made the matter
more ſuſpitious to all men. But more wil be ſaid heereof,
if there be any further occaſion.
               Now I will onely proceede by coniectures, and add to the
reſt ſome other probabilities, or inducements, in that the Ieſuits
being religious men, and therefore poore, yet ſome of
our Engliſh Ieſuits beyond the Seas, who haue no reuenues,
or commings in any way knowne; will ſometimes beſtow
largely in crownes, of their owne purſe, vpon ſuch fauorites
or factors, as they imploy in their affaires, & practiſes abroad
in the world. This is a thing not vnknowne to many of our
Engliſh men, liuing abroad in the low Countries, and elſe
where. How many did Fa. Holt deale with-all in the low
Countries in this kind, keeping correſpondencie with many
needy fellowes, and imploying many bare mercenarie men
in his affaires? There be alſo that will affirme (and of credit)
that Fa: Rich. Walpole in Spaine, giuing good ſtore of crowns
vnto a certaine Engliſh man (whom it was thought he meant
to vſe in ſome honeſt peece of ſeruice,) was afterwards (the
matter being knowne) examined how he came by ſo much
money, and he aunſwered, that he receaued it out of England
from his friends: But we all know that Fa: Rich. Walpoles
friends in England are not of ſuch ability, as to ſend him ſuch
exhibition. Now would I aske Fa: Parſons whence this money
came? But you perhaps wil demaund how ſuch ſummes
ſhould come to their hands? I aunſwer, that it is wel known
that they haue had the diſpoſition of the common purſe for
many yeeres, and the receits of almoſt all legacies in pios vſus,
yeerely almes, extraordinarie gifts, beſides reſtitutions de bonis
incertis, much for diſpenſations in diuers caſes, (euery one
running to them by reaſon of their large faculties▪) and for
alienations, ad-vouſions, &c. All which receites riſe to no ſmall
ſumme. There hath falne by way of legacies within theſe
few yeeres of my knowledge (beſides what other men can
ſay) 2000. pound, (ſome affirme 3000. pound) from one
man of worth, 500. pounds from an other priuate Gent:
800. pound from another, and ſome 100. pound yeerely in

lands, and rents beſides. All which portions, beſides infinite
other legacies of leſſe ſummes, haue come vnto their hands,
and diſpoſition: and whereof no man can ſay iuſtly that he
hath receaued one penny, I verily think. Beſides, Ma: Iohn
Gerard for his part, got by one Gent: 200. pound at one time,
(the bonds for which I once ſaw by chaunce) & 700. pound
at another time, (as his neereſt kinſmen will depoſe,) beſides
the diſpoſition of 100. pound by the yeere: of which the
Gent: (all accounts being taken to a pot of beere) neuer ſpent
50. pound yeerely. The ſaid Ieſuit had in another place by
a prieſts procurement, who told me thereof, Clx. pound, of
another he receaued 500. pound in a matter of reſtitution,
certa pro incertis, the party hauing compounded before by
the aduiſe of another prieſt, for 300. pound, which he ſhould
haue giuen to the priſoners of Wiſbich. But this young Father
comming to the party hoyſed the ſum vnto 500. pound,
and tooke it vnto himſelfe, depriuing the ſaid priſoners therof.
Furthermore, he receaued at times of a Gent: and his mother,
by his meanes, aboue 1000. markes. All this to me is
knowne, beſides what I know not of, and what he hath gotten
by the vſe of his exerciſes, in which kinde many will ſay
he hath got no ſmall ſummes. Iudge then by theſe few examples,
what great ſummes may ſoone accrew vnto theyr
purſes: and with this doe but conſider how their factors, and
ſuch as haue imployments for them in this kind, grow from
meane eſtates, and ſmall expences vnto good ſhewes in the
world, and much encreaſe in their yeerely expences. Of
which number two for example are generally knowne (I
dare ſay) vnto many.
               There is a Gentleman in London,I. G. whoſe eſtate we know
to haue beene ſo weake, as that his ſhew could not reach vnto
his ranke; but ſhortly falling in with the Ieſuits to be a
factor for them, ſince theſe late garboyles, he is become a
man of no meane reputation. His maintenance is ſound, and
large, inſomuch that whereas xx. ſhillings hath been money
in his purſe heere-to-fore, he can now hazard twenty nobles
at play. I verily thinke you will ſay that this encreaſe can
come no other way then from their box.
               
                  
There is likewiſe another Gentleman, that hath beene longer
acquainted with the Ieſuits affaires, and a man vvholie
imployed by them, eſpecially as Diſpenſator, or rather receauer
of ſuch beneuolences as haue beene giuen in pios vſus,
for the maintenaunce of poore priſoners. We haue knowne
this man ſomtimes of the Temple, not ſo largely prouided for
by his friends, as able to make halfe that ſhew he now doth:
yet did he then enioy all that his friends had left him. For if he
remember, when he vſed the Ordinarie, at a kinſmans houſe
of his owne with other Gentlemen, his commings in were ſo
ſmall, that diuers times, and (vnleſſe I be very fowly deceaued)
for ſome yeeres together, his kinſwoman to maintaine
his credit with the other Gentlemen, gaue him his ordinarie
money before meale to pay with the reſt. Belieue me, by the
port he now carrieth, and the ſtate he taketh vpon him therwith,
you would thinke him a man of no ſmall reuenewes.
Whereuppon you may geſſe, that eyther his fortunes haue
beene very extraordinarie of late, and vnknowne too, or elſe
hee is largely beholding vnto his good Maiſters that imploy
him in theſe affaires. But howſoeuer the world fareth vvith
him, I would his charitie, or iuſtice, or both, were more indifferent
in his diſtributions, then they haue beene: and that
hee would not at his pleaſure, and ſmall diſcretion, diſcerne
betwixt the deſerts, or not deſerts of priſoners, lay, or prieſts,
and exempt at his will whom he liſt. If he will be an Oeconomus
or Dispenſator, hee muſt one day reddere rationem villicationis.
               
               I remember once this Gentleman came vnto Bridewell to
certaine poore priſoners there to ſee their wants, and finding
them in extreame neceſſity, he began to examine them, whether
they reſorted, and to whom; and finding that they were
acquainted with a prieſt in the Clinck, he turned his backe in
a choler, ſaying; that they deſerued nothing, and that they
ſhould lie, and doe as they would for him, and ſo departed
leauing them neuer a penny. How true this is, the poore priſoners,
that felt the ſmart, can tell; and one can teſtifie that
was within hearing, when this paſſed which I haue declared.
Many more hangers on this box, and thoſe hungry ones too,

could I name, if I would ſpend my time ſo idly as to enrole
them here.Watſ: I could name one that was of late a priſoner (not
for building of Churches) who (by his owne confeſſion) receiued
30. pound of the Archpriest, and Ieſuits. This man
ſhould haue beene imployed for them in our affaires. All
this, to any man of wiſedome, and indifferencie, can import
no leſſe, then that the Ieſuits be Maiſters of no ſmall cōmings
in, when as, both themſelues are ſo well furniſhed, and theyr
followers, and hangers on ſo extraordinarily prouided for.
               But you will ſay, that although much come to their hands,
yet doth it not follow, that they either heape it vp for themſelues,
or ſend it ouer vnto their Societie beyond the ſeas. For
it is well knowne, that very much is ſent by them vnto priſoners
abroade in all places. And ſith there muſt be ſome to
haue care of thoſe matters for priſoners, it is more befitting
vnto the Ieſuits, (being religious men, & therefore not of the
world, nor to gape after worldly thinges, or to reſpect anie
thing in the world more then for neceſſity to maintaine nature)
then to any other, who haue not forſaken the world, &
preferments thereof. Firſt I aunſwer, that I take not vppon
me to charge them with ſending ouer of ſummes beyond the
ſeas, neither doe I meane to draw vpon my ſelfe the maintaining
of theſe obiections and accuſations layd to their charge,
(as at the firſt I ſaid) but onely to deliuer ſincerely ſuch matters
which I know to be true, and that euen plainly as they
were, leauing the iudgment thereof vnto the indifferencie of
the Reader; onely to that end, that the world might ſee vpon
what grounds ſuch accuſations might ariſe, and that we haue
had more occaſion in very deed to complaine againſt them,
then the world would take notice of.
               And for their large diſpenſing of almes giuen, & receiued,
let any that hath wit and vnderſtanding, iudge by that little,
which we haue ſet downe, (which in very deed is very ſmall,
in reſpect of that, which hath been giuen) whether there be
any proportion betwixt the receits, & the diſtributions: beſides,
wee talke not heere, nor ſpeake one word of the common
Collections which are yeerely made for priſoners, nor
ſuch yeerely exhibition, as we know good deuout Cath: doe

giue to priſoners, and priſons, neither of priuate almes giuen
in particuler, from particuler friends, vnto particuler men in
priſon: all which conſidered, I think it will not be found out,
that very much more cōmeth to priſoners beſides this. What
then (thinke you) may become of that which wee haue ſpoken
of, and ſuch like ſummes?
               And touching the Ieſuits ſending ſo largely to priſoners,
let the Clincke, Framingham, and other places, witnes theyr
great charitie for theſe two yeeres paſt, or there abouts. Concerning
their abnegation of the world, and worldly preferment,
whereby the credit and truſt of ſuch collections, & diſtributions,
ſhould rather be committed to them, then others;
I would it were with them, as it is with other religious men,
that forſake the world. But it is otherwiſe, for they are neuer
without one foote in the world, and that deepely to. I might
ſay (I feare me) hands, legges, body, and all, howſoeuer they
make ſhew to the contrary. And for to ſhew you, that they
too too much affect the world, and ſeeke too earneſtly after
the wealth thereof, I will ſet you downe one pretie Spaniſh
example, omitting infinite other which I could relate.
               It fortuned that a rich man in 
                     Ʋalledolid in Spaine, lying at
the point of death, had giuen largely vnto the Ieſuits, & vppon
compaſſion towards the Engliſh men liuing in the Engliſh
Colledge there, he layd out a good ſumme of gold vpon
a table, by him in the chamber, where he lay, with order that
it ſhould be giuen to that Colledge, towards the maintenance
of the Engliſh there. This gold lying thus in view, in commeth
a lay brother of the Ieſuits to viſite the ſick; and falling
into diſcourſe with the party deceaſed, began to relate vnto
him what care was had of him by their Fathers, and that there
was continuall prayer for him in their Colledge. The ſicke
man thanked him, and them for their mindfulnes of him in
thoſe extremities, and told him that he had alſo taken order,
that the poore Engliſh men which liued in the towne for
Gods cauſe, ſhould haue ſuch a ſumme of money, which lay
vpon the table, to pray for him. The lay brother perceauing
the gold to make a faire ſhew, repined that it fell not alſo to
their ſhare. Where-vpon he entered into a diſcourſe with

the ſicke perſon of the pouerty of their Fathers, and that they
being naturally borne in the Country, were forgotten of euerie
body, and by that meanes were very poore: but the
Engliſh men were very rich, and euery man gaue vnto them,
adding with-all that their Fathers would be more carefull to
pray for him then the Engliſh men, and their prayers more
effectuall for him. By this diſcourſe he got the gold into his
fingers, and departed merrily: but the Engliſh Ieſuits, who
were in the Engliſh Colledge, when they vnderſtood thereof,
were euill appayed, and complained thereof. If this be a
lye, blame the Engliſh Ieſuits of 
                     Ʋaledolid, who ſpared not
to complaine heereof to the Scholers. I ſhould wearie you,
to relate all the ſtories I could tell you, of them in this kinde:
but to auoyde tediouſnes, you ſhall content your ſelfe onely
with this at this time.
               After that Fa: Parſons had done with theſe accuſations, he
bringeth in againe prepoſterouſly a thing deliuered in the
25. page of our Relation, viz. that after Cardinall Allens
death, the ſtudents in the Engliſh Colledge at Rome, felt no leſſe
oppreſſion there by the Ieſuits tyranizing Gouernours, then wee
did at home, &c. How true this accuſation is, the ſtory of
thoſe ſtirres ſhall ſhew you, as in part hath already beene
deliuered, neither will this Fathers threats, and bigge words
ſerue his turne, to out-braue innocent men for telling truth,
and ſhaming the deuill, and the authors, and actors in ſuch
vniuſt, vncharitable, and irreligious proceedings: which his
Apologie deceitfully ſhufleth of, and vntruly relateth, as ſhall
appeare in the diſcourſe thereof. Concerning Fa: Garnets
beſtirring of himſelfe for ſubſcriptions againſt the fore-ſaid
accuſations, wee haue already ſaid ſufficiently how vniuſt
both the letters, writ in that behalfe were; as alſo how vndiſcreete
the ſubſcriptions were of ſuch, as without all limitation
freely ſubſcribed thereto. Yet heere by the way, I may not
omit Fa: Garnets letter in that behalfe, wherein (the rather to
moue all men to ſubſcribe to a generall acquiting them of all
ſuch things) he proteſteth coram deo et angelis, that there was
not mica veritatis, in thoſe accuſations; which yet Fa: Parſons
durſt not ſo peremptorily affirme: when hee ſayeth onely

that all was not true therein contayned, couertly inſinuating
that ſome things were true. And I will referre my ſelfe, and
all my poore credite vnto the Reader heereof; whether manie
things in that Collection be not true, yea, all things either
in whole or part; whereby you may note, what a dangerous
proteſtation Fa: Garnet entered into, materially contayning
a manifeſt vntruth; howſoeuer the formality thereof may
ſeeme to be excuſed by ſome hidden equiuocation or other.
And as for his modeſty or ſcrupuloſity in his triple diuiſion,
(as Fa: Parſon ſayeth) you muſt giue me leaue to think it rather
to haue proceeded vpon a guilty conſcience, or policie,
or both; thereby to draw euery man to ſubſcribe. For hee
might well imagine, that ſome men would look into the matter,
at leaſt ſo neere, as not to ſubſcribe more, then they could
auouch, howſoeuer ſome few might be induced thereto.
And what reaſon, or ſhew of innocencie there was in the performance
of that office, on the Ieſuits behalfe, I know not;
neither doe I ſee that neceſſitie in the proſecution thereof,
that Fa: Garnet could doe no leſſe (as Fa: Parſons affirmeth.)
For I would but aske him this one queſtion; why he did not
procure a iuridiciall examination of matters, that men might
ſpeak, what they knew vpon their oathes; but would ſhuffle
them vp in corners, and ſeeke to draw men by fauours, perſwaſions,
& the like, to teſtifie for them, as I am able to proue
they did. This kinde of couert dealing in any wiſe mans
iudgement, could not but yeeld great ſuſpition of guilty conſciences
in them: For all men know, that a man will conceale
many things, which he could ſay, being but ordinarily
thereof demaunded; which he would not doe, being examined
iuridicè vpon his oath. Beſides, who is ignorant, that
ſuch as ſhould haue accuſed them by their ſubſcriptions,
ſhould thereby haue incurred their high diſpleaſure, (which
for ought I ſee many yet feare) and yet haue done thereby
ſmall good, in that their ſubſcriptions ſhould haue been concealed,
or by ſome meanes or other fruſtrated of their ends,
as the ſubſcriptions of the three prieſts were, who ſubſcribed
ſomewhat diſliking to their humors. But there was a farther
policie in theſe matters. The procuring of theſe ſubſcriptions,

were but an introduction to other poynts, which they
had in hand, concerning the Archpresbiterie. For by this
meanes did they firſt ſound the affections of prieſts towards
them, & try what they could doe with them, if the like manner
of occaſion ſhould ſerue afterwards, as in the ſame ſort
they did, after the inſtitution of the Archp: by prieſts ſubſcriptions
to a congratulation procure his confirmation.
               After the end of all this, our good Fa: ſeemeth to lament
our caſe for defaming of theyr order: and hee citeth manie
Authors againſt diffamations, and defamors of others, & ſpecially
of Religious orders. But I would faine knowe to what
end hee ſo much laboureth, in quoting Authors to this purpoſe.
Can he thinke that men, who profeſſe to direct other
mens conſciences, can be ignorant of the ſinne of detraction,
and penalties thereof? Well, in execution and practiſe men
may erre, but it were great folly & raſhnes for him to thinke
them ignorant in the knowledge or ſpeculation of it. Or is
Fa: Parſons ſo vnobſeruaunt of his owne actions & writings,
that he doth not ſee that wee can retort all that hee hath ſaid
heerein againſt himſelfe? Is there any man liuing that hath
more defamed Eccleſiaſticall men then Fa: Parſons? VVas
it not Fa: Parſons that defamed ſo many vertuous Prieſts &
ſcholers in the Seminarie of Rome, and divulged the ſame to
all the world, and now in print in his Apologie? Is it not fa:
Parſons that in the ſaid Apologie hath defamed 12. or 13. reuerend
prieſts priſoners in Wiſbich? Is it not Father Parſons
that hath divulged in the ſaid booke, & by letters through the
world, diffamation againſt all the prieſts of England, that refuſed
to ſubſcribe to the Archpriest? Was it not fa: Parſons
that enformed falſly vnto his Holines, againſt not onely all
the Prieſts of England, but alſo all Cath: ſuggeſting to his
Holines, that they were at varience and quarrelling one with
the other? Was it not Fa: Parſons chiefely that defamed Ma:
Doctor Gifford, and now renueth the ſame courſe againe in
his Apologie? Nay, who liueth amongſt vs, that euer oppoſed
himſelfe againſt any proceedings of the Ieſuits, & felt
not this Fathers good words? See now good Sir, what danger
you ſtand in, through your vniuſt and ſlaunderous calumniations.

But as for that we haue ſayd or done, you ſhall
ſee that wee will ſufficiently purge our ſelues of all ſuch dangers,
which he ſhall neuer be able to doe.
               Firſt you know, it is a generall receaued ground by all, that
when the actions of any particuler man or men, (be they of
what degree they will be, ſecular or religious, Eccleſiaſticall
or Lay) do tend vnto any generall, or common hurt of a cō
                  munitie:
(as for example, the actions of ſome particuler ſeruaunt
in a familie, to the ruine or ouerthrow of the familie,
ſome particuler ſcholer or ſcholers in a Colledge, to the ſubuerſion
of the Colledge, or ſome particuler men in a cōmon
wealth, to the deſtruction of a Common wealth,) it is then
not onely lawfull to diſcloſe theſe particuler men, and theyr
particuler actions, though otherwiſe priuate and diffamatorie
vnto the ſaid particuler parties (as all ſuch actions of theyr
owne nature muſt needs be) but alſo euery honeſt ſeruaunt,
euery faithfull ſeruaunt, euery true ſcholer, and loyall ſubiect,
is bound in conſcience vpon his duty to his Maſter, faith vnto
his Colledge, loyaltie to his Prince, and loue to his country,
to diſcloſe ſuch perſons, and their facts or intentions, with
our regard or reſpect vnto the hurt, or damage, that may redound
vnto the ſaid particuler parties ſo offending. The reaſon
heereof is this, becauſe a generall good is alwayes to be
preferred before a particuler, and a greater hurt to be eſchued
before a leſſe. As for example, when two euils concurre ſo
that both cannot be auoyded, but that neceſſarily the one
muſt happen, it is not onely charitie, but euery man is alſo
bound to preuent the greater euill with permiſſion of the
leſſe rather then the contrary.
               This foundation beeing layd, which is grounded vppon
the law of nature; now will I eaſily make you ſee, that our divulging
of ſome proceedings of Fa: Parſons, and other Ieſuits,
is not onely voyd of iuſt imputation, but alſo lawful, iuſt,
and neceſſary, all circumſtances conſidered, & therefore free
frō the danger of thoſe penalties cited by Fa: Parſons in this
worke. And firſt, for the reuealing, or indeede divulging of
things already reueled by theyr owne fooliſh open dealings.
Concerning matter of ſtate, who can be ſo ignorant, as not

to know, that he is bound more to loue his country then a Ieſuit,
yea, the whole order of the Ieſuits: ſith vnto the firſt he
is bound by the law of nature, to the ſecond onely by the
law of fraternall charitie. Now then the actions of the Ieſuits
tending ſo euidently as they doe, and haue done to the ruine,
ſubuerſion, and ouerthrow of our Prince, and country, both
by ſecret practiſes, & open incurſions of Spaniſh inuaſions,
(as is manifeſt both by theyr own books, letters, & other dealings,
as well in Ireland, as England) what good ſubiect, or
true-harted Engliſhman can doe leſſe then diſclaime vvith
his mouth, reſiſt with his blood, and open with his tongue,
all ſuch vnnaturall and trecherous attempts?
               And if any man be ſo ſimple, or ſo deluded by theyr fayre
words, as that he hath not, or doth not ſee any ſuch practiſe,
or intention in them, let him not therefore blame vs for ſpeaking
therof, or divulging the ſame, who are too wel acquainted
therewith, and therefore bound to reueale, what we know
therein, when it ſhall be neceſſary for the preſeruation of our
Prince and Countrey. Neither let any man be ſo ſimple as to
thinke, that becauſe they are religious men, and Catholicks,
therefore they may be priuiledged the more in ſuch courſes,
vnder pretence of Reformation, for ſuch a conceit were very
erroneous. If in a Lay perſon, (vnder what pretence ſoeuer)
it be vnlawfull to worke the ruine of his country, much more
is it vnlawfull in a Religious perſon, vnto whom ſuch affaires
belong not. But ſome will ſay, they tend not vnto any ſubuerſion
of theyr Country, but to a Catholicke reformation.
To ſuch a fond obiection (yet too too common) I aunſwer,
that whatſoeuer they pretend, they goe about to effect it by
externe hoſtile meanes. And how this ſhould be without
conqueſt and mutation, and ſubuerſion of all, is impoſſible
to be conceiued. Beſides, he that hath wit will know, that the
kingdome of England is a faire marke to ſhoote at: & therefore
cannot be ſo fond or fooliſh as to imagine, that an inuader
hauing got the field, will leaue the crowne, which once
poſſeſt, he will ſeeke to keepe. And I ſuppoſe you will imagine
that a Spaniard will rather put himſelfe in truſt to himſelfe,
and his force, by which he entereth, then vnto the curteſies

of thoſe, whom he conquereth. If ſo, muſt he not doe
as William the conquerour did, erect his vaſſalls, and Country
men, and ſuppreſſe the nobility, and other the naturall inhabitants
of the Countrey? Doth hee not ſo in other places,
which he hath got by the ſword, transferring in ſome parts
of the Indies, and rooting out all the inhabitants almoſt of
the Countries, and planting Spaniards and Aliens? And can
any Cath: be ſo ſimple, as to perſwade himſelfe of any regard
to be had to him, in ſuch an inuaſion, becauſe he is a Cath:
Truly I doe wonder at ſuch fond conceits. Haue they forgot,
or haue they not heard that in the yeere 1588. all had
gone to wrack, Cath: and others? If they will not heerein
beleeue me, let them beleeue Fa: Parſons affirming as much
to diuers. And that the Duke de Medina, generall of the Nauie,
affirmed, that he knew no difference: let them beleeue
Fa: Southwells ſpeeches, vttered to the ſame purpoſe at Wiſbich,
amongſt the prieſts there. Incredulous men heerein
doe not certes vnderſtand of their proceedings at the winning
of Antwerpe, where they made no difference of murdering,
& ſpoyling whomſoeuer; amongſt whom were diuers
Cath: ſlaine, and ſpoyled after their entrance; and the ſooner
when the Souldiers perceaued they were Cath: (as I haue
heard) for feare of looſing their pray: See what reaſon wee
haue to preſſe them with theſe matters.
               Secondly, for the opening of their proceedings concerning
their Clergie, we haue much more reaſon to diſcloſe the
ſame, becauſe they tend to a greater miſchiefe being againſt
a greater, and more pretious Common-wealth. Wherefore
if thoſe things by vs divulged touching ſuch affaires be true,
there is no man of iudgement, and vnderſtanding, can blame
vs for manifeſting the ſame; ſith it is more, then neceſſarie,
that ſuch euill attempts, and indeuours, which tend to the ouerthrow,
and deſtruction of the eccleſiaſticall Hierarchie, be
knowne, and fore-ſeene of all men; that thereby the vniuerſall
miſchiefe, which otherwiſe would enſue, might be auoyded,
and their inſultations againſt eccleſiaſticall perſons, and
the priuiledges of the ſeculer Clergie with more ſpeed checked,
and controlled.
               
                  
This is ſo true a poſition, that I ſuppoſe no man will denie
it, in that the church of Chriſt cannot ſtand, without the ſeculer
Clergie, viz. Biſhops, Prieſts, &c. But it is certaine,
that it may ſtand without any particuler order of Religion,
being magis ad ornamentum, et adiumentum eccleſie ex conuenientia,
quam ex neceſſitate. And therefore euery man is bound
in conſcience more to the preſeruation of the ſeculer Clergy,
and priuiledges thereof, then to any perticuler order of Religion
in the Church; yea, then to all orders whatſoeuer of
particuler obſeruations. Now then the queſtion onely remayneth,
whether the imputations of thoſe things, obiected
by vs againſt them, be true or no: which knowne, all the
controuerſie of detraction, or penalties thereby incurred, is
eaſily aunſwered. And for the proofe of this matter, I refer
you to what we haue already written, as well in this reply, &
in our former bookes; as alſo to an indifferent conſideration
of their late practiſes heere amongſt vs for a ſubordination,
to depend at their direction, & deuotion: and their attempts
in Wiſbich, together with Fa: Parſons new worke of reformation.
All which duly, and indifferently conſidered, I know
you will ſay no leſſe, then we haue ſaid, and condemne them,
as deepely as we doe, for ſuch vniuſt inſultations to the peruerting
of all true order in Gods Church, tending to the defacing
of that excellent Hierarchie, inſtituted by Chriſt him
ſelfe. Neither haue theſe practiſes beene onely attempted in
England, but alſo in diuers other parts beyond the Seas; and
diuers Cath: vvriters haue taxed them there-with. If you
vrge yet the divulging of other particuler actions, and proceedings,
as particularly thoſe matters of Rome againſt the
Scholers, and alſo ſome particuler proceedings againſt ſome
priuate men: I aunſwer, that thoſe proceedings in Rome
had the ſame end, and ſcope, which theſe in England haue in
ſeeking to impoſe a yoake of bondage vppon the Scholers
there, before they came into England, that they might tyranize
at their will without check, or controle, & diſgrace ſuch
as contradicted their deſires, as you ſhall more at large ſee in
the diſcourſe of thoſe ſtirres. Beſides, Fa: Parſons, and the
Ieſuits had defamed many Prieſts, and Scholers vniuſtly, and

vntruly: whereby they were inforced to enter into the opening
of ſuch their proceedings for the maintenance, and recouery
of their fames, and credits by them vniuſtly aſſaulted,
which courſe (iuſtice and truth being obſerued) no man can
denie to be lawfull. And as for other particuler wrongs done
to particuler men, they haue for the moſt part tended vnto
one and the ſame end, and therefore vpon one and the ſame
ground reuealed.
               Furthermore alſo,An other caſe deduced out of the former grounds. to acquaint you with an other caſe of
conſcience, wherby all ſuch particuler obiections may be anſwered,
& we eaſily cleered: you ſhall vnderſtand, that when
any perſon or perſons take ſuch courſes, as that thereby vnder
feyned ſhewes, or faire glofes, they obfuſcate or blind the
eyes of the people, whereby they cannot ſee into the miſeries,
or dangers whereinto they draw them, then is it lawfull for any
man that ſeeth into the generall euils, which will enſue
therby, not onely to open their ſaid practizes, but alſo (if it be
neceſſarie, and that otherwiſe the parties will not be ſeene into,
and ſuch miſchiefes auoyded) to open ſome other particuler
facts or practizes more familiar, or apparent, therby to
giue light vnto ſuch, as otherwiſe wil not cōceiue the dangers,
and miſchiefes following the actions, and practiſes of ſuch
men, or be induced to belieue any ſuch manner of dealings
in them, and thereby auoyde them, as dangerous.
               As for example: If I knew any one man neere to a Prince
or generall Magiſtrate, whoſe ſecret actions, & priuate workings
tended vnto the ſubuerſion of the Prince, and Countrey,
or Magiſtrate, and Citty, and that this being vnknowne
to the Prince, or Magiſtrate, affection would not ſuffer them
to ſee their owne danger, and the danger of their Countrey,
Common-wealth, or Citty; it were not only lawfull for me,
to diſcloſe the particuler actions of the ſaid party, though
priuate, thereby to giue occaſion vnto the Prince or Magiſtrate,
to be more vigilant vnto themſelues, and their eſtates,
and more obſeruant of the aforeſaid dangerous perſon, but
alſo an act of allegeance to my Prince, and of loue vnto my
Country, vnto which euery man is bounde in duty and conſcience.
So in our caſe, if any particuler actions of the Ieſuits

be diſcouered, they are but matters of proceedings with particuler
men, that thereby you might learne by particularities,
and matters of leſſe moment, to conceiue the better what, &
how dangerous their practiſes be in matters of greater
waight; and how theyr proceedings hold one and the ſelfeſame
courſe, both in particuler and generall affaires, in matter
of leſſe and greater moment. And this (ſo long as we obſerue
truth in our relations) is both lawfull and neceſſary (as
the caſe now ſtandeth with the Ieſuits, and their actions in
England,) and we are free both from the note of detractors,
in reuealing theyr exorbitant proceedings, & penalties thereby
incurred. The like cannot be ſaid in theyr behalfe for defaming
of vs. For they haue not onely vniuſtly, and vntruly
detracted from our good names, and credits in theſe matters
of our proceedings (as all the world now ſeeth) but alſo entred
into our particuler liues, moſt falſly going about to
touch therein our good names, which no way is excuſable, in
that if any ſuch thing had beene true in any of vs, yet could it
not (beeing a ſecret infirmitie) haue tended to any generall
hurt of any whole body, or common-wealth, but onely to a
particuler hurt of a mans ſelfe, which by no law of conſcience
could be reuealed by them: Neither haue wee done ſo
by them, though I thinke no man will recken them all ſaints.
But thoſe ſecret diffamations proceeded doubtleſſe of a machiauilian
ground, and not of iuſtice, or charitie.
               Now let vs come at length vnto the booke of Important
conſiderations,
                  Important conſiderations. at which our deere Father ſpitteth no leſſe then
fire, with words of folly, frenſie, fury, mutinie, warre, and defiance,
paraſiticall, pernicious, erroneous, hereticall, wicked, reprochfull,
trayterous, ridiculous, impious, baſe, and wickedly minded,
proctors for hereticks, accuſers against perſecuted Catholicks,
transformed with paſſion, enuy, malice, ſold our tongues to the cō
                     mon
enemy, vnited in wicked attempts, contemptible to all Catholicks
of diſcretion, & the like. Certes this good mans zeale was
great, when in his heate of choler hee vttered ſo many fierie
and paſſionate ſpeeches. But yet I muſt needs craue pardon
at his hands to runne ouer this matter a new, and requeſt his
patience, that wee may examine the booke againe, and ſee,

whether it deſerue ſo mightie blame, as hee maketh ſhew of.
Belieue me, if it doe, we will cancell it, and blot out his date:
but if it proue otherwiſe, hee muſt be content to let it paſſe
with a more fauourable interpretation, and not wreſt matters
into worſe ſence, then euer the Authors intended.
               In the very firſt entrance into this booke, I wiſh you to
note a cunning falſhood of this Father, in the relating of the
title of this booke, which he ſetteth downe thus. Important
conſiderations to mooue all true Catholicks that are not wholy Ieſuited,
to acknowledge all the proceedings of the ſtate of England
against Catholicks, (ſince it excluded the Romaine faith, and fell
to hereſie) to haue beene not onely iust, but alſo mild, and mercifull.
&c. In this altered title, (which is not verbatim with the
title of the booke) Fa: Parſons ſheweth himſelfe not a little;
firſt in foyſting in of the world all before proceedings, thereby
to take aduantage of euery petty matter, that hath happened
perhaps ſometimes by the knauery of ſome Purſuiuant, or other
odd fellow without commiſſion, or warrant; as alſo in
adding with a Parentheſis (ſince it excluded the Romane fayth,
and fell to hereſie) therby to make the matter ſhew more hatefull
and haynous. Whereas in very deede, (as euery man may
ſee, that liſt to read ouer the Treatiſe) the intention is not to
excuſe, or iuſtifie euery particuler action of the ſtate, as the
action may be in it ſelfe conſidered without further reſpect,
then to that particuler bare action. For who will or can iuſtifie,
or excuſe the killing of a prieſt as a prieſt, or confiſcating
or hanging of a Cath: as a Cath: meerely for religion. This
(I ſay) is not intended in that booke, as all the world may ſee,
for therein is lamented the hard courſe taken, as well againſt
Prieſts as Catholicks; neither for ought I ſee, doth the ſtate
make ſhew of perſecution quo ad vitam et necem, for matter
meerely of religion, and conſcience, but vppon pretence of
treaſon, or attempts againſt her Maieſties perſon, or ſtate, or
(at the leaſt) vpon the feare thereof.
               Now then all the end, and ſcope of this booke, is none other
then this; to excuſe the ſtate from ſuch generall imputation
of infamie layd vpon it, eſpecially by the Ieſuits (who
haue been the chiefeſt cauſers of thoſe vehement afflictions)

as though the ſtate without all cauſe, or ſhew of cauſe, had
made lawes againſt innocent men, and there-vpon perſecuted
them vnto death, no true occaſion of exaſperation hauing
euer been giuen from any ſuch perſon, eyther to prince
or ſtate. To take away (I ſay) this vnderſerued infamie, this
treatiſe was written of purpoſe, to lay the fault truly, where
indeede really it hath beene; humbly deſiring at the feete of
our Soueraigne that we being innocent in ſuch actions, may
not ſuſtaine the burden of their offences; but may obtaine
ſo much fauour in her gratious ſight, as to be numbred amongſt
her loyall ſubiects, and thoſe that hate ſuch vnnaturall,
and euer accurſed practiſes, leaſt otherwiſe we be inforced
to ſay (lamenting our caſe) with the Prophet patres nostri
peccauerunt, et non ſunt, et nos inquitates eorum portamus. This
I ſay is the whole ſcope, and intention of this worke, and
therefore doth the author giue reaſons by particuler mens
actions, and vndiſcreete attempts, as well by writings, as practiſes,
that the ſtate hath had iuſt cauſe to feare, when it perceaued
ſuch dealings, and there-vpon was moued to prouide
by lawes, and premunitions againſt the like afterwards.
And if by theſe lawes, and prouiſions it happened, that innocent
men ſometimes were wronged (as in all generall lawes
it happeneth ſometimes) yet was not the ſtate (all cauſes firſt
giuen conſidered) ſo much to be condemned; nay, rather it
was to be excuſed, in that it is moſt certaine, that it hath not
proceeded with that rigor, vpon ſuch cauſes giuen, as otherwiſe
it might haue done, to the extirpation of all ſuch perſons,
from whom, or from whoſe degree, ſuch actions proceeded.
And I would but aske Fa: Parſons (becauſe I know him to
be a great ſtatiſt) this one queſtion, whether in his conſcience
he doe think there be any Prince in the world, be he neuer
ſo catholicke, that ſhould haue within his dominions a kind
of people, amongſt whom diuers times he ſhould diſcouer
matters of treaſon, and practiſes againſt his perſon, and ſtate,
whether he would permit thoſe kind of people, to liue within
his dominions, if he could be otherwiſe rid of them, and
whether hee would not make ſtraight Lawes, and execute
them ſeuerely againſt ſuch offenders, yea, and all of that

company, and quality, rather then he would remaine in any
danger of ſuch ſecret practiſes, and plots? I thinke Fa: Parſons
will not for ſhame denie this; eſpecially if he remember
the examples of the French religious men, for the like practiſes
expelled England generally, in a Cath: time, and by a
Cath: Prince, and theyr lyuings confiſcate, and giuen away
to others. The like was of the Templars, both in England,
and Fraunce. Yea, to come neerer vnto him, was not all their
order expelled Fraunce for ſuch matters, and yet the King,
and ſtate of Fraunce free from imputation of iniuſtice in that
action? If theſe things proceeded from Cath: Princes iuſtly
againſt whole Communities, or orders of Religion vppon
ſuch cauſes; wee cannot much blame our Prince, and ſtate,
being of a different Religion to make ſharpe lawes againſt
vs, and execute the ſame, finding no leſſe occaſion thereof in
ſome of our profeſſion, then the fore-ſaid Princes did in other
religious perſons, whom they puniſhed, as you ſee. But
you will ſay, that there is no reaſon, that the innocent ſhould
be condemned for another mans fault; if ſome one Cath: or
Prieſt were faulty in this kind, all were not ſo; how then can
the actions of the ſtate againſt ſuch be iuſtifiable? To this I
aunſwer, that you cannot think that euery particuler French
Monke, was guilty of treaſon in that Kings dayes, when
all were expelled, nor is it like that all the Templers were ſo
irreligious, as ſome of them were, neither doe I think that all
the Ieſuits were acceſſarie, or conſenting vnto their practiſes
in Fraunce; yet all (you ſee) payd for the delict of ſome.
Princes are iealous, and haue cauſe ſo to be, there depending
ſo much vpon their ſafety as there doth. When therefore
they find trecherie in any Communitie, they will be ſure to
prouide for the worſt, and rather extirpate that Cōmunitie,
then liue in feare thereof. Doth it not ſo happen alwayes,
when the Gouernours or Magiſtrates of a Cittie, counite,
or concurre vnto any treaſon; doth not the Cittie preſently
loſe all her priuiledges, and the Prince ſeaze vpon the ſame,
and take all into his owne hands, & gouernment, ſuppreſſing
the whole ſtate of the Cittie, for the faults of a few onely?
vvhat meruaile then, if this hath happened in our caſe, where

there hath been ſuch difference in religion? And then iudge
whether we, that haue beene innocent in ſuch practiſes, (as
GOD and our conſcience can witnes, and yet haue felt the
ſmart of ſuch proceedings) haue not great cauſe to cleere our
ſelues; to exclaime againſt ſuch as will neuer leaue to irritate
our Prince, and ſtate, and to make known vnto her Maieſtie,
and our ſtate, the innocencie both of vs, & of our ghoſtly
children (who haue beene preſſed with the burden of afflictions,
by reaſon of ſuch vndutifull attempts in ſome few
vnreſtrained perſons) moſt humbly crauing at her ſacred
hands, ſome redreſſe for ſuch miſeries, that the ſtroke may
light where the offence hath been giuen, and not henceforth
vpon the necks of poore innocents. If there be any offence
in vs towards her Maieſtie, or her proceedings, it is onely in
matters of religion, which beeing a thing not onely proceeding
of mans will, but by a light from God, informing firſt
the vnderſtanding, and then the will, (and therfore not to be
altered or diſpoſed as other indifferent actions or conceits
may be,) wee hope may, and will be more excuſable in her
gracious ſight. But for matters of practiſing againſt her perſon,
crowne, or ſtate, that is a thing onely proceeding from a
peruerſe, and paſſionate will, the vnderſtanding ſtill remayning
ſui iuris, able to diſcerne ad vtrum libet, eyther of the cō
                  ueniencies
or miſchiefs of ſuch affaires, which no way can be
excuſable.
               Now whereas ſome woorthy men are touched with ſuch
vndutifull proceedings in the afore-ſaid Treatiſe, you muſt
vnderſtand, that thereby the perſons of the men are not condemned,
but rather theyr facts, or they onely in thoſe facts,
yet worthy men in themſelues. And you muſt vnderſtand,
that good men, yea Saints, haue had their errors, (as theſe
proceedings in theſe woorthy men muſt be acknowledged)
neither may we approue ſuch errors becauſe the Authors of
them were Saints.
               No man approueth the defence of rebaptization in Saint
Cyprian, becauſe S. Cyprian is a Martyr, and yet whilſt hee liued
he defended the ſame very earneſtly, & practiſed it with
great contention againſt other Biſhops. Dauids fact of murthering

                  Vrias, muſt not be excuſed, becauſe he was ſecundum
cor Dei, and now a Saint: no, no, paſſions and errours haue
raigned in Saints whilſt they were vpon the earth, yea euen
amongſt the Apoſtles, and diſciples of Chriſt, whilſt he was
with them. Therefore let no man be ſcandalized, that good
men and worthy perſons are condemned in ſome particuler
facts, ſith no man liueth on earth without error.
               But you will ſay, it is commaunded in the Law non reuelabis
turpitudinem patris tui, & the two ſonnes of Noe were curſed
of God, for reuealing and laughing at theyr fathers nakednes:
therefore we ſhould rather haue buried ſuch defects
of our worthy parents in perpetuall obliuion vnder ground,
then haue publiſhed them thus to the world. Alas, I would
to God it had beene in our power to haue hid theſe things,
without the miſchiefes before expreſſed, belieue vs aſſuredly
the world then ſhould neuer haue had knowledge of them,
but it was not in our power, their facts were ſo publique to
the world, & better known vnto our ſtate then to our ſelues.
But it will ſtill be ſaid, if ſuch men of worth, and great vertue,
dealt in ſuch matters, why ſhould wee ſo much exclaime againſt
the Ieſuits? Is their fault ſo haynous therein aboue the
others? To this I aunſwer, that the Ieſuits faults are much
more, as you alſo will confeſſe, if you cōſider all circumſtances
well. For firſt, what was done by theſe worthy men, was
done almoſt in the firſt heate of change of Religion, wherin
both more paſſion might mooue, and greater hopes of recouery
of religion ſtirre them vp to ſuch attempts. Beſides, their
hopes of ſincere dealing in ſuch as ſhould haue concurred in
thoſe actions meerely for religion, & not of ambition, might
draw them on to follow ſuch deuiſes. For as then the ambitious
intentions of the Spaniards were not diſcouered vnto
them; which once appearing, ſuch as liued, and ſaw how little
ſinceritie or care of Gods cauſe they had, (but meerely
ſought after the Crowne, and the ſubuerſion of our country)
not onely repented them of theyr former dealings, but alſo
deteſted, and hated ſuch proceedings: as was manifeſt in
Cadinall Allen: and doubtleſſe would ſo haue happened in
the reſt, if they had liued to haue ſeen the handling of matters

ſince. But for the Ieſuits they are ſo headlong, and violent in
theſe courſes, that they ſeeme no more to regard the good of
our Country, or eſtate thereof, then the Spaniards themſelues.
For notwithſtanding the manifeſt intentions of conqueſt,
and ſubuerſion by the Spaniards intended, yet do they
ſo concurre with them, as whereas the Spaniard of himſelfe
ſeemeth ſlow, they pricke him on continually with plots &
ſuggeſtions. Witnes Fa: Parſons actions concerning two ſeuerall
Nauies which miſcaried: in one of which Ma: Doctor
Stillington tooke his death: of the other ſince he ſpeaketh in a
letter writ from Rome to Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert. Witnes
this the late attempt in Ireland, in which Fa: Archer, an Iriſh
Ieſuite was a great actor. VVho will not ſay now, that
the Ieſuits are much more to be blamed then any of the former
woorthy perſons, ſith they deſiſt not to proſecute that,
which by ſome of them was afterwards diſliked, & continue
an offence begun, yea and vppon knowledge of the infinite
deformitie thereof, into which the other ſaw not ſo deepely,
as is probable.
               Hauing thus giuen you ſome light, whereby you may trulie
ſee into the drift & end of the foreſaid Treatiſe of Important
conſiderations, & the reaſons we haue to purge our ſelues
of ſuch inexcuſable practiſes, (for the which hetherto wee
haue all ſmarted) and the cauſes wee haue, not onely to condemne
thoſe facts, and attempts, (how woorthy ſoeuer the
perſons were, that dealt therein) but alſo to exclaime againſt
thoſe, that ſtill runne ſuch diſloiall races, and with all our
power and might, not onely to diſclaime, but alſo reſiſt, and
reueale ſuch vndutifull practiſes, and indeuours, of her Maieſties
diſloyall, yet naturall ſubiects, be they what they may
be, and of what condition, and quality they will be, (for no
condition, or qualitie may patronize diſloyaltie:) hauing I
ſay, giuen you ſome light hereof, let vs now conſider, vvhat
particuler obiections, (or indeed barren exclamations) this
Father maketh againſt this Treatiſe.
               VVe will let paſſe his vaine quipping at ſundry: and ſeculer:
beeing both ſcurrilous, and irreligious, in abuſing the
phraſe of ſeculer prieſts vſed, and approued alwaies in Gods

Church, with great reuerence to the order of prieſthood,
which he not without note of contempt, ioyneth with an alluſion
vnto ſecular minds and deſires; ſaying, not onely ſecular
in order, but alſo in mind, hart, and deſires, making the word
ſecular in one ſentence to be predicatum indifferently, and in
like ſence (as a man would thinke) vnto order, mind, harts, &
deſires, & ſo may a man ſay, ordo ſaecularis, mens ſaecularis, corda
ſaecularia, deſideria ſaecularia, in one, and the ſame prophane
vnderſtanding, which how irreligiouſly it ſoundeth from the
mouth of a religious man, iudge you. Verily if he had been
carefull of his penne, he might haue ſeuered the ſentences at
the leaſt ſo, as the ſence of the word might haue appeared
diuers, and therein haue ſhewed a reuerent reſpect to prieſthood,
howſoeuer he had otherwiſe deſpiſed our perſons. But
let vs ſee I pray you, what he ſaith to our miſlike of certaine
Treatiſes, letters, and reports written, & made in diuers parts
of the world.
               All that hee ſayth to this matter, is nothing but a ſhufling
vp of graue, and worthy men of our nation, who haue writ
or dealt in ſuch affaires; but whether therein they did wel or
ill, hee neuer ſheweth by any reaſon or proofe in the world.
Onely he exclaimeth at vs, as enuious, and malicious, & ſuch
as haue ſold our tongues to the common enemy. This kinde
of ſhifting dealing is common, & ordinarie with this father,
but how ſimple in the ſight of wiſe men, I leaue you to cōſider.
If it be a ſufficient proofe, or excuſe in euery particuler
fact, viz. ſuch a graue, and woorthy man did the like, what
matter of fact may not be excuſed? Did not S. Cyprian rebaptize
ſuch as had beene baptized before by heretiques? Is
it therefore vppon this ground a ſufficient warrant to anie
man to rebaptize ſuch as are baptized by proteſtants? Haue
not diuers Saints, and Martirs, done diuers things not to be
imitated of the generations following? What good concluſion
then is this? Graue and worthy men haue writ, and dealt
in this affaire, therefore it is good, conuenient, and lawfull. If
ſuch graue and worthy men had infallibilitie in their actions,
(which Saints in this life haue not had) then ſuch an infallible
inference might be made, but not otherwiſe. Therefore

good Fa: you ſhould not onely haue produced the actions of
ſuch men, but alſo the reaſons, and grounds of their actions,
and proued them to haue been good and currant, by ſome
conuincing reaſon and proofe: but this you neuer touch. Any
ſhadow ſeemeth ſufficient to you to bleere mens eyes, but
this may not ſerue your turne.
               Wiſe and graue men haue erred, and ſometimes doe erre;
and yet remaine both wiſe, and graue. Wee are not Angels
who intuitiuè ſee into the natures of things, what is conuenient,
or inconuenient; but we are men ſubiect to paſſion, and
mutability, gathering things à posteriore, whereof follow manie
errors, and imperfections in our actions. And heere-vppon
it commeth, that posteriores cogitationes ſolent eſſe meliores;
and we often finde that by experience, which at the firſt
we were ignorant of. A notable example heereof we haue
in this very matter by Card: Allen, both a graue, and a wiſe
man, (as all the world knoweth.) For he was ſomwhat faultie
in the beginning in this kinde (as by a certaine treatiſe
wherein his finger was, is too too manifeſt,) yet doe we well
know, that in his latter time this worthy prelate was ſuch an
enemie vnto thoſe proceedings, as he neuer could endure to
heare of them, and much complained of the proceedings of
ſome Ieſuits therein, as many can witnes. Now then eyther
Fa: Parſons muſt condemne the former actions of this worthie
man as erroneous (as well as we doe) or elſe diſclaime
from his latter proceedings, being not in the ſame courſe
with the firſt. Yet heere by the way I muſt tell you, that I
verily think, that this worthy man was drawne vnto theſe proceedings,
more by others, then of his owne nature; and I
haue no ſmall reaſons to induce me thereto: For firſt you
know the generall expectance of the whole world, concerning
the Armado of 1588. as well for the greatnes thereof,
as the opinion of the Spaniards ſincere pretence of Religion,
which was nothing ſo. This conceite might draw the good
Card: to be deceaued, as well as Pope Sixtus, who (it is well
knowne) was drawne into a conceite thereof, and deceaued
by them. Secondly, you are not ignorant, that euen againſt
that pretended inuaſion, he was aduanced vnto the honour,

and dignity of a Prince, which might moue a right good
man. And that he had an opinion of a moderate courſe to
haue been taken by the Spaniards in that attempt; his owne
words in the ſaid treatiſe doe plainly ſhew, ſaying, that he was
made Card: for the ſweeter managing of things in our Country
after the conqueſt. Yet I cannot, but much wonder at
this honeſt Fa: that in his marginall notes vpon this point, he
was ſo blind, or ſo bold, as to cite Doctor Saunders works de
viſibili Monarchia, and de ſchiſmate Anglicano; which works
containe ſo many irreuerent ſpeeches, and the divulging of
ſuch odious matters againſt her Maieſtie, and her noble progenitors,
as the vntruths of ſome, and the incertainty of others
conſidered, could not but irritate the moſt Chriſtian
Cath: and patient Prince in the world. But becauſe the
things are not meete to be repeated, yea, are ſcandalous to
proceede from an Engliſh man; I referre my ſelfe for proofe
heereof to euery man, that hath read the bookes. I would to
God ſo worthy a man had not ſtayned his works, with ſuch
ſtuffe in theſe times, then would I dare to ſay, that he had
beene the greateſt honour to his Country, and the worthieſt
man of the world. The like I may ſay of Didamus veridicus:
For it is well knowne, that although the man was moſt worthie,
and one of the moſt famous Clarks of this age, yet was
he very cholerick, and would ſometimes bite more, then was
conuenient. But as for Philopater and Perni, I ſcorne to
think of ſuch fooliſh ſtuffe, hatcht by this Fa: and Fa: Creſwell.
And this ſhall ſerue in aunſwer of the firſt point, leauing
euery man of indifferencie to iudge, whether ſuch proceedings
in matters of ſtate, to the ruine, & ouerthrow of our
Prince, and Country, daily practiſed by the Ieſuits (wherewith
they are charged in the treatiſe of Important conſiderations)
be ſufficiently iuſtified by the example of ſuch like proceedings
in other men, & whether there be any wrong done
by vs, in diſliking of ſuch courſes, in thoſe worthy men,
whereof ſome of themſelues afterwards diſliked.
               Although I was purpoſed to haue omitted that point, becauſe
I thinke you ſhall ſhortly ſee a particuler Treatiſe therof,
yet will I now ſay a word or two, briefely of it. And the

rather I will ſo doe, in that I ſee Ma. Doctor Ely in his notes
vpon the Apologie ſomewhat diſtaſting the mention thereof,
induced (as I verily thinke) by this onely reſpect, that our
ſtate, being onely Proteſtants, and in nothing conſenting vnto
the authoritie of the ſea of Rome, therefore there ſhould
be no reaſon, why the Pope ſhould in any thing (neceſſarie,
or conuenient for our Church) ſtay, or reſpect the conſent or
permiſſion of our Prince, notwithſtanding the pretence of
the ſaid law of Premunire. But to ſatisfie in part Ma. Doctor,
and whoſoeuer els in this point, I thought good to add this
conſideration or motion, which drew mee, and others of vs,
to make the matter more weighty, & vrgent, then it ſeemeth
Ma. Doctor Ely, and others apprehend.
               You muſt therefore vnderſtand, that the chiefeſt occaſion
of this law at the firſt was, to preuent many miſchiefes, & inconueniences,
which happened heere in our Realme, by diuers
priuiledges and indults, that were procured from Rome
by ſurreption, vniuſt fauours, and falſe informations, by vertue
of which indults and priuiledges, many contentions aroſe,
aſwell amongſt the ſeculer Clergie, as the religious, yea
often times to the ſpilling of blood. To auoyde theſe ſo great
inconueniences, our Cath: Kings, with the free and full conſent
of all the Clergie, and temporalty, enacted that no ſuch
graunt, procured from Rome, ſhould be executed within
the dominions of England, vppon the penalties ſpecified in
the ſaid ſtatute, vntill the Kings conſent thereto were firſt
obtayned.
               Now then to the purpoſe, if his holines had inſtituted any
vſuall authoritie, heeretofore accepted by our Kings & Clergie,
and in vſe in Cath: times amongſt vs, and by the ordinary
courſe of law (to wit by election or otherwiſe) ex plenitudine
potestatis, (ſo that we had had ſufficient notice thereof,
to bind vs to obedience) it may be ſaid, that heerein the offence
vnto the Cath: law of premunire, had been onely a materiall
offence, if any at all, becauſe we may iudge all Princes
to be bound in conſcience, to become Cath: and to accept,
and concurre with ſuch ordinances of his Holineſſe, as are
vſuall, or neceſſary for the vpholding of the Eccleſiaſticall

Hierarchie of Chriſtes church. As now her Maieſtie, being a
Proteſtant, and ſo perſwaded in conſcience, is bound to concur
& accept of ſuch Eccleſiaſticall ſubordination, as is both
vſuall and neceſſary for the preſeruing of the Proteſtants
Church, and Clergie. But to accept and admit of an extrauagant
iuriſdiction, vnuſuall not only in the Church of England,
but alſo in the whole church of Chriſt, from the tyme
of Chriſt himſelfe vnto theſe dayes, and ſuch an one, as was
altogether vnneceſſary for our Church, yea very hurtful both
to our poore afflicted Cath: and ſtate alſo, (as wee will ſhew
at large hereafter, if occaſion be offered) could not (in my opinion)
but draw after it the penalties of the law aforeſaid, &
iuſtly. For if that law were iuſt, when it was firſt inſtituted,
it not beeing abrogated, is ſtill iuſt, and in force.
               Well then, this authoritie of the Archprieſt being ſuch an
exorbitant, vnuſuall, and inconuenient iuriſdiction, & therefore
ſuch an one as could not in conſcience bind any Catho:
Prince to admit thereof, or conſent thereto (were the times
Catholick) I doe not ſee why the ſame reaſon doth not hold
now with vs in theſe times, and how any man can be excuſed
from the penaltie of that law, in admitting an externall iuriſdiction
without the knowledge of theyr Prince, and againſt
her conſent, vnto which if ſhee were a Catholick, ſhee were
not bound to conſent, but contrariwiſe to repugne. This I
ſay is wilfully, without all reaſon or neceſſity, to contemne
her princely prerogatiue, and therfore no excuſe of religion,
conſcience, or the like▪ can (in my conceit) free any man, thus
accepting of this authority at the firſt, but meere ignorance
of the law, and caſe which I thinke was invincible in moſt.
               The third point of the argument of this worke of Important
conſiderations, is ſo falſly & ſo maliciouſly related by him,
that (belieue me) it doth not a little amaze me, to conſider ſo
ſtrange boldnes in a man of his coate. Firſt hee ſaith, that in
the ſaid booke we affirme: that neither the Pope, nor any other
Eccleſiaſticall power, hath authority to reſtraine, puniſh,
or repreſſe, by way of force, or armes immediatly, or by
others, any chriſtian temporall Prince whatſoeuer, for anie
delict of hereſie, Apoſtaſie, impugnation of Chriſtian fayth,

extirpation of religion, or other crime whatſoeuer, though
neuer ſo much danger, or damage ſhould enſue by his default
to the Common wealth, or the reſt of Chriſtendome.
If any liuing man vnder heauen (reading the aforeſaid diſcourſe)
doe finde any ſuch ſpeech, as this heere deliuered by
this vnhoneſt Ieſuit, let all that hee hath ſaid, be belieued againſt
vs: yea I ſay moreouer, if any man of indifferencie, do
gather any ſuch meaning, or intention in the foreſaid Treatiſe
directly, or indirectly deliuered, by any phraſe or ſentence
whatſoeuer, I will ſay, what he will haue me. How wicked,
and ſpightfull a collection then this of Father Parſons is,
Iudge you.
               
                  All that is ſaid to this purpoſe in that Treatiſe, is this, in the
37. page. Secondly, we doe acknowledge by our learning, (ſecluding
all Machiauilian Maximes) that Eccleſiasticall perſons, by
vertue of their calling, are onely to meddle with praying, preaching,
and administring the Sacraments, and ſuch other like ſpirituall
functions, and not to ſtudie how to murder Princes, nor to licitate
kingdoms, nor to intrude themſelues into matters of state, ſucceſſions,
and inuaſions, as Frier George did in Pannonia, to the
vtter ruine of that beautifull Realme. Let any man of reaſon
ſay, whether this be not a moſt Catholick and true diſcourſe,
or whether out of this, any ſuch irreligious paradox (as fa:
Parſons affirmeth) may iuſtly be deduced. And note here by
the way, that all this ſpeech is of inferior Eccleſiaſticall perſons,
not of the Pope, for that is afterward touched preciſely
by it ſelfe.
               
               Note alſo that it is ſaid, that Eccleſiasticall perſons, by vertue
of theyr calling, that is, as they are perſons ſpirituall, are onely to
meddle with praying, preaching, and administring of the Sacraments.
&c. Which is ſo true a Poſition, and Catholick, as no
Catholick dare to denie it, the inſtitution therof from Chriſt
himſelfe beeing to no other end. Yet you muſt vnderſtand,
that many times eccleſiaſticall vocation, is alſo ioyned vvith
temporall iuriſdiction, as now in the Popedome, & in diuers
Biſhopricks in Germanie, and ſome heere in England, if I be
not deceaued. We doe not denie, but ſuch eccleſiaſtical perſons
as they, being alſo temporall Princes, may execute temporall

lawes, and puniſh etiam quo ad vitam, et necem, theyr
ſubiects, and thoſe that liue vnder theyr gouernment: but as
he is a Biſhop or ſpirituall perſon, hee cannot muſter ſouldiers,
beare armes, or march againſt his enemies in the field. But
you perhaps will ſay then, that an Eccleſiaſticall perſon may
not defend his right by force, when otherwiſe he cannot, &
by that meanes he ſhall be ſubiect to all incurſions of thieues,
murtherers, & other barbarous and wicked people. To this
I aunſwer, that as he is a man, and therewith enioying all the
priuiledges of the law of nature, hee may defend himſelfe in
ſuch caſes, not defenſoriè onely, but alſo offenſiué, not onely
by bare reſiſting, but euen by ſtriking, wounding, ſlaying,
&c. And heereupon he may take armes in his own, or countries
defence: (ſuch I meane as in their precincts haue abſolute
authority) but this is not as he is an eccleſiaſticall perſon,
but as he is a ciuill Magiſtrate, and enioyeth the freedom of
the law of nature, which he looſeth not by beeing eccleſiaſticall,
ſeculer, or religious. And vppon theſe grounds oftentimes
haue Religious men defended their houſes, and Monaſteries
with armes, and iuſtly.
               But that eccleſiaſticall perſons, as they are eccleſiaſticall,
ſhould goe about to reduce either Pagans, Turkes, or hereticks
by force, and dint of ſword, by poyſoning, or murdering
of Princes, by ſolliciting rebellions, or inuaſions, to the
deſtruction of their Prince or country▪ leauing thereby the
ordinarie meanes of preaching, and teaching, with ſufferings,
and bloodſheddings cōmaunded by Chriſt, and by himſelfe,
and his diſciples, and all former Chriſtians practized, is ſcandalous,
not religious, Pagan like, & not Chriſtian like. Could
not Chriſt (thinke you) haue enforced the Iewes to the Goſpell,
hauing ſo many legions of Angels at his commaunde?
Were not the Iewes as much bound to harken vnto him, and
follow his doctrine, as the Proteſtants, or any other can be to
vs? Or can wee thinke that Chriſt did not cōmaund the beſt
way, when he ſayd vnto his diſciples, euntes in mundum vniuerſum
praedicate euangelium omni creaturae: qui crediderit, et
baptizatus fuerit, ſaluus erit, qui veró non crediderit, condemnabitur?
Did he not hereby leaue it to the liberty, and freedome

of the hearers, whether they would beleeue, or not? Or did
he commaund thē to murder or take weapons againſt ſuch,
as would not beleeue them? or could hee not haue ſubdued
the whole world by force of armes, vnto the Goſpell, if hee
would? If then Chriſt gaue theſe directions, why ſhould we
ſeeke new ſtratagems for conuerſions of countries? But you
will ſay vnto mee, that our Proteſtants haue beene of the
Church, that they are Chriſtians, & by their baptiſme borne
true ſubiects vnto Chriſtes church, and afterwards are revolted
from theyr due obedience, which they owe vnto her:
wherefore, they may be conſtrained vnto their obedience againe
as well, as any naturall ſubiect rebelling from his naturall
Prince vnto his temporall obedience. To this I aunſwer,
firſt, that the caſe is not all one: for why, the obedience of a
ſubiect to his temporall Prince, conſiſteth onely in the vvill,
which is in euery mans power within himſelfe, but the obedience
of euery Chriſtian catho: to Gods church, conſiſteth
as well in the vnderſtanding as the wil, and chiefly in the vnderſtanding,
which ought to direct the will.
               Now I thinke all men know, that the vnderſtanding of a
man cannot be forced by any, to this, or that; but as it is informed
and conuinced by reaſon. For who is he that can enforce
his vnderſtanding to iudge it to be midnight, and extreame
darknes, when the Sun ſhineth at noone-time of the
day? Whereuppon it followeth, that there is more reaſon, &
leſſe difficultie for a temporall Prince to enforce his ſubiects
to temporall obedience, then for the Church by temporall
force to conſtraine Countries and kingdoms vnto the fayth.
But you will againe obiect, that by the ſame reaſon, a Catho:
Prince, or Biſhop in his owne abſolute dominion, or ſoueraigntie,
may not, by the force of the lawes of the Church, or
ſtate, enforce any ſubiect to liue a Cath: but hee may follow
what religion he liſt; which would breed both confuſion in
the Church, and cōmon-wealth quickly. To this I ſay, that
there are two things to be conſidered in this caſe; the firſt is
his religion, the ſecond is his example, whereby there ariſeth
not onely danger, & hurt vnto the Church, & ſound members
thereof, but alſo damage vnto the ſetled Common-wealth,

and preiudice vnto the Prince in his quiet eſtate, in
that by one, or two particuler peeuiſh mens example, deuiſion
and ſtrife may ariſe in his Common-wealth, to the ruine
or ſubuerſion thereof by inward mutinies, and diſſention,
which ordinarily followeth nouelties, and innouations. For
the firſt part, which is his difformity in fayth and religion, the
Clergie, or Biſhop, hath to looke vnto it, and reforme it if he
can; if hee cannot, but findeth him obſtinate in his opinions,
he executeth the ſpirituall law vpon him, by the ſword of excommunication,
whereby hee is ſpiritually ſlaine and cut off
from Chriſtes flock. Which if hee ſtill continue, then doth
the Church iudge him not onely withered in the branch, but
alſo dead in the roote, and therefore as a dead tree, deliuereth
him vp vnto the ſeculer power, to execute law & iuſtice vppon
him. Where note, that the Church taketh not away his
life, but contrariwiſe, deliuering him vp vnto the ſeculer
power, intreateth for him: and then doth the Prince, or ſeculer
Magiſtrate, execute the ſentence of death vppon him,
as a perſon dangerous to the ſtate of his Realme, and his other
good and loyall ſubiects for the reaſons aboue-ſaid.
               Theſe kinde of proceedings in Gods church, ſhew how
far ſhee hath euer been from ſo violent courſes, as to plant religion,
and fayth, by blood; and that vnto a Clergie perſon,
as he is a Clergie perſon, the power of life and death belongeth
not; neither doe ſuch proceedings in deede imitate the
clemencie of Chriſt, whom the Church and Clergie (framed
vnto him) ſhould imitate. Neither did the Biſhops in the
primitiue church, put to death ſuch hereticks, as fell from
theyr fayth, and taught falſe doctrine, (as they might haue
doone many times, no doubt, eſpecially if priuate murmurings
in ſuch caſes had beene tolerable.)
               S. Bernard, a religious man, dealing with S. William, Duke
of Aquitaine, (a great perſecuter of gods people at that time,
did not ſeeke to poyſon, or murder him ſecretly, to rid the
world of him, and yet hee had him priuately for ſome time
together in his Monaſterie, where hee might with great facility
haue done it: neither did he ſeeke to ſuggeſt practiſes againſt
him in his owne country, or invaſions from the King

of Fraunce, or other Princes adioyning, but to win him by
wholſome inſtructions, ſpirituall conferences, and the like.
Neither did the Pope at that time ſeeke his ſubuerſion, but
his reformation, ſending perſwaſiue meſſages vnto him to
deſiſt, yea and embaſſages by the ſaid holy Saint Bernard, to
moue him to better courſes: and by theſe kind & wholſome
means praying continually for his conuerſion with patience,
and expectance, they won him from a perſecuter, and a very
wicked man, to become the rareſt penitent, and ſtrangeſt paterne
of auſterity in the world. Whereby of a veſſell of ignominie
and reproch, he became a veſſel of glory, and of a bad
man, a Saint. VVhy ſhould wee not haue delt ſo with our
prince, and ſtate, by prayers and ſupplications, if they had
beene neuer ſuch cruell perſecuters, which (all occaſions that
haue beene giuen them beeing well conſidered) wee cannot
iuſtly affirme, who knoweth whether God by ſuch prayers,
and meanes, would not haue conuerted their harts to other
courſes, ſith the harts of Kings are in the hands of God.
               But ſaith Fa: Parſons, this paradox tasteth of Lutheraniſme
& Anabaptiſme. We anſwer, that by Gods grace, we are as far
off from either Luthers, or the Anabaptiſts doctrine, as hee,
or any of his Societie. Neither doe we either denie externall
force, or ciuill Magiſtrate, or diſpute (as Martin Luther is ſaid
to haue done) to proue that it is not lawfull to wage warre againſt
the Turk. We haue not in all this diſcourſe once gone
about to affirme, much leſſe to proue, that any one king may
not vpon iuſt cauſes, make warre againſt another. Nay, we did
neuer ſay, that cauſe might not be giuen of ſuch iuſt warre
euen in ſome caſe of religion: but leaue that as a matter not
pertinent to be handled of vs at this time. This onely wee
haue ſaid, and doe ſay, that religious men or priests, haue not to
doe with kingdoms, and thoſe of our owne Nation, which haue
dealt in ſuch affaires againſt their prince, and country▪ we do
therein condemne their actions, and diſclaime from them, as
vndutifull and vnpleaſant to all true Engliſh natures. And
we wiſh alſo with all our harts, that no Pope, or other Clergie
perſon, had euer medled therein to exaſperate our prince &
ſtate againſt vs at home. Yet if we had generally kept our fingers

from ſuch matters, howſoeuer they had been attempted
by forrainers, wee are perſwaded, that the wiſedome of our
prince, and ſtate, would not haue imputed their actions vnto
vs, in whom wee could not haue had ſo much intereſt, as to
infringe either their wils or indeuours. But it beeing otherwiſe
too euident, that ſome haue intermedled in ſuch matters
(though ſore againſt our wills) we can doe no leſſe, but
acknowledge it to be a fault, and woorthy of puniſhment:
humbly proſtrating our petitions at the feete of her Maieſty,
that it will pleaſe her to make diſtinction of the innocent, and
ſuch as neuer haue offended in this kinde, from thoſe, that
haue intangled themſelues in ſuch monſtrous, and vnnaturall
attempts; that poore harmeleſſe innocents, and ſuch as with
their ſoules loue her perſon, and with their blood are ready
to defend her eſtate, and their countrey, (as I am perſwaded
all the Catholicks in England are, which remaine vntainted
with Ieſuitiſme) may not periſh for the offences of others.
               Another falſhood of this Fa: is in relating another place in
the 38 page of the aforeſaid Treatiſe of Important conſiderations,
which he thus reporteth, viz. The word of the ſpirit, and
not the ſword of the fleſh, or any arme of man, is that which giueth
life, and beautie to the Cath: Church, and that the promiſe made
to Saint Peter, is a ſure, and ſufficient ground to defend Catholick
religion without armes. Thus he relateth our words, and then
exclaimeth againſt the paradox forſooth. How ſincerely &
truly he ſetteth our words downe, you ſhall ſee, and thereby
iudge of his honeſtie. Our words are no other then theſe.
               
                  The Catholicke fayth, for her ſtabilitie and continuance, hath
no neede of trecherie, or rebellion. The promiſe made to S. Peter
is her ſure ground, and is more diſhonoured with treaſons, & wicked
policies of carnall men, then any way furthered or aduaunced.
The word of the ſpirit, and not the ſword of the fleſh, or any arme
of man is that, which giueth life or beautie to the Cath: Church.
Confer I beſeech you, this ſpeech deliuered as it was by vs, &
as Fa: Parſons relateth it, and ſee whether he hath plaied the
part of a faithfull and honeſt relator. Firſt therefore before
we enter into his falſe dealings herein, it is moſt euident in the
iudgement of wiſe men, that armes, & weapons neuer beautifie

Gods Church, or the Catholick faith, howſoeuer they
may be neceſſary or conuenient, ſometimes to defend the
ſame frō incurſions of aduerſaries, or oppreſſions of Infidels,
Turks, or Hereticks, as in ſome ſort is before expreſſed. For
all beauty of the Catho: Church, conſiſteth in vnitie, and
conſent of doctrine, true, and reuerend adminiſtration of Sacraments,
true, and ſincere preaching of Gods word, holy
obſeruations of the rights, and ceremonies thereof, and the
like. In theſe conſiſt the beauty of the Catho: Church, and
Religion, and not in any arme of man, or ſword of fleſh, as
all men I think will confeſſe. But ſee now his fidelity. In the
place of this ſentence, ſet: the promiſe made to S. Peter, is her
ſure ground, and is more diſhonoured with treaſons, &c. He putteth
downe theſe words: The promiſe made to S. Peter, is a
ſure, & ſufficient ground to defend Catho: Religion without armes.
Who would thinke a religious man would deale ſo falſly in
relating one poore ſentence? verily if he were not a Ieſuit, I
would think it impoſſible. What vncōſcionable dealing is it
in him to add vnto our words (ſufficient) therby to make apparance,
as though we excluded all meanes elſe of preſeruation
of Gods Church, but onely relying vpon that promiſe
to S. Peter, without any other indeauours? Would he haue
the world to think vs ſo ſimple, as that we doe not know, that
God vſeth ſecondarie meanes, and mens particuler indeauours,
both for the aduancement of his Church, as alſo the
continuance thereof, as well as he did for the Sinagogue of
the Iewes? Or will hee make it a neceſſary conſequent, becauſe
we exclude treaſons, and wicked policies of carnall men:
therefore we exclude all honeſt, iuſt, and lawfull meanes of
defending, or propagating of Gods cauſe? How doth this
follow, vnleſſe there be no other meanes, but by treaſons, and
wicked policies, which none but wicked perſons will affirme,
and ſuch as will make treaſons, and wicked policies acceptable
ſacrifices vnto Chriſt? as though God delighted in wickednes,
or had neede of ſuch meanes, to defend what he hath erected
in manu forti, et brachio excelſo: No, no; wee ſay further,
to confirme our former propoſition, that although God
doth vſe ſecond cauſes in diuers his works, and the helpe, or

concurrence of man in the aduauncing of his Church, yet is
his promiſe made to S. Peter ſo ſure a ground, that if it were
poſſible, that all mens indeauours ſhould ſurceaſe, yet ſhould
not his Church faile. Ipſe enim dixit, for he hath ſaid, it ſhall
not faile, nor hell gates preuaile againſt it. And further wee
affirme to ſtrengthen, and ſtabliſh the ſecond part, that treaſons,
and wicked policies of men, are ſo farre from aduauncing
Gods cauſe, that both he, and his cauſe are much diſgraced:
he diſhonoured, and his cauſe much hindered thereby.
Now let Fa: Parſons preferre theſe propoſitions to the
Inquiſition, and we will be defendants, and yet in all things
ſubmit our ſelues, actions, and words, vnto the iudgements
of Chriſtes ſpouſe, as willingly, and readily as any Ieſuit, or
Chriſtian elſe (by Gods grace) in the world.
               Furthermore, alſo he foyſteth theſe words in the taile of
our ſentence, (to defend Catho: Religion without armes) which
are his owne additions, and no words of ours. Theſe vnfaithfull
dealings cannot hold out: God will not be mocked with
his iuglings, and ſhiftings; truth will be ſeene doe, what Fa:
Parſons can doe, with all his cunning ſhifts. To conclude
therefore vpon the ground layed, we ſay againe, and with as
great cōfidence affirme as before; that all arguments brought
to the contrary of this we haue ſaid, whether by the Ieſuits, or
any other diſloyall ſubiect, they be mere vntrue Sophiſtications,
and therefore not to be beleeued. And as for the labour
which Fa: Parſons hath beſtowed, in citing of authors, hee
hath done, but as Ma: Lyster did in his Libell of ſchiſme, labour
about a matter not in controuerſie, alwayes flying the
true point of difference betwixt vs. For in all the worke of
Important conſiderations, the Popes indirect authority in temporalibus
is not called in queſtion, nor any one word ſpoken
thereof; neither is the power of depoſing Princes examined
or medled with-all, onely therein we complaine of treaſonable
practiſes, and attempts againſt our Prince, and ſtate, by
ſome of her diſloyall ſubiects, & of falſe ſubordinations, and
informations to his Holines; whereby ſome Popes haue been
drawne to conſent, and enter into ſuch inconuenient courſes.
And what we ſpeake of reſiſting the Pope, is not in reſpect

of his eccleſiaſticall authority (whereof we onely ſpeake,) but
of hoſtile inuaſion, againſt which to defend our ſelues, and
Country, we are taught by the very law of nature, without
reſpect of perſon, or intention of the Inuader, as I ſhall ſhew
manifeſtly in the aunſwer to that poynt obiected. By this
you may ſee, whether the reaſons, and authorities alledged
by Fa: Parſons, be not ſophiſtications, and falſe arguments
(as he vrgeth them, and draweth concluſions from them,) in
that he proceedeth vpon a falſe ground, and maketh therevpon
vntrue illations. Becauſe forſooth the Pope hath indirectam
potestatem etiam in temporalibus (according to the common
opinion,) that is, ſuch power as is neceſſary for the reformation
of the ſubiects of Chriſtes Church; therefore if
he goe about to transferre gentem in gentem, (which is onely a
power belonging vnto almighty God) or to inuade with
weapons in hoſtile manner, he is not to be reſiſted. This is
the concluſion he would, and muſt inferre vpon the reaſons,
and authorities alledged by him; or elſe he proueth nothing
againſt vs. VVhich concluſion how falſe, and abſurd it is,
both againſt the law of Nature, and common practiſe of the
world, I leaue euery man of wit, and wiſedom to iudge.
               Now whereas in the 4. point, he vrgeth againſt vs theſe
words, that if the Pope ſhould come in perſon with an Armie,
where we are, vnder pretence to establiſh catholick Religion by
force: we would oppoſe our ſelues against him, and ſpend the best
blood in our bodies in that quarrell, &c. and termeth it a braue,
and reſolute proteſtation againſt the Pope. This fellow was
aſhamed to relate, what we had ſpoken concerning our obedience,
and loue to the Sea Apoſtolick immediatly before,
which was, that if eyther his Holines ſhould come in perſon, or
ſend ſome Damianus or Auguſtine, &c. we would lye at his, or
their feete▪ and defend with them the Catholicke fayth by ſacred
Scripture, and authority of the Church, though it cost vs our liues.
This ſaying (which cannot but ſhew our ſincerity towards
Gods Church, and Vicar generall to all charitable men) this
good Fa: left out of purpoſe, ſnatching onely at our heeles
like a Cur, and taking the ends of ſpeeches to cōment vpon
at his pleaſure.
               
                  
But to ſhew you that Fa: Parſons cunning wit cannot infringe
our proteſtation (as hee termeth it) of reſiſting the
Pope, if he come with Armes to inuade, though with pretence
of Religion; you ſhall vnderſtand firſt, that (as wee
haue often ſaid) euery man is bound by the law of Nature, to
defend his life, his Country, and freedome of both. Vpon
which irrefragable ground, I doe inferre this ſequell: that if
any man in the world, vnder what pretence ſo euer, doe enter
the bounds of my Country, with fire, and ſword in hoſtile
manner, (by which of neceſſity, ſpoile of my Country,
ſubuerſion of the ſtate, oppreſſion of Innocents, loſſe of my
life, or friends will enſue) I am not onely patronized therein
to defend my ſelfe, friends, and Country, oppoſing my ſelfe
againſt ſuch euils, but alſo am bound thereto. Neither therein
can I iuſtly be ſaid to reſiſt, or impugne the Catho: Religion,
or defend hereſie, in that I onely ſtand directly for that,
which the law of nature bindeth me vnto. And if any hinderance
thereby of Cath: Religion ſhould follow, it were not
to be imputed vnto me, not intending any ſuch impeachment,
or damage to Gods Church, nor doing any act, which
of it ſelfe tendeth to any ſuch end.
               Secondly, it is well knowne vnto me, that Chriſt hath left
other meanes, by preaching, teaching, and good example
of life, for the conuerſion of Infidels, Hereticks, or ſinners,
and to me it is not knowne, that Chriſtes will is, that my
Countrey ſhall be conuerted by the ſword, and not by his
word, and ſuch other holy meanes: Yea, it rather appeareth
vnto me, that our relapſed Country is to be conuerted by the
way, and meanes that Chriſt himſelfe, and his Apoſtles vſed,
and not by ſuch bloody, and deſperate courſes. Therefore I
may, and am bound, rather to cleaue vnto that meane, then
to any other extreame, or vnnaturall enterpriſes. Thirdly, we
ſee by practiſe, that GOD hath euer disfauoured ſuch attempts,
to the admirable preſeruation both of her Maieſtie,
and our Country, which may giue vs iuſt cauſe to think, that
God is not pleaſed with ſuch violent courſes.
               Fourthly, whatſoeuer cauſe may be in a forrainer, or in the
Pope himſelfe to impugne, or inuade our country, which

may make his quarrell iuſt, and lawfull on his part, yet am
not I to take notice thereof. Yea, though the cauſe were euidently
iuſt in my knowledge, and conſcience, yet I am not
bound to leaue my countrey, and aſſiſt him. For the common
good of my country, and weale thereof, is to be preferred
before the particuler right of any perſon vvhatſoeuer.
And hereupon it falleth out, that many times the inuader or
oppugner, hath iuſt cauſe to inuade with armes, and therein
doth no iniuſtice; and yet for all that, on the contrarie ſide,
the defendants may iuſtly by force of armes keepe, & defend
themſelues, and countrey, from ſuch hoſtile incurſions, their
liberties and country beeing more deere vnto them, then the
righting of any particuler parſon.
               For if a priuate perſon, poſſeſſing goods or lands in controuerſie,
be not bound in conſcience to forſake them, and
deliuer them vp vnto the owners (who by ſentence of law
hath recouered them) vntill ſuch time as by execution of the
ciuill Magiſtrats or ſherieffe, the poſſeſſion thereof be giuen
from him, what reaſon is there that a whole country, wherein
alwaies are many innocents, not guilty of any iuſt cauſe of
ſuch oppreſſions, ſhould yeeld vp their rights, and become
ſlaues and vaſſalles to forrainers, looſing the rights and priuiledges
of their country?
               But you will ſay vnto me, that neyther the Pope is a forrayner
in reſpect of his authority, and dominion, extending ouer the
whole world, neither is this cauſe, beeing Catholicke religion, his
particuler right, but the right, which ought to be in euery creature.
To the firſt I aunſwer, that notwithſtanding that the Pope,
according to his ſpirituall authority, might be ſaid to be no
forrainer, yet if he come as an Inuader, vnder what pretence
ſoeuer, hee may be ſaid to vs a forrayner, in that his power
conſiſteth of forrainers, and cruell ſouldiers, by whoſe villanie,
many miſeries and oppreſſions, were ſure to light vppon
innocents, and vtter ſpoyle vpon our whole country. Neyther
were I bound to belieue the Pope, though hee ſhould
affirme the contrary; becauſe the wills of ſouldiers, (by whō
ſuch villanies and oppreſſions would be committed) could
not be in his power. And therefore I ſay, that if the Pope

could bring Chriſt with him in perſon, or an army of Angels,
whereby we might be aſſured, that reformation ſhould
follow without oppreſſions, or extreame miſeries and calamities:
then we might take part with him: but if he come with
an armie of men, (and ſuch men as ſouldiers are, whom all
villanies follow) he muſt not blame vs, if to auoyd ſuch euils,
we ſticke to the law of nature, and defend our ſelues, our
Prince, and country. And heereupon it is, that we ſay wee
be perſwaded, that prieſts of what order ſoeuer, ought not
by force of armes, to plant or water the Catholick faith, but
in ſpiritu lenitatis, et manſuetudinis, to propagate and defend
it: conſidering the inconueniences, which follow armes, and
inuaſions, and the little fruit, that commeth thereof, or the
ſmall number of Catholicks that ariſe thereby, ſo little good
example of vertue beeing giuen by ſouldiers, eſpecially Spaniards.
Yet by the way I may not omit to note againe Father
Parſ: his perfidious dealing, in diſplacing of the word defend,
ſaying, that no prieſts ought to plant, water, or defend, vvhich
followeth not in our ſentence. For a man may by armes ſomtimes
defend a thing got, which by armes he could not iuſtlie
get.
               As for example, Munks or religious men, may not get
themſelues Monaſteries or lands by force of armes, but hauing
iuſtly got them otherwiſe, and hauing an abſolute authoritie
within their precincts, they may by force keepe them
from ſuch forrainers, as vniuſtly inuade thē, if otherwiſe they
cannot. So may and ought religious men, and prieſts, to defend
catholick countries from the incurſions of the Turke,
Infidels, or hereticks, as oft times they haue done. But it followeth
not therfore, that they may goe into the countreys of
Infidels in hoſtile manner with armes, onely to plant the catholick
faith by force. But this is after the old faſhion of Fa:
Parſons iuſt dealings.
               I could heere vrge him with an obiection, which would
pleaſe him but a little; to wit, that if euery man be bound to
aſſiſt the Pope, inuading as he would haue him, it is for that
the cauſe he pretendeth is iuſt. And then doe I ſay ſecundum
magis, et minus, that not onely the Pope, but euery Prince, or

other perſon, comming with force of Armes into any Countrey
is to be receaued, and aſſiſted by the inhabitants, and
ſubiects of the Country, if his cauſe be knowne to be iuſt vnder
payne of deadly ſinne. Which if it be true, why then did
not his great Maiestie of Spayne, in Paule the fourths time, reſtore
Naples vnto the ſea of Rome, when as Caraff inuaded
the ſame with force of armes? The world will ſay, and the
Pope himſelfe will affirme, that he hath more right thereto,
then the Spaniard: how chaunced it then that hee kept it by
force frō the Pope, & ſtill doth? See what confuſion would
follow Fa: Parſons doctrine.
               But he will ſay, that religion is not onely a matter of iuſtice,
but alſo of neceſſity, binding all men thereunto. To this I
aunſwer, that though it be a thing of neceſſity, yet is not this
neceſſity of force, or compulſion, but vpon election, as Chriſt
left it: and euery man hath in his free will, whether hee vvill
accept of Gods grace offered, or no. Neither can any law, or
neceſſity in the world, contradict or impeach the law of nature,
borne with man, and alwaies remaining in him.
               To the 5. poynt obiected by Fa: Parſons, wee haue ſaid
ſufficient already, for our honeſt and lawfull excuſe, in blaming
or condemning of ſome actions, done by worthy men,
not therby defaming, or condemning ſuch perſons, but ſuch
acts, as errors, in theſe worthy perſons. Which is not (as hee
falſly affirmeth) to caſt any fault vpon any worthy perſon or
Martyr, or to defame them in any ſort: ſith the facts imputed
vnto them, were too too well knowne vnto the ſtate, and too
publique vnto the world. Whereby wee were but conſtrained
to purge our ſelues, as guiltleſſe of any ſuch matter; rather
chooſing that the fault that was, ſhould fall vpon particuler
men, dealers therein, and ſo knowne to be to the world,
then vpon the whole company of innocent prieſts, & Cath:
vvhich was (I thinke) but according to the rules both of iuſtice
and charity.
               And whereas it is ſayd, that if ſome of vs had beene of the
counſell, and knowing as much as we doe know, wee ſhould
haue giuen our cōſents to ſtraight lawes, for the ſuppreſſing,
and preuenting of ſuch wicked deſignements; you muſt vnderſtand,

that this is deliuered but as the particuler ſpeech of
ſome few, and not of all in generall (as Fa: Parſons falſly ſetteth
downe.) Neither did we ſay, that we would haue giuen
our conſents to that, which hath beene done againſt Catho:
as he maliciouſly peruerteth our words, but onely to ſome
ſtraight lawes, for the ſuppreſſing and preuenting of ſuch
wicked deſignments. Which I thinke any good Common-wealths
man in the world, of what religion ſoeuer, vvould
haue done, and could haue done no leſſe, then haue yeelded,
and giuen conſent to make ſome ſtraight lawes for preuenting
the ruine, and ſubuerſion of his prince and country, vnleſſe
he had beene perfidious vnto his prince, and trayterous
to his country.
               But by your leaue Fa: Parſons, theſe lawes ſhould haue
haue been made to haue brideled ſuch good fellowes, as your
ſelfe, and others, that haue dealt ſo perfidiouſly with theyr
prince and countrey, and not generally, againſt all prieſts and
Catholicks. And we perſwade our ſelues, they had not been
made ſo generall, if her Maieſtie, and the ſtate, had ſeene into
the rootes of ſuch proceedings, and knowne that they had
growne only from ſome few particuler perſons, ſuch as your
ſelfe, and not from the body or moſt part of prieſts, and Catholicks.
Which the ſtate could not ſee into & diſcerne from
the beginning, beeing ignorant of the diſtinction which
ought to be made betweene vs and your fellowes: and therfore
is not ſo much to be cried out againſt, and defamed for
tyrannie (this ignorance conſidered) as by you her highneſſe,
her lawes, and gouernment haue beene traduced: making
your ſelues thereby, and by others, the wicked enterpriſes,
the principall, and chiefe cauſe of all ſuch ſtraight, and bloodie
lawes. But rather is her Maieſtie, and the ſtate to be excuſed,
and implored for more pitty and compaſſion towards
vs for the time to com: ſith they now ſee farther into the true
rootes, ſprings, and cauſes, from whence, and from whom
ſuch attempts haue come.
               Neither is Fa: Parſons recapitulation of ſome lawes made,
and ſome executed before their comming into England, a
ſufficient excuſe; becauſe it is well known that her Maieſtie,

and the ſtate, was diuers times (as by the Important conſiderations
you may ſee) irritated by ſundry vndutifull attempts of
her ſubiects, and forrainers together, before ſhee made anie
bloody law at all. And there are many pregnant preſumptions,
that the Ieſuits fingers were medling in ſome, or moſt of
them. For there be Prieſts, who haue heard Fa: Parſons
(when they were Scholers in Rome) make ſet Lectures for a
whole Lent, (as I remember) of all matters, which had happened
from her Maieſties beginning of her raigne: In the
diſcourſe whereof he was ſo ready, and could deſcend ſo farre
into particuler plots, and intentions of plots, which neuer
came to paſſe, and were vnknowne to her Maieſtie, and the
ſtate, (as in the practiſe concerning the Earle of Northumberland,
and the like) that you would ſweare, he or his, had been
in the boſome of euery ſuch plot, and deuiſe.
               To the ſixt, and laſt point brought in prepoſterouſly, as
he commonly vſeth to doe, taking his bits by ſnatches heere
and there to make vp his gallymaufrey, it deſerueth no other
aunſwer, then hath already beene giuen, it being no other,
but a fond exaggerating of his old common points, with exclamation,
and bitter words; without reaſon, or proofe of
any one abſurdity, or vniuſt vntruth deliuered by vs. Which
argueth his ſpirit to be more fraught with ſpite, then power,
or ability. We will not aske him, which of the ſeauen deuils
rayleth, and biteth with ſo many bitter words, and falſe calumniation
vniuſtly, and vntruly againſt vs, but hartily pray
God to deliuer him from all incurſions of the deuill, and all
Atheiſme, and Machiaueliſme, that he may ſincerely ſee, how
he hath offended God by his plots, and practiſes in abuſing
his poore afflicted Church in our Country, and ſetting diſſenſion,
and diuiſion in his Clergy, for the compaſſing of his
policies, and deſignes, which ſo long as he, and his ſhal practiſe,
we cannot but ſtill intreate Cath: to forbeare the ſending
of their children vnto the ſchooles, where ſuch maiſters, as
Fa: Parſons, and his aſſociates, ſhall be teachers, and gouernours:
but rather to ſend them to other Vniuerſities abroad
in other Countries, vntill God ſhall prouide better for vs.
And thus we will end our aunſwer, vnto the firſt Chapter, in

which we haue beene ouer long, and tedious, becauſe of the
diuerſitie of matters hudled vp therein by Fa: Parſons, after
his accuſtomed manner, deſiring the Reader to beare with
vs therein, in that we were willing to open ſome things more
largely, that ſuch as were ignorant, or not ſo well acquainted
with theſe our affaires, and the true cauſes of them, might ſee
the better into the very grounds of all, which being ſo largely
deliuered in this firſt chapter, we ſhall with more facility, and
more briefly paſſe ouer the reſt that followeth: alwayes (as
occaſion happeneth) referring you to what is deliuered at
large in this firſt treatiſe.
            
            
               An aunſwer to the ſecond Chapter, concerning our pretended
paſſionate ſpirit, in the manner of the handling
of our former arguments.
               FA: Parſons his 2. Chap. containeth little in ſubſtance,
but what hath beene ſaid in the former, and is at large by
vs aunſwered: onely hee hath taken a little paynes, in
ſpeaking largely in his owne prayſe, & to the commendation
of ſome others of his owne order; becauſe they want
good neighbours to aduaunce, and extoll them; and in gathering
together of ſome cholerick words, heere and there
deliuered, in ſome of our former bookes. In which kind of
ſtyle, although he, and ſome of his deſerue the garland; yet he
omitteth not to make the beſt ſhew of aduantage thereby,
that he can againſt vs, not looking back into himſelfe, and his
owne moſt bitter ſpeeches, no leſſe full of gall, and choler, &
much more vntrue. Wherefore to aunſwer that point, without
farther particuler repetitions of euery word ſpoken in
heate, which yet are but to be attributed vnto the natures of
the Writers, or rather in very deede vnto the vniuſt, vnconſcionable,
and irreligious dealings of Fa: Parſons, and other
his aſſociates, with the Archpriest, againſt vs, whereby the natures
of very good men, ſometimes may be ſtirred vp to heat,
and choler, (as you may ſee in S. Hierom againſt Ruffinus,) &
not to the whole company of our brethren, though as the
prouerb is, Looſers ſhould haue their words. To anſwer this,

I ſay, we will beſtow a little paines in collecting this good Fa:
patient, and charitable words, and phraſes vttered againſt vs,
in this worke of Manifestation, and place them by themſelues
in the end of this treatiſe; deſiring his Fatherhoode to
ſet the Hares head againſt the Gooſe giblets: and then conſidering
the innocencie, and iuſtice on our parts, and the
wrongs, and oppreſſions we haue receaued from him, & his:
I hope the indifferent Reader will the rather beare with the
exceſſe of choler, vttered by ſome of our brethren in zeale of
iuſtice; the iniuries offered, exceeding farre the meaſure of
heate on our bretherens part. But yet becauſe ſome things
may happily occurre in this Chapter, which the Reader may
be deſirous to be ſatisfied in: wee will briefly examine the
chiefeſt points of moment therein, though (beleeue me) they
be ſo confuſedly hudled together, that the paines are greater
to marſhall them into any good order, then to aunſwer them.
In the entrance to this Chap: (after his old accuſtomed manner)
he poureth vpon vs ſtore of choler, out of his diſtempered
ſtomack; as, ſpite, rancour, enuie, malice, deſire of reuenge,
inſufficiencie in wiſedome, learning, and all other vertues, carried
away with furie, paſſion, and rage of reuenge; not caring what, or
how, or of whom they ſay any thing, ſo they may vtter their gall,
and diſgorge their choler, vpon them whom they enuie, feare, or
hate. Theſe are the preparatiues to his diſcourſe, whereby
you may perceaue, what cauſe this man hath to exclaime, or
take aduantage of the bitter phraſes of ſome of our brethren.
But to leaue him in his fumes: in the 20 page, after hee had
related ſom ſpeeches, deliuered in the preface to the Relation
of Wiſbich, againſt a letter of the Archpriest, he ſetteth downe
the Archpriests words therein concerning that point, & calleth
it a mild, and an humble kind of writing. Which being
examined in the Hope of peace, and conuinced to be full of
vntruthes (and therefore rather to be tearmed, a cunning
clawing Epiſtle, & couerture of falſhood, then mild or humble,)
we remit the Reader thether for his further ſatisfaction
therein. As touching the ſpeech of Fa: Weston deliuered to
M. Dolman, which he alledgeth in the 20 leafe, and of his recollecting
himſelfe with his aſſociates vnto prayer, his framing

of his countenance to weepe, and of M. Doct: Bauands
like ſhew; (which he moſt highly commendeth as religious,
and full of piety, and humility, and blameth vs of contempt,
in the relating thereof, and diſliking thereat) you muſt vnderſtand
that there is no good thing, or action in the world,
but it may be abuſed; neither doe any men vſe more oſtentation
of deuotion, and humility, then hypocrites, and ſuch
as ſeek moſt to deceaue. Did any man ſhew greater reuerence
in outward behauiour to Religion, and religious men, then
Nicholas Machiauell, as all men report of him? And yet hee
was, but an Atheiſt inwardly. Therefore not the bare actions
of themſelues, (which may be indifferent eyther good or
bad,) but the manner, and intention, with all other neceſſary
circumſtances, muſt be conſidered. For if any circumſtance
be faulty, the action is thereby vitiated, though otherwiſe
good of it ſelfe. Bonum est ex integra cauſa, malum autem ex
quolibet defectu. If then the intentions, or circumſtances of
theſe extrinſecall ſhewes of piety, or deuotion were to euill
ends: how can the actions be ſaid to be good, humble, or religious?
Is it Religion or deuotion to pray, that a man may
meet with another mans purſe by the high way ſide? Doubtleſſe
no, but an abuſe of prayer, and yet prayer is good in
it ſelfe.
               Theſe actions then of Fa: Weston, tending to the oppreſſion,
& defaming of his fellow priſoners (as we haue ſhewed
manifeſtly in the former chapter) could not be termed humble,
deuout, or religious; but an abuſe thereof, and therefore
iuſtly taxed as ſuch, in the relation of thoſe ſtirres. And as for
his faire ſhew vnto Ma: Doleman, that if the rest would be perſwaded,
he would giue ouer, and meddle no further, it was but a
meere ſhift, as the euent afterwards ſhewed, and as you may
ſee by the former chapter. Beſides, Ma. Dolman can wel teſtifie
ſo much, and my ſelfe alſo, who vrged this point preciſely
vnto him, but could draw him to no indifferencie. And
when I had preſſed him earneſtly therewith, he ſhifted mee
of vnto the reſt, whom he knew to be ſo ſetled by him in that
courſe, that it was bootleſſe for me, or any other to deale with
them therein.
               
                  
But I would demaund of you Fa: Parſons this one queſtion:
If father Weston were ſo vertuous, ſo humble, and ſo religious,
as you would make the world thinke him to be, why
(I beſeech you) did he not humbly imitate the example of S.
Gregory Nazianzen, who beeing lawfully choſen Biſhop of
Constantinople, without either faction, or ſedition, yet when
he afterwards perceiued contention to ariſe amongſt the Biſhops
about him, (though vniuſtly) he voluntarily departed,
vſing this ſpeech of Ionas the Prophet, Si propter me orta est
haec tempestas, proijcite me in mare, rather chooſing to preiudice
himſelfe, then that tumult and contention ſhould ariſe
in the Church.
               Doubtleſſe, if Fa: Weston had been a man of ſo rare humilitie,
as heere Fa: Parſons affirmeth, he would haue departed
from that faction, how violent ſoeuer they had been, and rather
then ſuch ſcandalous ſtirrs ſhould haue beene cauſed by
ſuch emulation for him, to the infamy of ſo reuerend a place,
as Wiſbich was before that time, and the infinite hurt of our
poore afflicted Church in England, hee would (I ſay) haue
withdrawne himſelfe from them, and choſen rather to haue
liued in a hole, then to haue referred the matter to his copartners,
ſct. if they be pleaſed, I am content.
               
               If S. Gregory had ſtoode vppon ſuch termes, concerning
thoſe Biſhops, that tooke his part, when (I pray you) would
there haue beene an end of thoſe contentions? No, no, there
was no ſuch ſpirit of humility in Fa: Weston as you talke of,
but contrariwiſe, too too much deſire of rule, and preheminence.
I pray God he may proue more humble in all his life
to come, then hee ſhewed himſelfe to be, in thoſe garboyles.
Touching Ma. Doctor Bauand, I know hee will not denie,
but that the ſecond, or third day after his beeing at Wiſbich,
he much diſliked the violent proceeding of fa: Westons part,
and complained of the impatience, and importunity of ſome
of them, ſaying that they were ready to pull his cloake from
his backe, becauſe hee would not heare their clamors. Howſoeuer
he grew afterwards to fauour them, and their proceedings,
let him looke to it. It is true, that ſince that time hee
hath proſecuted ſome matters, further then any man in conſcience

could doe, (ſo hath affection blinded, or ouer-ruled
him) as by a letter written by him in the Ieſuits behalfes, I
haue ſhewed in the firſt chapter.
               Concerning Fa: Garnets politick dealing in thoſe affaires,
then, and in diuers other ſince, I referre you alſo to the firſt
chapter of this Reply, to the Relation it ſelfe: and to all thoſe
bookes that haue beene written of our late troubles. Wherin
if you finde not ſtore of policies, and ſuch as (I thinke) may
beſeeme a right cunning politician: blame my iudgement, as
very meane, and weake. And therefore as in the beginning I
ſaid, ſo ſay I ſtill, that no wiſe man will meaſure euery man
by euery good action that proceedeth frō him, or euery good
word he vttereth, but meaſure his actions and words by their
ſequels, & circumſtances. Becauſe euery defect diminiſheth
the good, and corrupteth the beſt morall deed of man. Otherwiſe,
we might truly ſay, hypocrites were the beſt men,
becauſe commonly they do (at the leaſt publiquely) the moſt
morall good deedes.
               VVee may not omit heere the great humilitie hee alſo noteth
in this Fa: Weston, for his promiſcuall ſitting at the table,
ſometimes heere, ſometimes there, as it pleaſed him, leauing
his proper place, which was beneath Ma. Doctor Bagſhaw▪
                  
and Ma. Bluet, which in the Relation is iuſtly condemned.
For before this, there was much murmuring amongſt his aſſociates,
that he was not preferred vnto the higheſt place, before
the foreſaid two prieſts: which becauſe hee could not
obtaine, hee framed that new faſhion of ſitting, (as nouelties
alwayes follow pride) thereby (vnder a colour forſooth of
humility) to take away the note of his minority, to the aforeſaid
Doct: and M. Bluet. And let not Fa: Parſons after his
accuſtomed manner, ſay, that this is a malitious interpretation
of his humble act; for nouelties neuer follow humility,
but pride, and diſdaine. Neyther can he auoyd the note of
nouelty in this action of fa: Weston, becauſe religious men
vſe ſuch manner of ſitting in their Monaſteries. For to introduce
into the ſecular Clergie, thoſe things which may be
fitly vſed of Friers, and Monkes in their Monaſteries, were
both a nouelty, and ridiculous. And ſo we account of this

particuler action of promiſcuall taking place at meales, reſembling
the Puritans conſiſtories, where there muſt be no
Biſhop, nor degree, but a democraticall brotherhood all alike;
which the Church of GOD hath euer deteſted in her
Clergie.Iohn as good as Thomas. But if this humble Father would haue ſhewed true,
and ſincere humilitie indeede, he ſhould haue betaken himſelfe
to his true place (in that hee was a religious man) & haue
ſet himſelfe beneth all the prieſts there at the nether end of
the table. Neither could bee in iuſtice challenge any higher
place, beeing a priuate religious man in his order, and no prelate,
as Father Parſons would haue him to be, becauſe he had
beene his ſubſtitute in England, ouer the Ieſuits, but neuer
Prouinciall, though wee termed him ſo, in that he was his delegate.
For his ſaid ſubſtitution ſurceaſing, hee was but as
before, a priuate religious man, whereas the other prieſts were
& are verè pastores. And euery man knoweth, that the place
of a paſtor is aboue any priuate religious man, though of curteſie
ſomtimes they may, vpon opinion of their ſanctitie, giue
ſuch a place vnto them.
               In the 22. leafe hee talketh of wonderfull folly in vs, and
paſſionate proceeding, in telling you of the greatnes of that
ſocietie through all Chriſtendome; that many great men,
both of the Laïtie and Clergie were Ieſuits, & Ieſuited: and
that fa: Parſons was an eſpeciall man with the king of Spaine,
the Pope, and Cardinals. All which make againſt vs, as hee
ſaith, and ſhew fa: Parſons vertues and good parts, and the
great reuerence, & eſteeme of the whole Societie. A ſtrange
folly ſure this is, Cardinall Wolſey was a great man with King
Henry the eyght, with the Emperour Charles the fift, vvith
the King of Fraunce, and other great Princes, and for a time
he could doe great matters with them all; ergo, Card: Wolſey
was a vertuous and holy man. Stay there Ma: Parſons, you
will not ſay ſo. Frier George in Hungarie was a great man
with the Emperour ſometimes, and with other Princes other
times, and ruled all the country at his pleaſure, ergo, a good &
vertuous man? It dooth not follow. Fa: Parſons is, or hath
beene a great man with the King of Spaine, deceiued the
Pope, abuſed Cardinall Caietane, and other princes, & many

great men, haue had a better opinion of him then hee deſerued,
whereby he hath been reputed for a more honeſt man,
then he proueth; ergo, fa: Parſons is a Frier George, or Wolſey.
Doth not this concluſion follow as fitly, as the other?
               Haue not many times bad & lewd men wonne great fauor
and credite both with Popes and other Princes? What great
folly (I pray you) was it to tell you, that father, Parſons could
doe much with the Pope, or other great men with his iugling;
or that he was great with the king of Spaine, by reaſon
of his practizing vnnaturally againſt his owne Country in
his behalfe? or what folly is it to tell you, that his Order is
very powerfull in all Chriſtendome? Indeed it is a bugge to
many faint-harted Catholicks, yea, and to ſome of our brethren
to: who ſeeing their greatnes, are afraid to encounter
with them, though their cauſe be neuer ſo iuſt. But let them
be as great as they can: the greatnes of their order, & power
thereof, gaineth not ſanctitie to euery member. I pray God
that the conceit thereof, make not ſome of them be bold in
going ſtill forward with their moſt wicked deſignements:
which howſoeuer they ſhall preſume to attempt, they ſhall
(by Gods grace) find ſuch, as both dare, and will, to theyr
powers, withſtand thoſe their indeuours, notwithſtanding all
their greatnes.
               As for the auerring of ſome great men to haue beene Ieſuits,
or Ieſuited it is certaine, that many great men haue too
much fauoured them, through an opinion of their ſanctitie.
VVhereby ſome times they haue beene the eaſier drawne to
like of their proceedings. But that euer any of vs ſaid that
Cardinall Allen was a Ieſuit, it is an vntruth of a Ieſuit: and
the ſame I thinke of Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristow,
though they might be too much affected towards them, vppon
ſuch an erroneous opinion. But as for Don Bernardino
Mendoza, it is known, that he was wholy affectionate to thē,
and it is but an ordinary courſe with the Ieſuits, to bind both
noble men and women, and others alſo vnto them by vow,
and yet leauing them in the world to be their inſtruments, of
which kind in both ſexes, I could name ſome in our owne
Country. And therefore it is no ſtrange thing to charge the

Ieſuits to haue men in the world abroad that are theirs, and
bound to them in vow, and therefore may be termed Ieſuits.
For what doth incorporate into a religious body, but the
vowes thereof, amongſt which obedience, is the chiefeſt.
               Touching the relation of matters obiected againſt our
friends in Wiſbitch: there was no more folly therein, then is
in clearing any innocents of falſe matters obiected againſt
them, or for Fa: Parſons to lay downe obiections, vrged againſt
himſelfe and his friends, and to goe about, to aunſwer
them. And as for the diſorders obiected, if they be not ſo to
the full aunſwered, that all note of folly thereby is ſufficiently
taken away, and that with the diſcredite of ſome of his ſubiects,
chiefe actors in ſuch vncharitable, falſe, and vniuſt accuſations;
let them vrge them a new, and proſecute them, either
iuridicé, or by writing, and we will be ready to aunſwer
him at euery turne, to his diſcredit.
               In the 23 leafe, he ſetteth downe certaine propoſitions, giuen
vp vnto the arbitratours in Wiſbich, at the firſt meeting
about thoſe ſtirres; by which articles (he ſaith) the quiet part
meant (as you may ſee) to haue matters quietly, and ſecretly decided,
and the defects, and diſorders, which had beene cauſe of the
ſeparation, to be vttered modestly by common conſent, and no mans
fame publikely hurt. This aſſertion is ſo falſe, as Fa: Parſons
cannot but know it to be falſe. For (as in the former Chap:
we haue ſet downe, and is declared in the Relation) before
any ſeparation was made by them, they had by letters, and
meſſages ſpred abroad into all coaſts, infamous ſlaunders againſt
the vnited part, and at their very ſeparation, prefixed
the cauſe of their retire to be for ſcandalls, and mortall ſinnes.
How then was it poſſible, that matters could be ſecretly examined,
without hurt of any mans fame, when as they had defamed
them long before, & publiſhed the ſame to the world?
And as for the articles, the very firſt of them (to omit the
reſt) contayned ſuch a condition, as might haue tyed the arbitratours
to haue ſtayed 7. yeeres, to heare an end of their
fiddle-faddles, euery foote faining new accuſations, though
nothing to the purpoſe, to delay time, and weary the arbitrators.
Beſides, by the courſe of their conditions propoſed,

they would ſeeme but to haue tied themſelues to haue beene
enformers, and not accuſers; ſo that the arbitrators ſhould
haue proceeded by way of interrogations, to examine men
vpon queſtions without accuſers; which kinde of dealing
how vniuſt, and vncharitable it was (being both againſt the
law of iuſtice, and charity, to vrge men againſt themſelues
without accuſers) let euery man of vnderſtanding iudge. To
preuent theſe inconueniences, our friends ſet downe foure
other articles, which he afterwards mentioneth. The firſt is
this, viz: we require that ſatisfaction be made for the ſlaunder, and
diffamation ſustayned by the breach, if ſufficient cauſe cannot be
proued for their ſo doing. Vpon this Fa: Parſons maketh a
marginall note of ſatisfaction deſired for things paſt; and
proſecuteth the ſame afterwards, as if it had beene a hainous
matter, for Prieſts being defamed, to require ſatisfaction,
when the diffamation is paſt. I would faine know when
men ſhould demaund ſatisfaction, if not when wrongs were
already done. I am ſure a man can demaund no ſatisfaction
before the wrong be paſt; for before it be paſt, it is no wrong.
Whether then in demaunding of ſatisfaction, when no iuſt
cauſe could be proued againſt them, they did otherwiſe then
any men in the world might in conſcience, and would doe,
iudge you.
               The ſecond article is as followeth. Wee require that euery
accuſation be ſet downe in writing vnder the accuſers hand, ſub
poena Talionis, if it be not proued. This in the margent he calleth
a threat to all accuſers; and in the ſame ſort alſo proſecuteth
it in his comment. Whereby you may perceaue that the
intendment of him, and his fellowes, was naught elſe but to
ſlaunder, and defame, and to be bound to no ſatisfaction, for
neuer ſo great wrongs offered. This is, and alwayes hath
beene a familiar courſe with the Ieſuits, they muſt be tied to
no law of iuſtice: to mention but the law Talionis, which puniſheth
the accuſer, that vntruly, and vniuſtly accuſeth his
brother, as a calumniator, was pety treaſon. Deeme by this,
I beſeech you, whether it be probable in your conceite, that
our brethren were guilty of ſuch deformities, and notorious
enormities, as this man affirmeth; when as the accuſers durſt

not take vpon them the part of accuſers, with condition to
doe the ſatisfaction, if they were found to haue wronged
them by ſuch ſlaunderous accuſations. I am ſure where there
is any iuſtice in the world vſed, this condition will not be taken,
as a threat, but as an honeſt, iuſt, lawfull, yea, and neceſſary
condition. Howbeit forſooth nothing muſt be iuſt,
or lawfull, which pleaſeth not a Ieſuit.
               The third article enſueth in theſe words. Wee will aunſwer
in all things according to the Canon law, ſuppoſing theſe men to
be our lawfull Iudges. This condition Fa: Parſons noteth in
the margent, for a meere euaſion, and in the comment, a tedious
progreſſe, by reaſon of delayes, and exceptions, which
are ordinary in the courſe of the law. Belike this Fa: would
haue you thinke, that becauſe our brethren would tie themſelues,
and the reſt vnto iuridicall, and lawfull proceeding, as
well in their aunſwering to matters obiected, as in the others
accuſing; therefore they meant to keepe tearmes foure times
in the yeere about them, or haue ſome ſet Court day, with
Crier, and Sumner, once in a fortnight, or three weekes, or
elſe to what end ſpeaketh he of delayes, and exceptions in
the courſe of the Canon law? Or might not our brethren
haue the priuiledges of the Canons, not to aunſwer, but ſufficiently
accuſed by ſufficient witnes in law, and not by euery
raggamuffin, ſuborned perhaps for the purpoſe? Or would
they haue euery ſcullion in a kitchin a ſufficient witnes, and
his teſtimony currant againſt a prieſt? Or would they haue
the accuſers (as it ſeemeth) free to taxe them, without bond
of ſatisfaction for the wrong, if they failed? If this be not
his intention; why might not the Canons haue beene obſerued,
quoad ſubstantiam at the leaſt, and that ſpeedily without
delayes, the arbitrators, and witnes, and parties being all preſent?
But it was not delayes they feared, but the law, and iuſtice
therof, which would haue lighted heauie on their backs,
if they had proceeded: and therefore in very deede they and
not our friends ſought all the delayes, and exceptions they
poſſibly could.
               The fourth article which he cauilleth at is this. Wee will
ſustaine any cenſure with this condition, that being cenſured by

theſe men, we may be ſecured thereby from all other cenſures concerning
that matter. In the margent Fa: Parſons ſaith, this is
a confeſſion with a prouiſo; and in his Comment he addeth,
that it ſhewed their guilty conſciences, and how groſſe diſorders
they had committed. A ſtrange ſequell this is, that
this aſſecuration deſired, ſhould conuince them guilty of all,
that was obiected. I verily take it in my vnderſtanding, that
no men but fooles would haue done leſſe, to preuent double
payment for one delict, if any ſhould haue beene proued.
In a Communitie where many be, who could aunſwer for
euery one in particuler? Therefore leaſt any petty matter
might be proued againſt any one, hauing ouer-ſhot himſelfe
at any time (as in deede there was one, againſt whom they
ſeemed to except very much at that time, as a diſorderly perſon)
yet afterwards returning to their part, he was a very honeſt
man, though worſe then before, although as I am able
to teſtifie vpon my oath, when he was with our friends, they
neuer defended his errors, yea, ſome of them, the Doctor eſpecially,
rated him more for them, then any in the houſe elſe
did: for this cauſe, I ſay, and in the behalfe of this perſon, they
required ſecurity from farther cenſuring afterwards, being
once cenſured by the arbitrators. And this I thinke was but
a reaſonable demaund in the ſight of any indifferent man.
What needed the other part to haue ſtoode vpon this quirk,
as the times are now in England, but eyther to haue cenſured
the delinquent, and ſecured him, or if they could not haue ſo
done, (which was no difficulty) then to haue remitted the
cenſure, as they had pleaſed, which would haue beene ſufficient
for their purpoſe? Now what folly there was in the ſetting
down ſincerely of all theſe things in the Relation of Wiſbich
ſtirres, iudge you, or whether indeede it doth not euidently
note, both fidelity, and ſincerity in the writer of that
ſtory, that he would omit no one thing of moment, whether
making for the one ſide or the other, no ſhufling, and ſhifting
off of matters, concerning the truth, and deliuering falſhoods,
as Fa: Parſons doth. And heere by the way, note a
little folly in the good Father, that he would obſerue theſe
matters as ouer-ſights, and aduantages for his faction, which

were indeede very reall verities, & did lay out apparantly the
vniuſt, and vncharitable proceedings of fa: Weston, and his
adherents. For heereby any man of wit or reaſon will ſee
plainly, that the foreſaid Relation of thoſe matters is moſt
true, and ſincere, and thereby be ſecured, that he may not
onely read the ſame (which the Ieſuits moſt feare, and giue
warning of, as moſt dangerous) but alſo relie vppon the fidelity
and truth thereof.
               In the pages following, hee gathereth together bundels of
ſharpe ſentences, and words vſed here, and there, as heate
moued mens particuler paſſions, againſt the Archp: and Ieſuits.
Which although I wiſh had been omitted, yet all things
conſidered, the wrongs that the parties haue particulerly receiued
at their hands for many yeeres together, as well as in
generall, may ſomwhat excuſe their choler. But for the further
aunſwer to this poynt, they ſhall be payed with theyr
owne coyne gathered out of this booke (omitting the raylings
vſed by Ma. Lyster in his Libell, and fa: Parſons in his
Apologie, and elſe where) and layd vp as in a treaſurie to be
viewed together in the end of this reply, as before I haue promiſed.
Now as touching ſome of the imputations to the
Archpriest, as that of writing falſe letters against his conſcience,
or knowledge, or both; his Letters to Rome before his inſtitution,
doe manifeſt as much, and it ſhall be auowed when hee
pleaſeth. For his forgery about his authority, terme it how
you will, Ma: Collington, and Ma: Charnocke, two reuerend
prieſts tooke him with the manner, and are ready to iuſtifie
the ſame.
               And concerning that arrogant ſpeech of Fa: Parſons, in
the 25. leafe, the ſecond page, that without the comming in of
the Ieſuits, the moſt of vs had not been Catho: much leſſe priests:
it ſauoureth of too too much pride in arrogating ſo much to
themſelues. For ſince their comming into England, where
one hath been conuerted from hereſie to catholicke religion
by the Ieſuits, I dare boldly ſay, aboue an hundred haue been
conuerted by the Prieſts: yet neuer were the prieſts an hundred
for one of them. No, no, the Ieſuits ſcorne to meddle
ordinarily but with great perſonages, and men & women of

wealth, or great expectation. But the prieſts (making no diſtinction
of perſons) deale with all ſorts, poore aſwel as rich.
Whereby they bring more to Gods church, one of them, in a
yeere, then any one Ieſuit in ſeauen. I know ſome one prieſt
that hath reduced aboue an hundred in one yeere. All the
Ieſuits in England (I verily thinke) neuer brought in ſo manie
in the like ſpace ſince their firſt entrance. See then what a
proud and arrogant ſpeech of father Parſons this is.
               Beleeue me, if neuer Ieſuit had entred England, I ſuppoſe
there had beene more Catholicks, then there now are, and
with leſſe danger of lawes. And as touching our ſelues, for
the moſt part of vs, as we were catholicks before we knew any
of them: ſo might we haue beene prieſts though they had
neuer beene borne. There were prieſts in England before
they came hether, and will be heereafter, when peraduenture
there will not be a Ieſuite in the world. But wee muſt giue
them leaue for their time to ſet out themſelues.
               In the page 27. hee taketh occaſion to ſpeake of our follie
forſooth, in chooſing our meanes to compaſſe our intentions,
and bring our matters to effect. And firſt of The hope of
peace, he ſaith, that the meanes were contrary to the end, as
tending rather to warre, by laying open many vntruths againſt
our Superiour. I verily thinke, that he vnderſtood not
the cauſe of the title of the booke, for if hee had, ſurelie hee
would not ſo much haue miſtaken the matter as he doth. It
was not intended as a meanes to procure peace: but rather
to ſhew the iuglings of the Archpriest, and fa: Garnet, the
latter writing letters vnto a prieſt in the Clincke, to deale with
Ma. Bluet and Ma. Clarke there, and Ma. Collington and others
abroad to come to a peace, with faire offers, and intertayning
treaty of conditions by two or three ſeuerall letters:
and in the meane time the Archprieſt writing abroade moſt
falſe, and vntrue things againſt vs, and our bookes to his aſſiſtants:
which ſeuerall proceedings being ſo cōtrary, ſhewed
what hope, or expectance wee could haue of honeſt dealing
at their hands, or of any true & ſincere peace. This then was
the intention of that booke, to diſcouer theſe iuglings, and
therefore was it intituled The hope of peace, to ſhew that there

was no reall hope of any true peace to proceede from them.
As for the folly committed in the other booke to the Inquiſition,
once more I would intreate his fatherhood, to refer the
cenſuring thereof vnto his betters, the worthy congregation
of the Inquiſition, vnto whom it is dedicated and preſented.
And as for his carping at the ſimilitude of the man caſting
out deuils in Chriſtes name, I will let it paſſe for him to take
his aduantage as he liſt, and make his owne expoſition. For
I verily thinke, that euery wiſe man that readeth his interpretation
thereof, will diſcouer more folly in him for his applycation,
not intended by the Writer in that ſence but onely a
ſimili, then in him that firſt alledged the example. And for
our accepting, or ſeeking of fauour at the hands of Proteſtants,
and our Gouernours in temporalities: I think no man
can condemne vs therein, vnleſſe he will alſo condemne the
practizes of all times of perſecution, both in the time of the
law of Moſes, and alſo ſince Chriſt.
               In the 28. page he citeth certaine words of the Epiſtle to
the Important conſiderations, wherein it is affirmed, that there
is no ſinne ariſing vpon infirmitie, and frailty of man committed by
an Apostata, an Infidell, an Hereticke, a Schiſmatike, an Atheiſt,
caſt out of the fauour of God, and accurſed out of his Church, but
a Cath: may fall into the ſame, and yet remaine conſtant in his religion
to death. This father Parſons affirmeth to be a falſe aſſertion.
And therein ſay I, that fa: Parſons manifeſteth more
folly, then all the follies hee noteth in all our writings, put thē
all together; to ſay nothing of his ignorance or ſimplicitie.
For it is a matter certaine, and de fide, that a man hath free wil
vnto all kinde of ſinnes; and it is no leſſe manifeſt, that ſinnes
of infirmitie, and frailty, neuer cut a man off from Gods
Church. Neither can infidelitie, hereſie, or ſchiſme, be termed
ſinnes of infirmitie or frailtie, but of malice. For no man
can be an Infidell, heretick, or ſchiſmatick, without obſtinacie
and pertinacity of will, which cannot be called frailtie.
Therefore may a Catholicke commit of frailty any ſin that
an Infidell, hereticke, or Schiſmaticke committeth: remaining
ſtill a reſolute catholick. And this we ſee daily by experience,
all Catholicks being not ſaints. See therefore vvhat

learning fa: Parſons dropped out heere, and what ſtore of
wiſedome hee ſhewed in contradicting ſo manifeſt a truth.
Now will I leaue the Reader duly to conſider, whether our
follies in relating ſuch things as heere, and in the firſt chapter
fa: Parſons obiecteth, being vrged thereto vpon neceſſity, in
defence of our innocencie, be greater, or his, in cunning iugling,
and ſhifting, alwaies flying the true and reall poynt of
controuerſie, and carping at by-matters, and for his aduantage
reporting our words, and ſpeeches falſly, and otherwiſe
then they were deliuered by vs. Whereby we haue been enforced
(as you ſee) to take him tripping, to his eternall diſgrace
(if he haue any grace left) which we had not done, if
his ouermuch boldneſſe had not made him run himſelfe out
of breath, forgetting all truth, honeſtie, and ſinceritie.
            
            
               An aunſwer to the third 
                     •••
                  pter, concerning our pretended follie,
and preſumptuous ſpirit, in making to ur ſelues ſuch
aduerſaries as we doe.
               IN father Parſons handling of this chapter, I cannot but
wonder at his exceeding ouerſight, in that he admiring ſo
greatly our follies, would ſo palpably diſcouer his owne.
For what man I beſeech you of wit or vnderſtanding,
would vrge the contradicting of our Archpriests vniuſt oppreſſions;
our exclaming againſt the Ieſuits vncharitable
courſes againſt our ſelues, and condemning their vnnaturall
practiſes againſt their prince, and ſtate; our reſiſting of the
King of Spaines attempts againſt our Country, our diſplaying
the cruelty of Spaniſh Souldiers, & the tyrannie of their
gouernment, to auert the minds of all naturall Engliſh men,
from all vaine, and mad expectations of any good, by their
inuaſions; as fooliſh occaſions giuen by vs, to make to our
ſelues enemies of our Archp: the Ieſuits, and the King of
Spaine? What great potent perſon is Ma. Blackwell, in the
world, that he may not be contradicted, when hee doth amiſſe?
Is it lawfull to reſiſt, and appeale from a Biſhop, an
Archbiſhop, a Patriarch, and is it not lawfull to appeale from
an Archpriest? Muſt iuſtice be afraid of bugges? If any irreuerent

ſpeeches haue beene vttered, where they ſhould not
haue beene, we are ſorry for it; and let your payment made
to the full, in the ſame kind cancell ours. But otherwiſe for
our proceedings againſt Ma: Blackwell our Archpriest, wee
doe, and will defend them; and you in all your diſcourſe in
his behalfe, ſeeme to draw more from vs vnto him, then euer
was due to any ſubordinate Superiour in the world, vnleſſe
you would put infallibility in euery gouernour, without the
which, no ſuch bands can be, but that iuſt exceptions may
be taken againſt them; and appeales there-vpon framed, &
proſecuted, as you ſee in our caſe is admitted. Concerning
your potent order; ſuch vizards are for children, and temporiſers,
and not for men of our profeſſion: who ſhould in
euery cauſe preferre iuſtice, and right, before potencie, and
might. We know many in your order, to be apt to remember
old quarells, and to pay home when aduantage, & time
ſerueth, and we looke for no other at your hands. But what
then? Shall we therefore deſiſt to proſecute iuſtice, and hinder
your exorbitant endeuours? Shall I hold my tongue, becauſe
Fa: Parſons may worke me a ſhrewd turne, if I come
into Spaine or Italy? No, no, non confundar pro anima mea,
dicere verum; I will (God willing) vtter nothing but truth,
and neceſſary truth, and that ſhall out; let Fa: Parſons threat,
what he can. And touching the Spaniards, they are profeſſed
enemies to our Prince, and Country, and ſeeke nothing
more, then our ſubuerſions. As they are Cath: in Chriſtian
charity we wil loue them; but as enemies to our Country, we
contemne them, and will with our bloods reſiſt them. And
(as I ſuppoſe) we haue not onely right ſo to doe in reſpect
of our Countries defence, but alſo iure gentium, in that they
were the firſt breakers of the league betwixt vs, and them, as
by their attempt in Ireland, in the yeere 1579▪ may appeare;
to omit the plot of Robert Rodulphi, ſome yeeres before. But
in this Fa: Parſons plainly diſcouereth his loue, and affection
towards his Country, and what a treacherous minde he carieth
towards his true, and naturall Prince: in that he ſeeketh
to draw her naturall ſubiects, to keepe amity, and beare affection
towards her profeſſed aduerſarie, and the onely enemie

of our Country: Howſoeuer falſe harted he be, yet was
it a point of exceeding great folly for him, ſo openly to diſcouer
the ſame, that now no man of wit or diſcretion, and loue
to his Prince, and Country (which euery naturall borne Engliſh,
is bound to haue) can iudge other of him, then as a
profeſſed enemie vnto them both.
               And touching the Colledges, and Penſions that are maintained,
and giuen by the Spaniard (which he ſo oft inculcateth)
we no whit thanke him for them, as things are handled,
and occaſions thereby miniſtred of our greater perſecution
at home, by reaſon of Fa: Parſons trecherous practiſes, thereby
to promote the Spaniards tytle for our Country; and his
hatefull ſtratagems with ſuch ſcholers, as are there brought
vp: enforcing them to ſubſcribe to blanks, and by publike
Orations, to fortifie the ſaid wreſted tytle of the Infanta:
which courſes cannot, but repay vs with double iniuries, and
wrongs, for the benefits receaued. If they had been ſincerelie
giuen vs for Gods cauſe, without any ſuch vniuſt conditions;
we ſhould haue cauſe to thank him, and euer pray for
his regall proſperity. But being otherwiſe (as we haue ſaid)
we cannot thinke it a poynt of ingratitude, not to reſpect his
liberality therein. And whereas Fa: Parſons in the 31 page,
laboureth to perſwade vs, that the King of Spaines intentions
againſt our Country, were principally for the aduauncement
of Cath: Religion; and that he neuer meant, or pretended
in his life any temporall intereſt for himſelfe, to the
crowne of England: he both iugleth with vs, and alſo ſpeaketh
againſt his owne knowledge, and conſcience. Firſt, he
iugleth by a notable equiuocation, in that he ſayeth, he neuer
pretended intereſt for himſelfe, to the crowne of England,
becauſe forſooth he meant it for his daughter the Infanta; a
prety ſhift to play bo-peepe with. I pray you what eaſe
ſhould haue come more to vs▪ by pretending it for his daughter,
then if he had pretended it for himſelfe? And as touching
his intention principally (as you ſay) for Religion: did
not you Fa: Parſons affirme to diuers Scholers in Spaine,
(who are yet ready to iuſtifie the ſame againſt you) that if the
Duke de Medina had preuailed in 88. he had made no regard

of Cath: and that the ſtate of our Country was not knowne
vnto the Spaniards, before you came to Spaine, and made
them there-with acquainted: and that it was Gods doing to
preuent that attempt, for our Countries good? Haue not
you deliuered the like ſpeeches to the ſame effect ſince to diuers
Scholers in Rome? Did not Fa: Southwell comming ouer
to Wiſbich, vſe the like ſpeeches there of that attempt?
Haue not our Scholers in Spaine diuers times heard the religious
Preachers in open pulpit condemne their intentions, as
not principally for Gods cauſe, but for ambition, & the like.
How can you then aſſure vs of his principall intention for
Religion? Haue not you in the hearing of diuers Scholers
vſed theſe ſpeeches, in talking of the Spaniards attempts againſt
our Country, viz: It is no matter, let them alone, when
they haue once ſubdued our Country, and ſetled the ſame, we will
quickly thrust them out againe. A prety perſwaſion to children;
but ſottiſh, and ridiculous in the eares of wiſe men.
Yet did it ſhew your great regard eyther to one thing or other,
ſo you might draw all to your deſire. You haue certainlie
a very factious braine: and ſo that you may ſet men together
by the eares, you care not. But to leaue theſe Spaniſh
intentions, let vs proceede with you to other matters.
               From the Archpriest, Ieſuits, & king of Spaine, he cōmeth
vnto the Popes, and fourthly hee reckoneth that wee ſhould
haue abuſed his holines that now raigneth, whom wee haue
made (as he ſaith) our aduerſarie. And why forſooth? Becauſe
we did not admit the Archpriest at his firſt inſtitution
by the Card: protectors letters: and that we affirmed, that a
Breve might be procured out of ſome office, without his holines
knowledge: and that wee ſaid our two meſſengers, Ma.
Doctor Biſhop, and Ma. Charnocke, were ill handled by Fa:
Parſons procurement in Rome: and that his holines, beeing
moued by the French Embaſſador, or Agent, was once determined
to heare our ſaid two Agents, but afterwards diſſwaded
by the Spaniſh Embaſſadour, and other meanes
wrought by fa: Parſons. Theſe forſooth are the great matters
that haue made his holines our aduerſary: which things
becauſe they are childiſh obiections, and meere Pageants of

folly in fa: Parſons, ſcanned & anſwered, and iuſtified ſo oft
in our ſeueral writings, I wil omit to be wrapped vp amongſt
other his follies.
               But concerning the other three Popes, viz. Pius Quintus,
Gregory the 13. and Sixtus quintus, whoſe actions againſt our
Country, by the inducements principally of the Ieſuits, and
ſuch like, wee both diſlike, and wiſh neuer had beene: I ſee
no how he can draw vs to any inconuenience in the vvorld,
vnleſſe it be vnlawfull to diſlike any particuler action done
by any Pope. For otherwiſe I am ſure, that by thoſe actions
came no good, but much hurt: and I aſſure my ſelfe, that if
the aforeſaid Popes had foreſeene the inconueniences, that
haue enſued ſuch actions, they would neuer haue been drawn
thereto. But they were deceiued & ſeduced by diuers, Stukeley,
the Ieſuits, and the Spaniard, who ſhould haue been named
firſt, as beeing the firſt and the laſt, in plotting of all
miſchiefes againſt our country. Neither is it ſtrange to haue
Popes drawne to inconuenient courſes by the aduiſe & coū
                  ſell
of others. For in theſe matters they are but as other princes,
depending vppon theyr counſell and aduiſe which may
erre: as in the attempt of Paule the 4. againſt Naples. But it
may be lawfull for the Ieſuits to tax Popes actions in higher
points a great deale, without danger, and yet we may not ſay
this, or that particuler fact in a Pope, had beene better omitted.
               What folly, if not inſolencie, is this? Did not the Ieſuits
generally condemne Sixtus quintus, and publiquely one of
them preach againſt him in Spaine, becauſe hee would haue
changed theyr name to Ignatians, after the manner of other
religious orders, taking their name of their firſt founder: and
haue brought them to the Quire. And for his dealing in the
behalfe of the King of Fraunce that now is; did they not ſay
that his holines, Clement the eyght erred in abſoluing the ſaid
King of Fraunce, beeing therein deceiued by his Diuines?
Theſe are matters of a little more conſequence, then our diſlikes
of particuler actions againſt our country, or reſiſting a
Cardinalls Letter. Yet ours argueth great folly, and muſt
needes procure the Popes to be our enemies: & theirs great

wiſedome, meriting much at the Popes hands for their good
ſeruice done therein. What is this but to arrogate infallibilitie
to theyr proceedings, and to draw all ſtates, Popes, and
Princes, both to be directed and ruled by them? But by the
way, I may not omit his cunning leauing out of halfe a ſentence
in the 52.Imp. P: 40. page, where relating our wordes out of the
Important conſiderations, which are theſe; If the Pope had neuer
beene vrged by them to haue thrust the King of Spaine into that
barbarous action against our Realme: hee leaueth out the firſt
halfe, and citeth them thus: If the Pope had not thrust the king
of Spaine, &c. which maketh the ſentence to ſound more odious
againſt the Pope, as proceeding of his owne proper motion,
and deſire of our Countries ouerthrow, where by our
words we ſhew him to haue beene induced, and vrged therto
by others, as indeede he was: but Fa: Parſons will neuer
leaue his old tricks of iugling.
               From theſe higher powers of Popes, by one ſtep vp, and
another downe, he commeth vnto the greater part in Wiſbich,
which (he ſaith) we make our enemies, and he noteth
30. well neere of them, and but ſeauen or eight of ours:
whereas when theſe contentions began in Wiſbich, and during
their moſt aboade there, the number was not of ſuch
inequallity, as he telleth you there; being 13. on the vnited
part, and 19. on the other, and no more. How they may be
increaſed, or diminiſhed, ſince the end of thoſe ſtirres, by
new miſſions from other priſons, importeth little to the purpoſe.
Yet we aſſure our ſelues, and know it to be true, that
neceſſity forceth ſome to hang on their ſleeues there, leaſt otherwiſe
they ſhould ſtarue in priſon, by the vncharitable
ſubtraction of exhibition, cauſed by the Ieſuits, as all men
know.
               But to come neerer to the purpoſe: Be the number more,
or leſſe, what folly, I pray you, is it in proſecuting of a iuſt
cauſe, to make a few prieſts in priſon our aduerſaries? Indeede
if the cauſe were euill, I would hold with Fa: Parſons,
that we ought to haue reſpected the grauity, and merits of ſo
many Confeſſours in priſon, together with the iniuſtice of
the cauſe by vs taken in hand, but ſeeing our cauſe is iuſt, and

moſt iuſt (as in the chiefeſt point of the Archpriest, and
matter of ſchiſme already is euident, and in the reſt (I doubt
not) will proue in the end) what ouer-ſight was it by ſuch
honeſt, and lawfull meanes, to procure their enmitie, if they
will thereby make themſelues vniuſtly our enemies, or aduerſaries.
Marie ſaith Fa: Parſons, becauſe theirs being the
greater part in that houſe, euery man of iudgement conſidering
the odds, and differences of theſe two parts, to wit, the
number, and qualitie of each ſide, will eaſily incline to giue
ſentence againſt them. To this wee ſay, that euery man that
taketh father Parſons courſes, and regardeth multitude, and
ſtrength more then equitie and iuſtice, will eaſily condemne
indeed the leſſer part: but euery wiſe, and honeſt man, vvill
looke into the cauſe, and not to the number, or outward faire
ſhew of the perſons, which often deceaueth the vulger ſort,
but neuer any diſcreet indifferent perſon, not caried away
with partialitie.
               And as for the cōmendations of fa: Weston, they had been
better out of another mans mouth then fa: Parſons, and wee
haue ſufficiently ſpoken thereof in the firſt chapter. But touching
Ma. Pond, wee can better commend his conſtancie in
religion, and durance, then his diſcretion in his particuler actions;
which we will omit, not indeed intending the diſgrace
of any, rather attributing ſuch things to a defect in nature,
then otherwiſe: though I muſt needes tell Ma: Parſons, that
hee taſteth too too much of ſpight and mallice, in diſgracing

                     •
                  oure reuerend and worthy men our friends; to wit, firſt Ma:
Doctor Bagſhaw, whom in diſdaine he calleth a Doctor of his
owne procuring, without licence of his Superiour. Whereas
all men know there is no other licence required in taking degree
in ſchooles, but ſufficiencie in the party proceeding,
which (all the world knoweth) was more in him, then any
Ieſuit that euer came into England, and approbation of
the Vniuerſitie, where he taketh degree, which hee had with
great applauſe. See whether this ſauoured not of malice againſt
the Doctor in particuler, making him further the Author
of all contention, becauſe he oppoſed himſelfe to theyr
ambitious deſires; and charging him with expulſion out of

the Romane Colledge, which is moſt falſe, and that he was
of an vnquiet ſpirit there. All theſe obiections proceed of an
old grudge, without any iot of veritie.
               The Rector Alphonſo Agazara, that then ruled the Colledge,
betwixt whom and the ſcholers was difference, was
then thruſt out for his troubleſome, & vnquiet gouernment,
and vniuſt dealings againſt the ſcholers, as is well knowne to
all that liued then in Rome. You may find more of this matter
in Ma. Doctor Bagſhawes aunſwer to the Apologie, ioyned
with Doctor Ely his notes.
               The ſecond perſon whom hee ſo much diſgraceth, is Ma:
Bluet, a man of great grauitie, and for his long ſufferance, the
moſt worthy Confeſſor of our Nation: and whoſe perſon,
and cariage hath been ſuch, as thereby he hath beene, and is
venerable in the ſight of all men, euen amongſt the Proteſtants.
And as touching his hauing once beene a Miniſter, it
is a lewd obiection againſt him, no more derogating from his
vertues, and good parts, then S. Auguſtines, beeing once a
Manichè, derogated from his authority, and ſanctity, vvhen
afterwards he was Biſhop of Hippo. Who knoweth not that
diuers worthy men of our Nation haue beene Miniſters, and
yet doubtleſſe are, whom we hope to ſee vnited with vs in the
body of the Cath: Church? Haue not diuers beene called
from the very Altars of Idols to become Chriſtians, yea and
prieſts to; and will you ſay that the office of the Miniſtrie is
more diſgracefull, then the office of Idolaters? But this ſtill
ſheweth a ſpice of too too much malice.
               The other two reuerend prieſts, are Ma. Champney, and
Ma. Barnbe, whoſe parts, and vertues are knowne to be ſuch,
as all the enuy in fa: Parſons cannot impeach. Ma. Bluet and
Ma. Champney are now in Rome, if any iuſt exceptions could
be made againſt them, were it to touch their liues, I think fa:
Parſons would vrge it againſt them. But all that hee, or any
other ſaith to diſcredite them, is vntrue, and fained of purpoſe,
to keepe theyr ignorant affected heere at home in iealouſies,
blinding them with muddy miſts of detractions, that
men ſhould not ſee into theyr owne ſleights and deceits, and
diſcouer theyr bad proceedings in theſe affaires.
               
                  
The next ranke of the enemies wee haue procured (as hee
ſayth) is Doctor Saunders, Ma. Moreton, Doctor Web: and
Cardinall Allen: and with theſe he ioyneth Doctor Stappleton,
Doctor Bristow, Ma. George Martin, and Ma. William
Reynolds. It is a world to ſee how this man ſhuffleth and cutteth,
to draw all famous men to be fauourers of his fond and
fooliſh courſes, & by conſequence aduerſaries to vs; of ſome
of which it was neuer heard, that euer they medled in any
matter concerning ſtate. And if euer they did (which to vs is
vnknowne, & as we thinke to the world) wee would as vvell
diſlike of them therein, as we do with all actions of that quality,
proceede they from whom they will. Yet is not this to
condemne or diſgrace the men (as we haue ſaid) or to make
them iuſtly our enemies, no more then to diſlike the fact of
S. Cyprian in rebaptization, is to procure S. Cyprian our enemie:
but rather the contrary, to procure theyr amity, & greater
loue, (if duly and iuſtly they conſider it, ſpeaking of ſuch
as are yet liuing) in that hereby we giue them ſufficient light,
to ſee the errors of ſuch proceedings, and what harme hath
come to Gods cauſe by ſuch attempts. Into which the worthy
Cardinall Allen looking more narrowly, ſaw right well,
and therefore deteſted ſuch proceedings in his latter dayes, as
you may ſee more plainly in Ma. Charles Pagets aunſwer for
himſelfe,I note the ſuſpitious deaths of theſe two prelats, not as accuſing him therewith, leauing it to Gods iudgment, but becauſe he maketh no conſcience what ſuſpitions he caſteth out of others. in the end of Doctor Elyes booke againſt the Apologie:
where alſo you may perceiue, how farre hee was from
ioyning with fa: Parſons, or fauouring his proceedings, whō
he held for a man of a violent, and headlong ſpirit, and much
complained thereof. And if it had ſo pleaſed God that hee
had liued, fa: Parſons would haue found, that hee had diſliked
his courſes, and would haue curbed him for them. But
hee liued not, and ſome ſay his death was not without ſuſpition.
It is certaine that whilſt he liued, fa: Parſons kept himſelfe
aloofe in Spaine: but after his death, hee haſtened him
as ſoone as hee could conueniently to Rome. Where after
the ſaid Cardinals death, and the death of the worthy Biſhop
of Caſſana, which was by flat poyſon, (as many affirme) hee
raigned like a little King. But God that throweth downe the
higheſt Ceder tree, would haue things fall out as they haue

done: that his pride, and ambition might be ſeene, and his
ſecret, vniuſt, vncharitable, and diſloyall facts, wherein hee
hath long ſteeped his practiſing fingers, to the oppreſſion of
many innocents, and encreaſe of our domeſticall afflictions,
might be ſeene on all ſides, to his ſpeedy humiliation (which
God graunt) or his euerlaſting infamie, which I wiſh he may
by iuſt ſatisfaction in true humility auoyde.
               But to come 
                     〈◊〉
                   our purpoſe, for the facts of Doctor Saunders,
they haue beene ſufficiently both in the firſt chap: and
Important conſiderations proued to haue beene vniuſtifiable,
and it little importeth, whether he did thruſt himſelfe into
the Iriſh matters, or was commaunded thereto (as Father
Parſons affirmeth, which yet wee beleeue not) the action it
ſelfe being vnnaturall, and therefore not falling vnder commaund,
and much leſſe to him being a prieſt. Neither was
he forced to iuſtifie the action of the nobles in the Northern
commotion, or to defend any ſuch courſes, as he did, which
no way were conuenient; and therefore let Fa: Parſons hold
his babble, vnleſſe he will ſtill diſcouer more his treacherous
will towards his Prince, and Country, to make himſelfe more
hated of both, which neede not, his deſerts haue beene ſo
good. As for the action of Doctor Web, and Ma: Morton,
it was an inconſiderate, and vnaduiſed act, irritating the
Queene, and ſtate, without any reaſon in the world. And
aſſuredly had Pius quintus ſeene the inconueniences thereof,
I aſſure my ſelfe he would haue kept in that Bull. But many
faire tales of great matters to be performed by the Nobles,
within the Realme, drew him thereto: as in like manner the
hopes of the Recouery of Ireland, buzzed into Pope Gregories
head by Stukley, prouoked him to the like attempts afterward.
Let any man of indifferencie iudge, whether wee
haue not cauſe to diſlike theſe courſe. But ſure I think Fa:
Parſons did long for a generall maſſacre of Cath: throughout
England, in that he would haue vs to iuſtifie theſe things,
and fauour ſtill his wicked plottings, and practiſings. As
concerning the booke ſet out in Card: Allens name in 88.
it is the terribleſt worke, that hath beene writ of that ſubiect,
and able to hang all the prieſts, and Cath: in England, if they

had but the leaſt finger in it, & yet this holy Fa: would haue
vs to iuſtifie it. If the worthy Card: did ſo much ouer-ſhoot
himſelfe, wee know it was much contrary to his hart, in his
latter dayes; and therefore are verily perſwaded (for diuers
reaſons) that the worke eyther wholy, or in the greateſt, and
worſt part thereof, proceeded from Fa: Parſons, vnder the
good Card: name; which made vs to impugne it, not as the
Card: worke, but as Fa: Parſons. And ſuch derogating
words, as are vſed againſt it, touch not the worthy Card: but
that vnworthy Ieſuit. Neither is it the Card: that is called by
the name of this Ieſuit; but Fa. Parſons, though he would fain
ſhift it off, to the Card. Touching the Card: booke againſt
Engliſh iuſtice, ſhewing that Cath: did truly ſuffer for Religion,
and were free from matters of treaſon, and treacherie,
and that prieſts were not ſent in, to deale in matters concerning
the ſtate, but Religion onely, is ſo little impugned by
vs, that euery where in all our writings, and in the Important
conſiderations it ſelfe, wee auerre, and defend the ſame in that
point. But to ſay that no Prieſt, Ieſuit, or other Cath: hath
practiſed againſt the ſacred perſon of our Soueraigne, and
quiet of her ſtate, as wel by their dealings within the Realme,
as by their procuring inuaſions, and laying the plots thereof
without the Realme; it were meere impudencie, and to denie
a verity as apparant, as the ſunne-ſhine at noone dayes, as
both by diuers publique conuictions thereof, and by books,
letters, and pamphlets written to that purpoſe may appeare;
and Fa: Southwell in his ſupplication in part confeſſeth as
much. Therefore theſe things being ſo euident, and publique,
as they be, wee doe no more, but ſeeke to cleare our
ſelues, and Cath: heereof, letting the burden light vpon ſome
particuler perſons, medlers in ſuch vndutifull actions, and
not vpon the whole innocent body of Prieſts, and Cath.
VVhich courſe how neceſſary it was for all Cath: in our
Country, let themſelues be Iudges, vnleſſe they would willingly
haue had their throats cut, or haue beene hanged for
other mens actions.
               In the taile of this Catalogue of our made enemies, Fa:
Parſons placeth himſelfe, as the chiefe of all the reſt, and I beleeue

him to be the chiefeſt, and onely, as the ſpring, & head,
from whom all our miſeries, and miſchiefes, both temporall,
and ſpirituall, in part, or whole, for many yeeres, did and ſtill
doe proceede, although he reckon vp a fardell of Fittons, in
his owne commendations, wondring from whence all theſe
imputations ſhould come, and that in all our bookes he can
find no one thing of ſubſtāce, that we haue againſt him. And
then he reckoneth mountaines of mighty great good things
done for vs, and many other matters, for the iuſtifying of
himſelfe. All which prayſes would haue ſounded far ſweeter
our of his neighbours mouth, then his owne, vnleſſe ſuch
neighbours were ſcant in thoſe coaſts. Firſt, he ſaith, his departure
out of England is highly iustified in the Apologie, that no
man without ſhame can obiect the ſame againe. For this Fitton,
reade Ma: Doctor Bagſhawes aunſwer to the Apologie, in
Ma. Doct: Elyes notes. Then he talketh of his ioyning with
Card: Allen in Flaunders, and Rome, for the promoting of the
Cath: cauſe in England. It ſeemeth he was an ill copeſmate;
for I am ſure Cardinall Allen quickly ſhot him off for a
wrangler. After this, he reckoneth his Seminaries in Spaine,
and Flaunders. A goodly broode; hee gaue vs a reward to
breake our heads, by his good deedes to bring men into treaſons
againſt their Prince, and Country, as is declared before,
and more appeared by his ſolliciting ſome of the Prieſts
brought vp there, to come in hoſtile manner againſt their
Country. So he dealt with Ma. Thomas Leake, and others:
and ſuch as refuſed, he fell out with them. Now he reckoneth
his comming backe to Rome, and ſauing of that Colledge;
but in very deede he was the deſtruction thereof, as
in the Hiſtory of that Colledge, at large you ſhall ſee. Yea, he
is ſo voyde of ſhame, that he is not afraid, to recount his procuring
of vs a Superiour the Archprieſt, (which with an impudentlye,
he ſaith, was our owne petition) as alſo his proceeding
with Ma. Doct: Biſhop, & Ma: Charnocke in Rome,
as great benefits vnto vs, and merits in himſelfe. Beleeue me,
when I read this, I was amazed with wondering at this mans
brazen viſage. Neuer did I in my life (I proteſt) reade, or
heare ſo notorious wickednes, and iniuſtice, ſo impudently

recounted for iuſt: nay, and which is more, for benefits vnto
vs, and meritorious in himſelfe. Ieſu whether wil this man
goe, or what wil he not iuſtifie and commend? Doth not all
our little world know, that the erecting of the Archpriest,
was the cauſe of all our diſſenſions? How then was hee procured
at our owne petition? Did not Ma. Standiſh moſt falſly
by his meanes, ſuggeſt vnto the Pope in our names a deſire
of ſuch a thing, wee neuer dreaming thereof? Did any one
prieſt in England, ſend his hand, or conſent with Ma. Standiſh
to ſollicite any ſuch matter? Were not the Ieſuits conſtrained,
cunningly to extort Ratihabitions from the prieſts
themſelues, by ſubſcriptions vnto a congratulatory letter, after
that they had by forgery erected him, and ſaw him impugned?
Diabolus est mendax, et pater eius, God ſend father
Parſons more ſhame, more honeſty, and more truth. Pardon
my plainenes curteous Reader, for the matter is moſt palpably
groſſe, and ſuch as I thought could neuer haue proceeded
from a Chriſtian, much leſſe a religious man.
               And for the vſage of our two Agents in Rome, the heauens
themſelues cry out againſt his barbarouſnes therein. Euen
ſome of his owne faction, yea, and as we haue heard, him
ſelfe hath ſince wiſhed he had not dealt ſo with them. Reade
what is written of this matter in the copies of diſcourſes, in the
cenſure vpon fa: Parſons letter, in Ma. Doctor Biſhop his letter
to fa: Parſons there, and in Ma. Doctor Elyes aunſwer to the
Apologie. After theſe notorious vntruths poured forth, hee
bringeth yet another ranck, to wit, ſuch as haue died Martyrs,
whom he ſaith we condemne as traytors, and there hee
calleth vs in doubt of betraying our brethren, and thereby
making of Martyrs. But I wonder not now at any thing he
ſaith, for I well ſee he hath wholy giuen himſelfe ouer to the
trade of Fittening; with the which it ſeemeth hee hath made
ſale of his conſcience: how could he els call vs into queſtion
for ſuch bloody practiſes, in whom he neuer ſaw the leaſt inclination
to ſuch villanies. Which of the Ieſuits hath hetherto
been in danger of apprehenſion by our meanes, and yet
wee know all, or moſt of theyr reſidences in England, and
theyr walkes? I am ſure he will ſay, that if we were ſo lewdly

diſpoſed, we would begin with them firſt. What malignant
ſpirit is this in him, to call our names in queſtion for ſuch
treacheries? And touching ſuch as haue died in theſe times,
in whom ſuch practiſes haue not beene found, wee defend
them for true Martyrs, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer imputation
of treaſon layd vpon them by any. But others vvhich
haue been tainted heerewith, whether prieſts or Ieſuits, vvee
cannot ſo affirme of them: but leaue them to Gods mercie,
(as Ma: Ballard amongſt the prieſts) and this is defended euen
in the booke of Important conſiderations.
               
               Now concerning Ma: Sherwin: his words, or deferring to
aunſwer, are not brought in, to derogate from his martyrdome
(as fa: Parſons falſely gathered,) but to ſhew, what iealouſies
ſuch doubtfull ſpeeches, or refuſing to ſpeake directly,
did put into the Queene, or States heads, of generall concurrence
in thoſe matters of ſtate againſt them. Which made
them more earneſt in their proceedings, for feare of afterclaps,
as not knowing at that time, the difference betvvixt
the affections of the Seculer prieſts, and the Ieſuits towards
theyr country. It is euident, that in the beginning ſome were
ſcrupulous concerning Pius quintus his Bull, which might
make Ma. Sherwin to deſire, that the queſtions propounded
vnto him, might not be vrged. Neither doth the ſtory written
by Cardinall Allen proue, that in his priuate examinations,
he made no ſuch aunſwer; for hee had not the Regiſter
of theyr examinations, but by relation, in which that might
be omitted.
               Nor doth it follow, that if he had ſaid thoſe words, they
would haue beene vrged at the barre, or execution. For that
euery thing, ſpoken in euery priuate examination, is not produced
alwaies at the barre: and whether it was or no, I know
not. But ſure I am, that ſuch delayings of aunſwers in that
caſe, concerning the excommunication, and the Popes inuading
vnder pretence of religion, did much irritate the State. Yet doe
wee not thereby condemne them, as not Martyrs, (as moſt
falſly Ma. Parſons accuſeth vs) neither is there any word in
our Treatiſe to that effect. And therefore hee might vvith
more charity a great deale haue denied, that wee rather imputed

thoſe taciturnities, and ambiguous aunſwers, vnto
ſcrupuloſitie, and feare, what they might doe in ſuch caſes (as
doubtleſſe it was) then to any inward trecherous affections
towards their Prince & country. And for Ma. Haywoods forbidding
of acta Martyrum, they that informed it, will auouch
it in place and time conuenient.
               Touching his running vppon deſigned Martyrs, it might
pleaſe him to remember, that there is a little difference betweene
a man deſigned for a Cardinall in his owne conceit,
and our brethren that are in priſon, ſubiect by the lawes of
the Realme euery day to be put to death. But to ſatisfie the
good father, let him know, that for the name hee ſo playeth
with, it is not arrogated, by any impriſoned, to themſelues,
but attributed to them by theyr brethren abroad, as an vſuall
name to conſtant Confeſſors in priſon. S. Cyprian, whom
he ſo much citeth about that phraſe, calleth ſuch, not only deſigned
Martyrs, but Martyrs indeede. And the Church celebrateth
ſome for Martyrs, that neuer ſhed theyr blood, but
onely died in priſon.
               For his vaunting of Martyrs that fauoured his faction and
proceedings, where one hath liked them, of ſuch as haue died
of late, I thinke 3. haue diſliked, and diſclaimed them. Witneſſe
Ma. Fran: Iones, Ma: Iohn Pibuſh, Ma. Barkworth, and
diuers others I could name if I were diſpoſed. Concerning
Cardinall Baronius, that hee ſhould terme our brethren refractarij,
I verily think he abuſeth him, and that the wiſedom
of that man would neuer vtter ſuch words of men, addreſſed
vnto Chriſtes vineard.
               But I may not omit the aduantage Fa: Parſons taketh at
our ſaying, that ſome of our brethren, were ſometimes as forward
in liking ſome courſes taken, and in pittying the caſes of ſuch
as iustly felt the ſmart thereof, as at the Northerne, or Iriſh attempts
heretofore &c. Howſoeuer Father Parſons liſt to wreſt
this ſaying, it doth ſhew as much as before I haue ſayd, of the
Martyrs aunſwers: that our ignorance in ſuch affaires vvas
great, and therefore not to be imputed, as we hope to them
it is not. But ſeeing and knowing, what now we ſee & know,
no ignorance can excuſe vs, if we diſclaime not. Matters were

then caried vnder a maske of zeale, and religion, and the verities
of plots and treaſons were vnſeene of vs; who euer deteſted
diſloialty. But theyr actions haue been ſince ſo open,
that we could not but ſee, that religious pretences, were but
fayre ſhewes to colour foule matters, which wee deteſt and
hate, as no whit proportionable to religious, or prieſtly vocation.
               And to conclude this chapter of aduerſaries, with father
Parſons, I wonder that for ſhame he could note the Duke of
Norfolke, as though any loyall perſon of the houſe of Arundell,
hauing wit, or diſcretion, could be agreeued with vs, for
deteſting the diſloyaltie of the Duke. I aſſure my ſelfe it is deteſted,
and hated of all the honourable generation of that
lyne. For will any man loue the ſinne, or iniquity of any perſon,
becauſe the ſaid perſon was his kinſman or parent? what
a ridiculous imagination were this?
               And as for our asking, what the ſtate will thinke of ſuch
prieſtes as come from the Seminaries heereafter, it is not (as
maliciouſly this Calumniator commenteth) that we will doe
theyr errands before they come; but in reſpect of his trecherous,
and trayterous dealings with them in the Spaniſh Seminaries,
to draw them to treaſonable actions: who now hauing
got the gouernment, and managing of Rome, Doway,
and all, may worke the like in thoſe Colledges; ſo that no
place ſhall be free from ſuſpicion to our ſtate, of ſuch practiſes
againſt them. And thus we will end this Chapter, praying
to GOD to forgiue all Calumniators, and draw them
to more charitable courſes, and then ſhall it be happy for
Father Parſons.
               
            
            
               
               An aunſwer to the fourth Chapter, concerning our pretended
folly, in vttering open and manifeſt vntruths, and contradictions
to our owne diſcredit.
               IT is a common practiſe amongſt men, that meddle in
broken matters, and ſuch as will not abide the touch (eſpecially
if they be cunning, and of wit and pollicie that meddle
therein) to ſeeke helps by ſhifts, circumſtances, and
by-matters, (and thoſe leſſe to the purpoſe, when they are
preſſed, or called in queſtion) for ſuch euill or vnlawfull affaires;
that thereby they may giue ſome glozing ſhew, and
appearance vnto the world of innocencie, to iuſtifie their bad
and corrupt dealing. And euen ſo fareth it heere with Fa:
Parſons, who being taken tardy in his vndutifull dealings,
and vniuſt practiſing againſt his naturall Prince, and Country,
with ſuch euidencie, and apparant facts, that conuince
his guilty behauiour therein; to colour, and hide theſe his
foule faults, and make ſome ſhew of innocencie he flieth to
by-matters, taking hold of ſuch things, as are of leaſt importance,
alwayes flying, and ſhuffling, when hee commeth to
the poynt that toucheth, and ſubſtance indeede of the accuſation.
For whereas both he, and ſome of his aſſociates, are in
particuler accuſed, as dealers in ſtate matters, and practiſers
againſt their Country, and ſome plots, ſtratagems, and deuiſes
of his, and theirs, and ſpecified particulerly; hee ſhuffeleth
them off in haſt, as though he were afraid much to meddle
with them, onely ſnatching at ſome circumſtances now
and then, he leaueth the matter vnſatisfied, or fully aunſwered.
As where it is auerred in the Important conſiderations,
that we thinke in our conſciences, they haue beene instruments,
and meddlers in all things which haue beene intended against her
Maiestie: heere he keepeth great reuell, and maketh ſuch a
ſtirre, that he runneth ouer all the attempts, that were practiſed
before their entrance into England, to ſhew that there
were matters attempted before they came hither, or any Engliſh
Ieſuit was in authority. Which aſſertion being auerred,
but opinatiuely, as that we think, they haue had their fingers

in all matters, not abſolutly auouching the ſame, is not a ſubſtantiall
accuſation, but a thing left in doubt, and ſuſpence,
as all matters vnder opinion are. And therefore that was but
a by-matter, in reſpect of the reall facts, and attempts layd to
their charge afterwards; yet ſhall you finde, that he vſeth the
canuaſing of theſe by-matters, to diſcredit all other reall accuſations,
and to make himſelfe, and his aſſociates, to ſeeme
innocent in all t
                     •
                  e reſt. But this cunning muſt not ſerue his
turne, we will p
                     ••
                  inly let you ſee, wherein they haue directly
offended in theſe kinds of dealing; that they ſhall neuer be
able to denie the ſame, with any ſhew of probability. And for
diuers of the former deuiſes, we will giue you ſome reaſons,
and probabilities, that induced vs to thinke, that their heads
haue beene hammering in all the reſt.
               Firſt, for his euaſion in matters attempted before their entrance
into England, or that any Engliſh Ieſuit was in credit,
it doth not follow, that therefore no Ieſuits had their fingers
in ſuch attempts. Were there not Ieſuits of other Countries
to ſtep into ſuch actions? In the action of Parry, you ſhall
finde there were. Secondly, was not Fa: Darbiſhire a Ieſuit,
long before the Engliſh Ieſuits came into England? And I
haue heard men, that knew him very well, affirme that hee
was a great medler many yeeres agoe in ſuch affaires. Might
he not then haue his fingers in the French matters, concerning
the Duke of Guiſe, and Queene of Scots? Some will affirme,
that he was an abetter therein. Thirdly, were not the
Ieſuits from the beginning, great with the Spaniards, whoſe
fingers haue beene almoſt in all matters, as that of the Duke
of Norfolke, that of Ireland, and diuers others? Is it not ſomwhat
probable by this, that the Ieſuits might be Counſellers,
or abetters in theſe affaires, being men of ſuch ſtirring ſpirits,
and ſo forward to put themſelues into Princes matters,
and dealings of ſtate? VVere they not likewiſe very great
with Pope Gregory the thirteenth, their greateſt benefactour,
and moſt affectionate vnto their order of all Popes? Might
they not then be of counſell in Stukleys intention for Ireland?
Are not theſe great probabilities to induce men to think, they
haue beene hammering from the beginning; hauing had

ſuch faire offers, and ſo fit oportunities, and themſelues being
ſo ready, and deſirous to deale in ſuch kinde of affaires,
as all the world ſeeth, both by experience, of Fraunce, England,
Ireland, and other places? Iudge by this, whether the
aſſertion in the Important conſiderations, that wee thinke they
haue beene instruments, and dealers in all practiſes from the beginning,
against our Prince, be ſo voyd of reaſon, or probabilities,
as Fa: Parſons would make you beleeue: or whether it
be malice in vs to ſuſpect the worſt, vppon ſuch probable
grounds againſt ſuch men, whom we know to be ſetled enemies
againſt our Prince, and Countries ſafety; as Fa: Parſons,
and ſome other Ieſuits are, and euer haue beene, as by
the practiſes following, you ſhall euidently ſee, if you be not
ouer blind, with affection towards them; with which no
man of wiſedome in matters apparent, will ſuffer himſelfe to
be ſeduced. If you will excuſe their intentions vpon affection,
be it at your pleaſures: but denie not, that the ſunne is
vp, when it is noone, for ſo I ſhall think you to be eyther too
much affectionate, or ſtarke blind. But what if Fa: Parſons
haue falſified both our words, and our meaning? In deede
he hath ſo done, very notoriouſly. For page 14. of his book,
where wee ſeemed to aſcribe all the ſaid miſchiefes to our
Engliſh Ieſuits: wee did preſently preuent this cauill, by a
parentheſis, in theſe words: Wee meane both them, and others
of that ſocietie, with ſome of their adherents. Now this plaine
fellow, leauing out this parentheſis, runneth ryot ridiculouſly
with open mouth againſt vs. In deede the parentheſis was
left out by negligence afterwards, page, 24. which was not
greatly materiall, it being apparant, that wee aſcribed all the
treacheries, and treaſons we there ſpake of, not onely to the
Ieſuits, but likewiſe to ſome of their good friends, that were
then Ieſuited in thoſe deſperate deſignments.
               But now let vs come to particulers, ſince their comming
into England, which was in the yeere 1580. And firſt, we
will begin with William Parryes action, which happened in
the yeere 1584. his araignment was the xxv. of Februarie,
and his execution, the ſecond of March following. This
William Parry departing England in the ſecond yeere, after

the entrance of the Ieſuits, (as appeareth by his examinations,
araignment, and letters writ with his owne hand vpon
record, conferred in Venice with a Ieſuit, named Benedetto
Palmio, of the hard ſtate of England, concerning Cath: and
by him was reſolued, that he might lay violent hands vpon
her Maieſtie, and commended in that reſolution, and encouraged
there-vnto. Cōming afterwards to Lyons in Fraunce,
and communicating the ſame againe, with ſome of the Ieſuits
there, he was alſo reſolued in diuers points. And vppon
theſe practiſes after his returne into England, being attached,
arraigned, conuinced, & condemned, he confeſſed the whole
matter at his arraignment, and by letters writ with his owne
hand. Now let the world iudge by this, whether the Ieſuits
haue not medled in matters concerning her Maieſties perſon,
and ſtate. This fact of Parry, Fa: Parſons ſhuffles off
with asking, whether it was by the plotting of any Engliſh
Ieſuit, not daring, to aske the queſtion of Ieſuits in generall,
becauſe he knew them to be guilty therein; yet ſo hanſomly
was the queſtion demaunded, with a clearing of himſelfe afterwards,
by Parries confeſſion, that you would haue ſworn
(I dare ſay) that no Ieſuit had intermedled in that action. See
by this (as at the beginning I told you) how he faſtneth vppon
circumſtances of Engliſh Ieſuits, ſhuffling of the ſubſtantiall
accuſation, that the Ieſuits practiſed with Parry in
that action. Neither was it ſaid in the Important conſiderations,
that Parry dealt, or plotted with Engliſh Ieſuits, but with
the Ieſuits. Nor that we thinke Engliſh Ieſuits to haue had
their fingers in all matters, but the Ieſuits in generall, or ſome
other infected with Ieſuitiſme, and their practiſes. And that
Fa: Parſons had not his hand in this matter, was not for want
of will (as may be preſumed by other actions ſince,) or that
he could not talke with the ſaid Parry in Paris (as he ſaith,)
but becauſe Parry refuſed to conferre with him, as you may
ſee by his confeſſion, euen as Fa: Parſons hath ſet it downe.
But by his leaue, I ſmell a Rat. Shall we thinke that any Ieſuit
in Paris, would haue dealt with Parry, Fa: Parſons being
then in the Citty, but that he would firſt haue acquainted
him there-with? Are Ieſuits ſo ſparing, to impart ſuch matters

one to another? It is well knowne they are not. Beſides,
is it likely that any man would haue offered, that Fa: Parſons
ſhould haue conferred with Parry, to haue confirmed him
in his moſt villanous plot, except hee firſt had knowne his
minde, and that hee was ready for ſuch a helliſh conference?
Shrug & ſhufflle good father Parſons as you liſt: I feare that
all the water in the Thames, will not waſh you cleane from
this ſo barbarous a deſignement.
               Now will we come to Frauncis Throgmorton, the next after
Parry, (though fa: Parſons prepoſterouſly putteth him in
the firſt place) for hee was conuicted the 21 of May following.
Firſt his practiſes were all communicated and plotted,
with Bernardino Mendoza the Spaniſh Embaſſador, wholie
Ieſuited, if not a Ieſuit, and therefore it was not like, that theſe
things ſhould paſſe without their knowledge, priuitie, and
conſent. Beſides, the plot was about one, and the ſame matter
with that of Parries, eſpecially concerning the Queene of
Scots, in which (as I haue ſhewed) they were practizers. Add
to this Mendoza his words, concerning fa: Parſons going to
Rome about the matter, and that the Spaniard, & the Duke
of Guiſe, were partners in theſe plots, with both whom (all
men know) the Ieſuits were very great.
               As for Mopp, alias Spring, whom he ſaith to be Ma. Charles
Paget, Ma. Thomas Morgan cleered him by letters to Francis
Throgmorton, frō dealing to moue any man in this attempt:
but that he came onely to view the country. By which it ſeemeth
altogether fained by fa: Parſons, that hee ſhould deale
with the Earle of North: and Ma. Shelley, whereby followed,
(as hee ſaith) their ouerthrow. But in this I leaue the farther
aunſwer to Ma. Charles Paget himſelfe: aſſuring my ſelfe,
that he is abuſed heerein: although whatſoeuer hee dealt in
this affaire, or any other, that might be preiudiciall to her
Maieſtie, or ſtate, (if he haue dealt in any) it ſeemeth to haue
been by the Ieſuits perſwaſions, as you may ſee by his anſwer
to the Apologie: where he hath theſe wordes: If I had dealt
(ſaith he) in any matter of practiſe for our country beſides you, (as
I neuer did) but that you were the inuenters of the ſame, and the
perſwaders of me therunto (the more vnfortunate that I had ſuch

directors.) By which words you may ſee, that if Ma. Charles
Paget were any dealer in this matter of Throgmorton, hee was
vrged thereunto by the Ieſuits. So that fa: Parſons bringing in
Ma. Paget, muſt of neceſſity bring in himſelfe, or other Ieſuits.
Add alſo vnto this, that Sir Frauncis Inglefield, had been
vrging Ma. Throgmorton for almoſt two yeeres together vnto
this plot, as by his confeſſion appeareth: & all men know
that Sir Frauncis Inglefield was wholy at the Ieſuits deuotion.
And fa: Parſons in the firſt chapter of his Apologie, the third
leafe confeſſeth, that this Sir Frauncis Inglefield and hee, were
ioyned in the affaires of our Country: by which it is more
then probable, that fa: Parſons was a dealer in this action
likewiſe.
               As touching the Earle of Northum: all the probability we
haue that fa: Parſons was a ſtickler therein, or ſome other Ieſuits,
is this; that in the Romane Colledge, before diuers of
the ſtudents there, hee could deliuer the plot, and euery circumſtance
thereof ſo exactly, that all men which heard him,
adiudged him to haue beene in the very boſome of that deſignement.
In which diſcourſe, he deliuered ſome particulers:
as that it was plotted, that the Earles ſonne ſhould trauaile
vpon licence out of England, and comming into Millaine,
ſhould haue been ſtaied (vnder I know not what pretences)
that thereby the Earle himſelfe might haue been leſſe ſuſpected
in England about his plot, and intentions. This fa: Parſons
deliuered there, (as diuers yet will witnes) which could
not but demonſtrate him to haue been inward with that plot,
in that alſo this intention concerning the Earles ſonne, vvas
vnknowne vnto the Queene and ſtate, (as I vnderſtand) vntill
by this his diſcourſe it was made publique. Note ſtill (gentle
Reader) how all circumſtances bring in the Ieſuits to be
acceſſary to all plots and deuiſes.
               As concerning the plot of Babington, and the other gentlemen,
it is not aſcribed vnto the Ieſuits directly, but onely alledged
as an vndutifull practiſe, and treacherous againſt her
Maieſtie and ſtate, by thoſe graceleſſe Ieſuited gentlemen,
whereby great hurt and preiudice aroſe vnto the Catholicks,
and catholicke cauſe in our Country. And (the matters beeing

ſo apparently treaſonable) fault is found with Ma. Southwell,
for that he excuſeth it in his ſupplication, going about
to lay all the blame thereof vppon the Secretary Sir Frauncis
Walſingham, as though he had beene the inuenter, and layer
of the plot, and perſwader, or drawer on of the Gentlemen
thereunto. Which is both falſe, and ridiculous to imagine,
that he durſt practiſe, in laying ſuch dangerous plots of ſtate
without her Maieſties priuitie, howſoeuer his intentions were
to breake the necke of all in the end, with the ouerthrowing
of the dealers therein. Neither could the Gentlemen be excuſed,
if he had been the firſt author and perſwader thereof,
for that no mans perſwaſion may excuſe an euill act, that in
it ſelfe is euill: for ſo might a man lay all his ſinnes perhaps
vpon the deuils backe. But howſoeuer Ma. Secretary Walſingham
entertained the plot, (after it was reuealed vnto him
by ſome of the confederates) to bring it vnto the ful perfection,
wherein perhaps he did more, then hee had thanks for
of her Maieſtie, yet can it not be denied, but that the plot, &
practiſe proceeded from themſelues, and theyr owne confederats,
and was by them really intended, as appeared manifeſtly
by theyr owne confeſſions. And therefore to be excuſed
afterwards by a Ieſuit, could not but yeeld ſuſpition vnto
her Maieſtie, and the ſtate, of hollow loyaltie in Catholicks
towards her: who would goe about to excuſe apparant treaſonable
practiſes againſt her perſon, thereby to perſwade her
ſubiects, and others, that ſuch as were iuſtly put to death for
theyr treaſons, were not guilty therein: but that they vvere
onely plots and inuentions of the ſtate themſelues, which is
to defame the publique iuſtice of a Prince: thē which a greater
wrong cannot be done, eſpecially when matters are apparant
to the contrary. And that this fact of Ma. Southwell
was iuſtly condemned, and diſalowed as inconuenient (to omit
iniuries to her Maieſtie and ſtate) the effects ſince haue
demonſtrated as much: the ſtate hauing been more exaſperated
there-with, then with any pamphlet writ theſe latter
yeeres:Collins. as hath appeared by the execution of three ſeuerall
perſons for onely medling therewith,Bullocks. and divulging it. Thus
you ſee,Ducket. that what hath been ſaid concerning Anthony Babingtons
                  
matter, hath beene ſpoken with great reaſon, and
moderation, without any accuſation at all of the Ieſuits therin,
but onely touching our diſlike of the excuſe of this foule
fact, afterwards made by Fa: Southwell, by which the inconueniencies
ſpecified aroſe, as all men will witnes. But ſith
Fa: Parſons is agreeued with that little, ſparingly ſet downe
in ſome fiue lines onely; he muſt giue vs leaue to deliuer you
ſome probabilities, where-vpon we could haue taxed them
with ſuſpition of dealing therein. The plot was but a continuance
(as it were) of Parryes deuiſe, and Throgmortons practiſes,
in which (as you haue ſeene) they and their fauourites
were Counſellers, perſwaders, and abetters, and therefore
not improbable, that they would proſecute the ſame, when
any opportunity ſhould be fitly offered; and a fitter thē this
(wherein ſo many reſolute Gentlemen were combined) they
could not haue. That the Ieſuits were not taxed of this, at
the arraignments of theſe Gentlemen, or accuſed by their
confeſſions, imports little. For you muſt know, that the Ieſuits
are wiſe,Their dealings in the affaires of our Archprieſt, vnder the name of the Prieſts themſelues, doth ſhew as much. and cunning politicians, and can tell how to
manage matters by ſecondary, or third meanes, lying aloofe
off themſelues, and being leaſt ſeene or ſuſpected, ſuch as
haue beene acquainted with their dealings know this, which
I ſay, not to be voyde of truth. Hauing then had ſome experience
in the faile of Parry his plot, and Throgmortons, in
which (eſpecially the firſt) they were neerely touched; it behoued
them to be more warie, and deale with more cunning,
and ſecrecie then they had done. That Fa: Parſons, Fa: Holt,
and Fa: Creſwell, were at Rome, and Naples, is little to the
purpoſe; the intercourſe of letters, and intelligences from
all places, being ſo ſpeedy, familier, and common with them,
whereſoeuer they remaine, as it is knowne to be.
               Beſides, at that time Fa: Darbiſhire lay in Fraunce, and (vnleſſe
I be deceaued) in Paris: a man fit (by the reports of men
of iudgement, to deale in ſuch affaires, and with cunning
enough. And to all this, the conference which Ma: Ballard
had with their moſt entirely Ieſuited friend Mendoza: and
the ſequell alſo of Fa: Southwells defence, or excuſe. This
haue we related, not to accuſe the Ieſuits directly with this

plot of Babington, and his confederates; but onely to ſhew
you that leſſe was ſaid thereof in the Important conſiderations,
then might haue beene, if the author had vttered thoſe matters,
of malice againſt the Ieſuits, as Fa: Parſons affirmeth.
Some thing further might be ſaid heereof, concerning Fa:
Weston (that worthy wight) his inward acquaintance, and
familiarity with Ma: Babington, that ſommer 
                     •
                  hat he was executed.
But thereof wee will be ſilent at this time: neyther
would I now haue made any mention of 
                     〈◊〉
                   but that I finde
our common aduerſaries to be acquainted with it. Now are
we come to Sir William Stanlyes yeelding vp of Dauentry,
condemned in the Important conſiderations, as a cauſe alſo of
exaſperating our Prince, and ſtate, againſt Cath: at home.
Father Parſons after his accuſtomed manner, carpeth at his
knighthood, giuen by Sir William Drury in Ireland, and not
by the Earle of Leiſter in Flaunders, which being a by-matter
from our purpoſe, little importeth, being that he receaued
that degree by her Maieſties authority: and therefore it
forced not by whoſe hands he receaued it. And for his holding
the towne in the right of her Highneſſe, or the right of
the States, it as little importeth, conſidering that he was put
in truſt with it by her Maieſtie, and vpon his alleageance to
her, ſhould haue diſcharged the truſt, and fidelity, repoſed
in him in that charge. To diſpute the caſe, whether hee
might in conſcience, or ought in danger of mortall ſinne, deliuer
vp the Towne to the King of Spaine, is not neceſſary
to our purpoſe: yet this I will ſay, that all which Fa: Parſons
hath ſaid in proofe thereof, is not worth a ruſh, vnleſſe hee
proue two points: firſt, that her Maieſtie is the perſon, that
hath giuen the firſt cauſe of breach of the league with the
Spaniards, which I think (if matters be well examined) will
proue contrary, as you may ſee by the attempts made by the
Spaniard, both ſecretly, and publiquely, againſt her Highneſſe,
and ſtate, before aleadged, nothing being attempted
by her againſt his Maieſtie of Spaine, or any his Countryes.
Which being true, then might ſhe iuſtly, and in conſcience,
iure gentium, make warre againſt him, win his Townes, and
Countries from him, and in right and iuſtice detaine them.

Secondly, he muſt proue that Sir William Stanley, knowing
in his conſcience, that ſhe had no iuſt cauſe of warre againſt
the Spaniard, (which I think he could not know) might deliuer
vp the ſaid Towne, without a greater miſchiefe to follow
vpon ſuch reſtitution: for a man is not bound to make
reſtitution of goods euill gotten, or poſſeſſed mala fide, when
without imminent danger of his owne, or other mens liues,
he cannot doe (as all Canoniſts will confeſſe) becauſe the
life of a man is dearer then goods, and the leſſe euill muſt be
preferred, before the greater. As for example, if I ſhould
haue vniuſtly taken away the weapons of another man, and
had beene malae fidei poſſeſſor: yet if I ſhould perceaue that
the true owner were paratus ad homicidium, and thereby eyther
my owne life, or others, might be endangered (if I
ſhould reſtore his weapons vnto him, which erſt I had taken
vniuſtly from him) in this caſe it is euident, that I were not
bound to make reſtitution, although I were (as I haue ſaid)
malae fidei poſſeſſor. So in this caſe of Sir William Stanleyes, if
greater miſchiefe might probably enſue thereof, then the deteyning
of the Towne could be, he was not bound thereto.
Which caſe Fa: Parſons hath not handled. Now will I
referre the cenſure to other men, whether greater euill did
not grow vnto our common cauſe in England, by this particuler
fact of Sir William Stanlies, in that the ſtate was thereby
exaſperated againſt all cath: for his fact, which great damage,
and common hurt of his Country-men, and Cath: he was in
charity bound more to regard, then the reſtitution of one
Towne to the Spaniard. And therefore waying, and conſidering
the auerſion, and alienation of our ſtate from Cath:
for ſuch facts as theſe, of Sir William, and the like: wee haue
often wiſhed, that if his conſcience had felt any touch, or
ſcruple concerning thoſe warres, he had otherwiſe quietly
left them off, or with-drawne himſelfe, without giuing any
ſuch open occaſion of complaint vnto the ſtate. But his not
onely deliuering vp of that Towne, but alſo ioyning himſelfe
with the Spaniard in field againſt his Soueraigne, and
Country, may not be approued by any good ſubiect. And
therfore I wiſh that ſo worthy a martiall man, had conuerted

his ſword againſt the Turke, or other common enemies, and
not againſt his owne Soueraigne, and Country, that by his
actions our Prince might haue had no iuſt cauſe to haue
beene offended with vs at home. Aliens and ſtrangers may
doe what they will, and wee yet remaine blameleſſe, if wee
haue no part with them, becauſe they are ſtrangers; but
when naturall ſubiects of our owne Country, and Cath: ſhal
in theſe iealous, and ſuſpicious times, practiſe or conuert
their weapons againſt their Prince, and Country: it cannot
but incenſe their wrath, and indignation againſt all Cath: at
home, as by experience we haue felt.
               Touching Fa: Parſons vrging of an Epiſtle writ by Card:
Allen, in defence hereof, what might be his reaſon, or whether
he did it of himſelfe, or vrged there-vnto, by reaſon of
the great expectance of the Spaniſh intention anno 1588.
immediatly following, (which we ſuſpect) I cannot tell: but
I wiſh with all my hart, it had beene vnwritten, conſidering
the little good hath come thereby. Neither is this to diſhonour
the worthy Card: (as Fa: Parſons would make it) but
contrariwiſe to ſhew our loue, and honour, we beare towards
him, in that we hartily wiſh ſuch ouer-ſights, or inconuenient
actions (as the beſt man in this life is not without imperfections,
nor the wiſeſt in his iudgement without errors) had
neuer proceeded from him. And whereas ſuch things (as
the book written in the yeere 1588. & this Epiſtle) are too
too euident, and publiquely knowne to our ſtate, and all men
elſe: we ſeeke to excuſe the ſame as much as in vs lyeth, that
the fault, or rather the errour, may by circumſtances ſeeme
more tolerable, which no man of wit or diſcretion, can deny
to be an euident demonſtration of our loue, and affections
towards him, as our deareſt, and worthieſt Father. Which
cannot be odious, and offenſiue in vs to our Prince, & ſtate,
as we truſt in that duty, and nature bindeth euery man extraordinarily
to loue their parents, and founders eyther naturall,
or ſpirituall. And therefore to excuſe them, is but a
ſhew of filiall loue, and affection; but obſtinatly to defend,
and maintaine that in a parent, which is no way approueable,
were meere ſycophancie, not loue, meere peeuiſhnes, not

any tolerable affection.
               Now come we to the great attempt made by the Spaniards
in the yeere 1588. out of which action Fa: Parſons exempteth
all Engliſh Ieſuits, becauſe (he ſaith) himſelfe, fa: Holt,
and fa: Creſwell, were then in Rome with Cardinall Allen:
and that no Engliſh Ieſuit at all was reſiding at that time, eyther
in Spaine, or in the Low-countries. But all this proueth
not, that therefore the Ieſuits had no part in this action. Neither
can it be probable to any man of iudgement, or vnderſtanding,
that the Ieſuits beeing ſo great with the King, and
ſo forward in attempts againſt our Country, hauing had
their fingers in matters precedent, (as you haue ſeene) would
now ſit ſtill, hauing ſo faire an offer made, and ſo good opportunity
to be dooing? I confeſſe that there was no great
reſpect made to the Engliſh beyond the Seas in that action,
(nor in any other of the Spaniards will be, if euer matters
come to iſſue) nor perhaps were the Engliſh Ieſuits called to
be counſellers therein, as ſince they haue beene, becauſe indeede
the Spaniard intended a moſt bloody conqueſt, and
tranſlation of our ſtate, and people. But to thinke that the
Ieſuits were not vrgers thereto, and ſetters forwards (to theyr
power) of that attempt, were to contradict all reaſon, and
probabilities. For firſt it is moſt certaine, that all the vvorld
had very admirable expectance of that army, and the Ieſuits
more then any. Secondly it is plaine by the Cardinals booke,
(if it were his) written as a preparatiue to that action, that hee
was made Cardinall of purpoſe for that exployt, & to haue
been ſent hether preſently vpon the Spaniards conqueſt. But
Father Parſons ſaith, that he laboured to ſet forwards at that
time the Cardinals preferment (if you wil belieue him) which
maketh it euident, á primo ad vltimum, that father Parſons was
a dealer in this action. Thirdly, it is alſo certaine, that the Ieſuits
in Rome, were great with the Spaniſh Embaſſador, liger
there, and had great recourſe vnto him, when the matter
was on foote. Doth not this then argue them to be concurrers
thereunto? Fourthly, it is likewiſe moſt true, that the
Engliſh Ieſuits in Rome, appropriated certaine pallaces in
London to themſelues, to fall vnto their lots (when this matter

was in handling) to wit Burley houſe, Bridewell, and an other,
which I haue forgot, making themſelues cockſure of
their already deuoured pray. This all the ſtudents that liued
in the Colledge at that time will witnes with me.
               Now would I demaund of you, what reaſons they might
haue to be their owne caruers, if they had not had ſome intereſt
in that affaire? Fiftly wee know, that they were more
forward in Rome, concerning this matter, then the Cardinall,
or any other, inſomuch as at the firſt newes of the Spaniards
comming downe into the narrow Seas, they vvould
haue had Te Deum ſung in the Colledge Church for ioy of
victory, if the Cardinall had not ſtaied it. Doth not this alſo
ſhew, that they were as farre in the matter as Card: Allen, or
any other? And to conclude, did not the poſting ouer of fa:
Parſons into Spaine, preſently after the ouerthrow of this armie,
for farther dealing with the Spaniard for the time to
come, and his better informations in Engliſh affaires, and fa:
Holt, poſting into the Low-countries for the like purpoſe, to
keepe the Spaniard ſtill in hope of future times, that this miſhap
might not with-draw him frō euer enterpriſing the like
afterwards, ſhew that they were dealers in the former: doubtleſſe
all theſe circumſtances cannot but ſufficiently prooue it
that they were, in the iudgement of wiſe men.
               Now, as touching the ſpeech of the Duke of Medina
Sidonia, wee haue already ſhewed out of Fa: Parſons ovvne
ſpeeches, that hee made no reſpect at all of Catholicks: neyther
knew hee (as Fa: Parſons ſaid) whether there were anie
Catholicks in England, or not.
               The next poynt brought in by Fa: Parſons, is the laſt Iriſh
attempt; but before wee ſay any thing to that, wee muſt put
his fatherhood in minde of his practiſes, concerning two other
preparations, wherein he cannot deny himſelfe to haue
beene not onely a dealer, but alſo the very chiefe and principall
actor? The firſt was that wherein Doctor Stillington &
ſome others got their death, which miſcaried by reaſon of the
ignorance of their Pilots, or rather by the prouiſion of God,
34. ſhyps beeing ſhiuered vpon theyr owne Bayes. If he denie
this, wee haue Ma. Thomas Leake a reuerend prieſt, and

others witnes thereto, with whom he dealt to goe in that Armie.
And becauſe Ma. Leake refuſed, he intreated him accordingly.
This preparation was intended (as thē was thought)
for Ireland. The ſecond preparation was ſom three or foure
yeeres after (if I be not deceiued) of which Fa: Parſons maketh
mention in a letter writ to Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert frō
Rome into Spaine, deſiring to heare of the ſucceſſe thereof,
ſaying withall, that they had little hope of that attempt at
Rome. This preparation (as I remember) was in the ſame
yeere that the Earle of Eſſex went vnto the Ilands: and it miſcaried
alſo by tempeſts. One of the ſhips (vnleſſe I be deceiued)
was driuen into an Hauen in South-wales.
               Theſe two preparations are ſo euident, to haue proceeded
with his concurrence, and cooperation, as he no way can
denie it without the note of impudencie, ſo many witneſſes
and his owne Letters, beeing in teſtimony againſt him. By
this you may ſee how fooliſh, falſe, and ridiculous that proteſtation
is, which he alleadgeth of Sir Frauncis Inglefield, &
Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert, (if any ſuch were) wherein they ſay,
that neuer any conqueſt was intended by the old King of
Spaine, nor by his Maieſtie that now raigneth. For I vvould
but aske Fa: Parſons to what end theſe preparations vvere?
whether they were to catch Butter-flies vppon the ſeas? I
think few men of vnderſtanding will think, that good King
Phillip meant to haue onely eſtabliſhed Catholicke religion
by force of Armes, and when he ſhould haue ſeene himſelfe
maiſter of the field, and Crowne, would depart quietly: leauing
all to our ſelues, as he found it. No, no, the ſweet Kingdome
of England, would haue been perhaps as precious vnto
him, as his beſt dominions in the world. No leſſe abſurd is
the proteſtation concerning Fa: Parſons, and Father Creſwell,
that they did neuer treat in their liues, nor conſent, that the
King of Spaine ſhould haue any temporall intereſt in the
Crowne of England: nor that the old King, or his Maieſtie
now raigning, euer intended any ſuch thing, but onelie the
good of Catholicks, and their eaſe. This is ſo friuolous, ſo
childiſh, and ſo ſenceleſſe a proteſtation, that I am aſhamed
to thinke of the folly thereof.
               
                  
What wiſe man will not laugh at Fa: Parſons, to heare him
in ſuch ſober proteſtation affirme, that hee neuer intended,
that the King of Spaine ſhould haue any temporall intereſt
to the Crowne of England, and yet by all his might & power
ſeeke to make him Maiſter thereof, by inuaſion and force of
armes; or that hee pretended nothing but the eaſe of Cath:
when hee ſought the cutting of their throats? Theſe are
ſtrange contrarieties, in words to proteſt our good, and in action
to ſeeke our liues. VVas the booke of Titles, (wherein
the Kings daughter, the Lady Infanta was intitled to all her
Maieſties Dominions) writ to no purpoſe, but to exerciſe
father Parſons wit? VVas it a vaine ſpeculation in the
ayre, without relation to effect or end? Or if it be a ſottiſh
dulneſſe for any man to thinke ſo, how then was there no
temporall intereſt ſought to the Crowne of England? But
becauſe the intereſt was layd vpon the Infanta, therefore belike
father Parſons thinketh all inconueniences & abſurdities
ſalued, and himſelfe excuſed. A ſimple ſhift to blind a buzzard.
As though the Infanta could get, or poſſeſſe the crown
of England, without aſmuch preiudice to our Country, as if
the King ſhould haue taken the right to himſelfe? Muſt they
not both come in by force of armes, & muſt not that be with
conqueſt & ſubuerſion of the ſtate, debaſing of all nobilitie,
and tranſlation of our Engliſh nation in the greateſt part?
Can we expect leſſe by a Spaniſh conqueſt, then wee found
by the Norman, in the Conquerer his daies? No certes. It wil
be farre worſe. Let any man but looke backe to thoſe times,
and ſee the miſeries and oppreſſions, that fell vpon the Engliſh,
with the ſlaughters, murders, and expulſions of all the
nobility almoſt, and gentry of the Realme; and doubtleſſe
he will deteſt the conceits of fa: Parſons herein, & hold him
for the moſt deadly enemie that the Engliſh nation hath this
day liuing.
               But to paſſe ouer this poynt, let vs now come to his excuſe,
concerning Iriſh matters: which is but a meere euaſion,
and to little purpoſe. For whether his finger were not in
the laſt practiſe (as may be ſomewhat probably coniectured,
by the former attempt for Ireland, in which he was an actor)

or whether it were not, it is euident that the Ieſuits were dealers
therein, and Ma. Archer an Iriſh Ieſuit, a chiefe moouer
thereto, as appeareth by Letters written by Don Iohn d'
Aquila, & intercepted by the Lord Deputie. There is a moſt
trayterous letter of his extant, which in time may come to
light. But ſhould I labour to light a candle at noone-tyde,
whoſe poſitions good Fa: are theſe? The Catholicks in Ireland,
may fauour the Earle of Tyrone in his warres, id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      magno
cum merito, et ſpe retributionis aeternae, and that with great merit,
and hope of eternall reward, ac ſi bellum contra Turcas gererent,
as though they warred againſt the Turks. 2. All
Catholicks doe ſinne mortally that take part with the Engliſh against
Tyrone, nec poſſunt aeternam ſalutem conſequi, and can
neither be ſaued, or abſolued from theyr ſinnes by any prieſt,
vnleſſe they repent and leaue the Engliſh. 3. Idem cenſendū
est. &c. They are in the ſame caſe that ſhall helpe the Engliſh with
any victuals, vel quid ſimile tribuunt, or any ſuch like thing. 4.
The most worthy Prince Hugh O Neale, and other Catholicks
of Ireland, that fight against the Queene, are nullo mod
                        •
                     , by no
construction Rebels.
               
               How ſay you Frier Robert, out of what forge came theſe
warlike engins? They were hammered in Salamanca the 7.
day of March, 1602. and are as you ſee red hot. But vvhat
Vulcan was the workman of them? You ſhall heare euerie
one of them ſpeake for themſelues. Sic ego. &c. So I Iohn de
Sequenza, profeſſor of Diuinitie in the Colledge of the ſocietie
of Ieſu, in the famous Vniuerſity of Salamanca, cenſeo, do
thinke. Idem conſeo ego, I Emanuell de Royas, profeſſor of Diuinitie
in the ſame Colledge of the ſocietie of Ieſu, am of the
ſame opinion. Et ego, &c. And I Iaſper de Mena, profeſſor
of Diuinitie, & of the ſacred Scripture in the ſame Colledge,
doe aſſent to theſe Fathers ſentence, tanquam omninò certae, as
to an aſſured truth. Ego, &c. I Peter Oſorio, Preacher in the
Colledge of the ſocietie of Ieſu, at Tire, am altogether in iudgment
with theſe Fathers. Now Fa: Parſons, ſpeake out man,
haue any of your company been practicioners in the treaſons
of Ireland? The Catholick Author of the Ieſuits Catechiſme,
telleth vs, that all the late rebellious treacheries, & murthers

he there mentioneth, were plotted & contriued in the Colledges
of the Ieſuits in Fraunce. And doe not theſe Ieſuiticall
profeſſors tell vs as much of their owne proceedings in
their Colledges of the ſocietie of Ieſu in Spaine, for our treaſons,
rebellions, and murthers in Ireland?
               May I be ſo bold as to imitate theſe Spaniſh Diuines ſtyle?
Ego F. B. doe profeſſe in the ſight of almigh
                     ••
                  e God, and to
the whole Catholicke Church, that I do veri
                     ••
                  e thinke in my
conſcience, the ſaid foure Propoſitions to be moſt falſe and
vnchriſtian: and that howſoeuer certaine Ieſuits and theyr
followers doe diſſemble, and equiuocate for the time vvith
ſome men heere in England, who ſhew too much weakenes
in beeing ſo greatly led by them, and what vaine, and childiſh
euaſions ſoeuer this foxed Father of ours deuiſeth to ſhift of
matters from himſelfe, and his ſocietie, not of Ieſu, in theſe
points, yet if euer they be able to procure another inuaſion,
or to ſtirre vp any Tyrone in England, theſe trayterous poſitions,
hatched in hell, will be againe reuiued amongſt vs by
them. If this concerne the ſtate to be conſidered of, it vvere
well it were looked into in time. I can be but ſory, that the
auncient Chriſtian faith and religion of Chriſt, ſhould thus
be ſcandalized by Machiauillians, vnder pretence of the bleſſed
name of Ieſu.
               
               As concerning Fa: Parſons letter to Fa: Holt here cited, out
of the which he onely noteth what pleaſeth himſelfe, but yet
in ſuch ſort, as if his wits were breeched▪ or that the man had
been building Caſtles in the ayre. In one part of that letter,
hee talketh of a Catholicke Prince to be thought of after her
Maieſties death, whether Spaniſh, Scottiſh, French, or other.
Is it not ſtrange that a Frier ſhould thus beſtir him? In any
wiſe mans iudgement, it includeth much folly, great ignorance,
no ſmall pride, and a world of factious garboyles, and
mutinies. His folly and pride appeare, in that hee will intermeddle
in matters ſo farre beioynd his reach, as though hee
could diſpoſe of kingdoms, and ſucceſſors to Crownes. We
ſhall ſure haue a Neuell, Earle of Warwick of him, to erect
and depoſe Kings at his pleaſure. His ignorance is alſo as manifeſt,
in that he is ſo ſimple as to thinke, that his plots or diſſignements

ſhall be like to take effect in thoſe times; or that
the Catholicks (if they would follow his Chimericall conceits)
ſhould be able to make a King at their pleaſures, and
diſpoſſeſſe the right ſucceſſors, or fruſtrate the deſignement
of the whole Common-wealth. And it is cleere that his hart
is poſſeſſed with a world of tumults, in that therby he would
make our cou
                     •••
                  y a perpetuall Campe of hoſtilitie. For doth
he thinke, that 
                     •
                  ny true Competitor will looſe his right for
his invaſions, or 
                     ••
                  at his Maieſtie, our neighbour Prince, will
ſit ſtil, while he createth Kings? Or that the Cōmonwealth,
will yeeld the diſpoſe of the ſcepter to his worſhips deſignement?
               See what blood-ſhed this fellow would draw vpon vs, with
his Machiauillian deuiſes, to the vtter ruine and ſubuerſion of
the whole. Beſides his folly, I ſay, which appeareth in this
letter (as himſelfe citeth it) and tendeth to the ruine of our
Country, and Common-wealth, as you ſee: wee haue noted
to him other Letters writ to Maſter Thomas Fitzharbert into
Spaine, concerning the Kings preparation againſt England:
which ſufficiently diſcouereth his affections towards his
Prince, and Country. And we can alledge his Letter, written
to the Earle of Angus the 24. of Ianuary, 1600. wherein
he confeſſeth, that he had laboured eyght or tenne yeeres for
his Maieſtie of Scotland, and the preferment of his title, with
the ſumme of twelue hundred Crownes a yeere for 2. yeeres
together from Spaine, which were as hee ſaith, disburſed in
the yeere 83. & 84. As alſo 4000. crownes, procured to the
ſame effect, from Pope Gregory the 13. by bill of exchange,
which he confeſſeth he brought to Paris, and there deliuered
it. And hee ſaith the ſame had continued, if any correſpondencie
of gratitude, or hope had continued from Scotland:
with no ſmall aſſurance of farre greater matters, & aduancement
to the Kings perſon, if the enemies ſince of both our
Realmes (as he ſaith) had not ouerthrowne, and altered that
courſe.
               This he hath in that Letter, and much more. Whereby
you may perceiue, what his practiſes haue been from time to
time, againſt her Maieſtie, and ſtate: ſeeking firſt (as you ſee)

by large penſions got from Spaine, to worke with the Scots,
and others, for the vntimely aduauncement of his title, which
muſt haue beene with the ouerthrow of her Maieſtie, or otherwiſe
(you know) it could not haue been. And here I requeſt
the Reader, to note theſe labours of father Parſons for
the affaires of Scotland, to haue beene in the yeeres 1583, &
1584, in which ſelfe ſame yeere, happened the trayterous
plots of Parry, Fran: Throgmorton, and the Earle of Northumberland,
and the practiſes with the Duke of Guiſe, Spaniard,
and other Engliſh abroad, about the deliuery of the Queene
of Scots, and ouerthrow of her Maieſtie, and ſhortly after the
treaſons of Babington, and his complices. Which I note, that
you may ſee how fa: Parſons courſes concurred at the ſame
inſtant with their attempts: and by this you may geſſe, whether
it be not more then probable, that hee was inward with
all thoſe deuiſes, & perhaps ſome of that mony was imploied
to the ſetting forward of thoſe attempts, though hee vvould
ſeeme cleere in all things. But it is Gods will, that his ovvne
Letters and writings, ſhould diſcouer his dealings. There
want not other Letters of his, and his complices, which ſhew
his good will towards our Soueraigne & country: but theſe
ſhall be ſufficient at this time.
               Now will we come to the obiections made againſt him,
concerning his intituling the Spaniards to the Kingdoms of
England, Fraunce, and Scotland, and of the Students ſubſcribing
in Spaine to the Lady Infanta her title, as alſo concerning
the Lord Dacres, and diuers of our nation, diſcredited by fa:
Parſons, to the loſſe of ſome of their liues, and laſtly of the
booke of Titles, or ſucceſſion: to all which wee will aunſwer
in order. To the firſt, of intituling the Spaniard vnto England,
Fraunce, and Scotland, it is plaine, & euident in it ſelfe,
that by intituling them to England, conſequently he intituled
them to Ireland, and all her Maieſties dominions, and to
Fraunce, becauſe of the right wee pretend to that Crowne.
Touching Scotland, it may follow by a ſequell of neighborhood:
becauſe (you know) the Spaniards creepe euer forwards,
louing rather to gaine by theyr neighbors an ell, then
loſe an inch. For by reaſon of the imminent danger of that

Crowne, and the rather, becauſe that King is a Competitor
to England, and therefore ſuſtayning great wrong by his inuading
of vs; would no doubt ſtirre and make warre againſt
him, which happily might occaſionate his ouerthrow, and
loſſe of that Kingdome likewiſe. So that fa: Parſons falſly intitling
the Spaniard vnto the Crowne of England, doth alſo
in effect, intitle him to Scotland likewiſe, in that hee could
not poſſeſſe the one quietly, without the other, conſidering
the wrong that of neceſſity muſt be done to the Scot, which
would make him ſtirre ſo long, as he were able to leauie but
a thouſand men, or procure ayde from neighbours adioyning.
I doe not take vppon mee to determine of any mans
right, or title, praying with my hart, that her Maieſtie may
long cōtinue amongſt vs: but do note in a word, what bloodie
miſchiefe fa: Parſons doth breathe out in his famous libell
of ſucceſſion.
               For the proofe of the ſecond obiection, of the ſchollers beeing
vrged to ſubſcribe to blankes, and to confirme the Infanta her
title to the Crowne of England, is a matter very notorious and
euident. VVee haue diuers prieſts yet aliue in England, to
confirme the ſame by othe, aſwell of them, that were inforced
to ſubſcribe againſt theyr wills, as others that openly refuſed
the ſame. I doe therefore wonder to ſee the mans vnſhamefaſt
deniall of ſo manifeſt and apparant a truth.
               As touching the fained matter of the Cardinalls deuiſe for
certaine courſes to be held in our country after her Maieſties
time, and his propoſing of the ſame to diuers, it is a moſt egregious
calumniation againſt the deceaſed Cardinall, & all
men may eaſily ſee it to be but a meere inuention of fa: Parſons,
in naming onely two perſons deceaſed, Sir Frauncis Inglefield,
and Doctor Stillington for witneſſe, knowing vvhat
proofe a dead witnes may carry, eyther in Court or country.
Beſides, there were diuers men of wealth of ou
                     •
                   nation, with
whom hee was as like, or more like to haue communicated
the ſame, as with the two dead perſons named, who for ought
I can learne, neuer heard of any ſuch ſpeeches from him.
Whereby you may ſee by whom the worthy Cardinall is diſgraced,
and diſhonoured now hee is dead, beeing by Father

                  Parſons drawne into all fooliſh, and fond deuiſes, as an actor
with ſo factious creatures, in matters by themſelues deuiſed.
But they which diſgraced him liuing in his latter dayes, will
not ſuffer him of likelihood to reſt quiet, now hee is dead.
Concerning his propoſing the booke of Tytles to haue been
reade, in the Refectory in Rome, in ſteed of a ſpirituall Lecture,
vſed to be reade at ſuch times: there be diuers yet that
will depoſe the ſame againſt him; and Ma: Lowbery now a
reuerend prieſt, was the man ſhould haue read the ſame, but
he reiected it, vtterly refuſing to meddle with ſuch ſtuffe.
To the third poynt concerning the L. Dacres vſage amongſt
them, we will referre the relation thereof to Ma: Charles Paget,
beſt acquainted there-with, who hath promiſed (if Fa:
Parſons ſurceaſe not) to diſcouer his vſage with others.
               To the fourth matter of diuers diſgraced by him, and his
complices; it would make a huge volume, to ſet downe the
particularities of euery one that hath beene abuſed by them
in this kind. And therefore we will reſerue it for a particuler
treatiſe of purpoſe▪ if occaſion inforce vs heereafter, to diſcouer
more at large their particuler dealings againſt particuler
men. Onely at this time I will note vnto you one or two
notable examples. The firſt ſhall be of Ma: Barkworth, now
I truſt in heauen. This Ma: Barkworth being a prieſt in the
Colledge of Vallidolid, was by the Ieſuits ſuſpected to be a
furtherer, and concurrer with certaine youths, that entred
into the order of S. Benedict. Whereof Fa: Parſons hauing
intelligence, did write to the Rector of that Colledge, that he
ſhould be diſmiſſed preſently, ſhewing in his letters ſome anger,
that he ſtayed ſo long. Where-vpon the Miniſter of the
Colledge came vnto him one morning (being ſicke of a feauer,
and not well recouered) and bad him to ariſe, and make
himſelfe ready to walke with him, ſaying, that it would be
wholſome for him to walke, and ſhake off his Feauer, and
not to yeeld thereto. When they were departed out of the
Engliſh Colledge, he led him into the Colledge of the Ieſuits,
and leauing him in a paued roome, he tooke occaſion to
depart from him, vpon ſome affaires, to ſpeake with one of
his fellow Ieſuits in that houſe. And comming back againe

vnto him, hee brought the Rector of the Ieſuits Colledge
with him: who entred into an inuectiue, and bitter diſcourſe
againſt him, and the concluſion was as followeth. He commaunded
him to put off his Scholers robes, to put on a ſute
of ragges (which they offered him) to depart the Colledge,
and Citty, and to ſhift for himſelfe; ſaying, that he was not
worthy to ſtay longer there, neither ſhould, and that for a
viaticum to helpe himſelfe in his trauaile, he ſhould not haue
ſo much as a Spaniſh reall, which is but ſixe pence Engliſh.
Ma: Barkworth perceauing their intentions, told them, that
he would not depart with ſuch diſgrace, hauing not offended;
in that if he had concurred with the fore-ſaid youths,
for their entrance into Religion, yet was it not ſuch a fault, as
could deſerue ſuch expulſion, their wills being not in his
power to rule or commaund. The Rector ſeeing he would
not diſpoile himſelfe, and put on thoſe ragges to depart, called
in certaine of his lay brethren, ſtrong fellowes, to deale
with him by violence, and to enforce him to change his habite.
Whereof two comming vnto him, catched him by the
legges, and pulling them from vnder him vpon a ſuddaine,
threw him backward flat vpon the pauement, with ſuch violence
(being then ſicke, and weake with a Feauer) that hee
was much bruſed there-with, and in a great maze preſently
vpon his fall, the reſt of the lay brethren apprehended ſome
a legge, ſome an arme, and ſo drew him into another roome
paued in like manner, as in thoſe hote Countries, all roomes
for the moſt part are. He being, as I ſay, thus amazed, and
perceauing them to pull, and hale him, fearing belike, that
they would murder him, vſed theſe words, but in the Spaniſh
tongue: What will you kill me? will you kill me? let me first confeſſe
me.
               
               When they had thus dragged him into the other roome,
with ſtrugling, and ſtriuing, he got vpon his feete. No ſooner
was hee vp, and recollected, but that one of them gaue
him ſuch a ſtroke with his firſt vpon the face, that hee felled
him down backward againe. With this blow he was ſo bruſed
in his face, that when he was cold, afterwards he was not
able to vtter his words, that one though neere him, might

well vnderſtand him, what he ſpake. Whilſt this was in hand,
and the Rector of the Ieſuits Colledge, and the Miniſter of
the Engliſh Colledge, Fa: Blackfan being ſpectatour of this
cruell, and inhumaine tragedy, in came a Spaniſh Ieſuit, of
a noble houſe in Spaine, and finding them in this ſort abuſing
ſo outragiouſly this prieſt, he reproued them for it; and
told them it would be a great ſhame vnto them, if the world
ſhould be witnes thereof. Heere-vpon they left off, and hauing
better bethought themſelues of this fact ſo outragiouſly
committed, they intreated him to keepe ſilence thereof, and
not to make the other Scholers acquainted heere-with, and
they would kindly intreate him heere-after: he ſhould haue
large faculties, a good viaticum, when he went for England,
and all the friendſhip they could ſhew him elſe. Heere-vnto
he ſeeming to yeeld, they priuily conuayed him backe to the
Engliſh Colledge, & brought him to a ſequeſtred chamber,
where he lay vntill his recouerie. But ſome of the Scholers,
that then were in the Colledge (as there were then not aboue
9. or 10. the reſt being ſent away to another place, for feare
of the plague at that time in the Citty) ſeeing him come in
all bruſed, began to ſuſpect ſome ill meaſure. So that notwithſtanding
their ſecret conuaying him into a ſequeſtred
chamber, they found him out, and reſorted vnto him; which
one of the Ieſuits perceauing, ſpake vnto them ſaying, Take
heede, come not neere him, for we verily think he hath the plague.
This ſpeech they gaue out to feare the Scholers from reſorting
vnto him, that they might not ſee, into what pleight they
had brought him. But for all they could doe, they could not
hinder them but that they would, & did ſee him. The Phyſician
being ſent for vnto him, and feeling of his pulſe, not
knowing what had happened, ſayd, that hee had ſuffered
great violence; by which you may geſſe, how ſtrangely hee
was handled in this combat. I know there be diuers, that wil
thinke this Hiſtory ſtrange, and incredible; but if it chaunce,
that Ma: Charles Paget doe but ſet downe the actions of Fa:
Holt, eſpecially concerning Ma: Godfray Foulgeam (the very
cauſe of whoſe death hee was) you ſhall ſee more ſtrange
matters then this. And for the proofe of this Hiſtory of

Ma: Barkworth, my ſelfe haue heard it related of three or
foure ſeuerall parties witnes thereof, and ſuch as deſire more
certainty heerein, I referre them vnto thoſe, that were then
in the Colledge of 
                     Ʋall
                        •
                     dolid, and ſaw him in this extremity,
and heard him afterwards deliuer the whole courſe of their
proceedings with him in the Ieſuits Colledge, as heere it is ſet
downe. Of which number ſome are prieſts, who haue vppon
their faith, and fidelity, deliuered the ſtory thus vnto me,
(as from his owne mouth) and their owne eyes being witnes
to part of it.
               Another example of their vncharitable dealing, was with
Ma: Fixar (one of the moſt famous men of our Nation, for
diuers good parts in him) whom firſt heere in England they
diſgraced, with the note of eſpiall moſt vniuſtly. And afterwards
he being in great credite in Liſbone in Portugale, with
the Biſhop (if I be not miſtaken) was by Fa: Parſons meanes
with-drawne thence vnder colour of greater preferment.
And when they had him thence into Spaine, they confined
him into an out place, with ſuch diſgraces, & diſguſts, that he
ſhortly died. Theſe two I thought good to ſet down, omitting
infinite more examples of his, and other Engliſh Ieſuits, their
vncharitable dealings againſt diuers, yea moſt part of our
Country-men, eſpecially the Gentlemen abroad in baniſhment.
Beleeue me, it were farre more eaſe, and tolerable for
any Cath: to liue at home, and endure the afflictions of our
Country for their conſciences, then to liue abroad in Spaine,
Italy, or the Low-countries, and to ſuffer that at the Ieſuits
hands, which I know diuers to haue done.
               To the fift and laſt point of accuſation, concerning the
booke of Succeſſion, put out in the name of one Dolman a
ſecular prieſt; whatſoeuer his friuolous excuſes may be of
vir dolorum, it may haue a fitter conſtruction from dolus, then
dolor, in that the whole worke is naught elſe, but a deceitfull
conference, and treatiſe, to bring an old rotten fayned title,
neuer dreamed of before this vir dolorum, coyned it out of a
whole Teſſaradecades of genealogies, and generations ſo long
agoe, that the very Iland it ſelfe might haue beene turned
topſey turuy, ſince the firſt ſpring or roote of that title; and

many a ſcore, yea hundreds yet aliue that doe ſtep before it.
And no leſſe a deceite it ſeemeth to be, that he would put it
forth in the name of a reuerend auncient Prieſt in England,
to bring him into danger for the ſame. Whereas he ſayeth,
that hee neuer knew Ma. Dolman, it is a manifeſt vntruth.
For he not onely knew him, but alſo knew him to be one of
the moſt principall prieſts of our Nation, both for the reuerence
of his yeeres, grauity, iudgement, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   good parts,
that hath alwayes oppoſed himſelfe againſte the vniuſt, and
exorbitant courſes of the Ieſuits, whereof 
                     〈◊〉
                  : Parſons hauing
ſuch continuall, and certaine informations of euery man in
particuler, and their affections, could not be ignorant, eſpecially
he being the onely man of reſpect, amongſt the chiefe
Cath: of account, in the Eaſt parts of England. And therefore
it may well be preſumed that this vir dolorum, as he calls
himſelfe, did dolo malo of purpoſe publiſh the ſame vnder his
name, thereby to doe him a good turne, if he could. Wee
know the Ieſuits charity towards their back-friends, and ſuch
as ſtand in their way. And whereas in diſgracefull ſort he
ſeemeth to excuſe him from ſuch an intention, becauſe forſooth
(as he ſayeth) Ma: Dolmans talent is knowne to be farre
inferiour to ſuch a labour: you may gather his loue, and affection
towards him, & how willing he is to doe him a good
turne, if it lay in his power. Wee can aſſure you that all that
know the man; and ſpeake not of him in ſpleene and hatred
(becauſe he is not a fauourer, but an aduerſarie to the Ieſuits
proceedings) cannot but confeſſe, that he is a man of excellent
good parts, and not inferiour to moſt of Fa: Parſons faction
in England: And therefore no vnlikely matter, that a
worthier peece of ſtuffe, then this Libell of Succeſſion, might
proceede from his endeuours, if hee would be ſo idle, as to
buſie himſelfe about ſuch vngratefull toyes.
               After theſe obiections Fa: Parſons by the miſtaking of a
word falſely printed, viz: greenewatt for greenecoate, of purpoſe
maketh himſelfe ignorant of the matter, which he knoweth
as well, as a begger knoweth his diſh. For he cannot
be ignorant of his owne ſpeeches deliuered in Greenecoate,
alias, Leisters Common-wealth; a booke written by himſelfe,

to the diſgrace of the late Earle of Leiſter. Wherein he ſayeth,
that difference in Religion (ſpeaking in the behalfe of
the Scottiſh tytle) ought to be no barre in the inheritance to
the Crowne. Thus you ſee him, like a weather-cocke, turning
euery way. But now he is become ſo religious, in the
behalfe of the Spaniard, that he will haue them all to goe together
by the eares, and one to cut anothers throat: yea, ſuffer
all the villa
                     •••
                  es, and miſerable oppreſſions in the world by
the Spaniard, 
                     ••
                  cauſe he is a Cath: rather then to admit of
the Scot for that 
                     〈◊〉
                   is not ſo, or of any other in his caſe; and
will needes haue all men bound, without all temporall reſpects
whatſoeuer, vnder payne of damnation to ſtriue to
bring in a Cath: Prince, againſt the true heire, and him that
hath the beſt title. Which generall propoſition how abſurd
it is, and againſt the very law of nature, we haue elſe where
ſhewed. For by the ſame reaſon were the Chriſtians bound,
being in great multitudes in the primitiue Church; yea, and
whole legions of them ſouldiers, and therefore in more likelyhood
to haue preuailed therein, then a few vnarmed Cath:
here in England, to haue ioyned their forces at euery change,
for the erecting of a Chriſtian Emperour: the ſame being a
thing of greater importance to Gods Church, then for any
King, or Prince of ſo ſmall an Iland to be a Catholike. Neither
can the difference of hereſie, and infidelity, the one being
a ſubiect to the Church, and the other none, much helpe
the matter, for your Emperours many times went by election,
and faction of the ſouldiers, and hee that could get the
force of the ſouldiers to proclaime him, and bring him in,
was the true Emperour, without reſpect of blood, kindred,
or linage: and therfore there was more reaſon for the Chriſtians
ſo to haue done at that time, then for Cath: in theſe.
But yet they held no forcible courſes, I meane the Chriſtians,
nor thought it lawfull ſo to doe.
               As concerning the letter to the Earle of Angus, we haue
already ſhewed ſufficient out of it to the ſame purpoſe, it was
cited in the Important conſiderations. The whole courſe of
the letter being ſomewhat long (after Fa: Parſons manner of
writing familiar Epiſtles,) is to no other end, then to ſhew

his diligence beſtowed 8. or 10. yeeres, for the King of
Scotland, his vntimely aduantage to the crowne of England.
And for the matter of the French Embaſſadors going to the
Pope, to procure audience for our firſt two meſſengers, Ma.
Doctor Biſhop, and Ma. Charnocke, he may aske Ma. Nicholas
Fitzherbert thereof. I doubt not, but hee can reſolue him
therein of the truth. Whether it was the French Embaſſador
or a Cardinall, it was an office agreeable to their humours &
dignitie. Neither is it to the purpoſe that the Duke of Ceſſa
laughed, or is fained to laugh by fa: Parſons, for all was but a
Spaniſh laughter, and ſo muſt be reputed nothing diſcrediting
any action of ours: vnleſſe he thinke geſtures & laughters,
can put vs like children out of countenaunce. But he is
much miſtaken: for if laughing will ſerue the turne, we can
laugh as faſt as either Fa: Parſons, or the Duke either: be it
ſpoken without touch to his degree, which wee reſpect in
him, and all perſons of Maieſtie, grace, or honour.
               VVe will heere omit the vſage of our two meſſengers, becauſe
elſe where wee haue ſpoken ſufficient thereof, but yet
he hath heaped vp ſuch a farthell of vntruths in the onely relating
of them, as that they were heard for three months together,
that they were not cast into priſon, that iustice by that action
was not violated. &c. that I am aſhamed to ſee ſuch palpable
vnſhamefaſtnes, not one word beeing true, as by our former
diſcourſe to his holines (where things muſt be fifted to their
verities) you may ſee: and alſo in the copies of diſcourſes. If
furthermore you pleaſe to read Ma. Doctor Biſhops aunſwer
to fa: Parſons letter, and the cenſure vpon the ſame, there you
ſhall find the ſtraightnes of their vſage, with a ſtrange impriſonment
vnder Fa: Parſons theyr Gayler, and that they were
neuer admitted to deale about their buſines, nor heard: but
onely once, beeing accuſed before the two Cardinalls. But
theſe are the ſtraynings and ouerſtraynings of fa: Parſons, to
defend his proceedings, which I told you of him in the preface.
For his queſtion, how the reſtraining of a couple of
prieſts may be both blaſpemie to the ſea Apoſtolick, and to
her Maieſtie, I aunſwere him that this is a forgery, and an impoſture
of his owne, and no ſuch coniunction made in the

Epiſtle by him cited. Onely it is there ſaid, that neither his
holines, nor any other competent Iudge, euer heard of the
coggery, preiudice, and blaſphemy done againſt the ſea Apoſtolicke,
and the ſacred Maieſtie of our Prince: not that
their impriſonment was either coggery, preiudice, or blaſphemy
to her Maieſtie, but that by their impriſonment, his
holines could not heare of their preiudiciall dealings againſt
our Prince and ſtate, nor of their coggery and blaſphemy againſt
the Sea Apoſtolicke, all Princes and Prelats in the
world, being in a ſort abuſed by ſuch dealings.
               As touching fa: Parſons returne into Spaine, whether by
Mendoza his commendations, or not (which little importeth)
we will omit, as not much to the purpoſe. All the world by
experience ſeeth, that his going thether, was not for any
good to our country, but to procure inuaſions, and to raiſe a
new bloodie title to the Crowne of England. I will note but
two circumſtances in this fathers diſcourſe of this matter, not
to be omitted: the firſt is, that no letter, or meſſage paſſed for
many yeeres together betweene Mendoza and him, to wit, after
the deſastrous affaire of Ballard, and Babbington. By this you
ſee that Letters, and meſſengers were wont to paſſe between
them before this deſaſtrous affaire: and ſo it is very probable,
that fa: Parſons was made acquainted with all thoſe practiſes,
wherein Mendoza had dealt, concerning Throgmorton & Babington,
by thoſe letters, and Meſſengers.
               The ſecond obſeruation is, that when Mendoza ſome
yeeres after returned to Madrill, there paſſed great expoſtulation
betweene them two, about that affaire of Babbington,
and ſome other ſuch matters. Wherein the ſaid Embaſſador
had beene thought to haue beene ouer-much ledde by
the forward men, and their mates. Doth not this ſhew firſt,
that Mendoza was a ſubiect to the Ieſuits by ſome hand or other;
or elſe, why ſhould Father Parſons a Ieſuit, expoſtulate
matters with a Duke, a Prince, & an Embaſſador to ſo great
a King? How durſt he otherwiſe haue noted by way of expoſtulation
(which ſheweth an authority) his beeing ouermuch
miſled by the forward men, which inſinuateth a diſlike
or checke, for following too much the aduiſe and directions

of ſuch men, blaming the manner, and circumſtances, but
not directly the matter. Doe not theſe circumſtances leaue
a ſuſpicion of Fa: Parſons conſent to that plot, though he diſliked
that Mendoza was ouermuch ledde therein by the forward
men. See how God will that father Parſons ſhould bewray
himſelfe.
            
            
               An aunſwer to the fift Chapter, concerning our pretended folly:
and malignant ſpirit, in obiecting certaine bookes to father
Parſons, which tend to his commendation, and of his confutation
of a little Treatiſe, in anſwer to his booke of Succeſſion.
               NOw are we come at length to the fift chap: of bookes
obiected to Fa: Parſons, which he will haue to increaſe his
credite. Of theſe bookes he citeth 4. in number vrged
by vs, to wit, Philopater, the ward word: the high counſell
of Reformation, or Memoriall, (as hee termeth it) and the
booke of Titles, or ſucceſſion to the Crowne. Theſe hee nameth,
but leaueth out the ſcurrilous pamphlets of Perneus and
Greene coate, or Leisters common-wealth, with ſuch other of
that rabble; full of exaſperations againſt the Queen & ſtate,
and very ſcandalous, as conteyning infamous ſlaunders againſt
both, and in particuler againſt ſome of the counſell:
which could not but giue occaſion to incenſe them (beeing
in power and authoritie) againſt all Catholicks, and prieſts in
England. And all England knoweth, that the booke againſt
the Earle of Leister, did mightily auert him from all Catholicks
in generall. But it is a true ſaying, which often I haue
heard ſpoken of father Parſons, that hee will rather loſe his
friend then his ieſt, & it is verified in all his proceedings. For
if once he apprehend a courſe, he wil thorow with it, though
all the world ſmart for it: of ſo violent, and pernicious, and
head-ſtrong a nature he is.
               But to come to the bookes which by himſelfe are cited. Of
the two firſt, viz. Philopater, and the Ward-word, he ſaith no
more, but that they be in defence of the Catholicke cauſe;
the firſt, againſt the rigorous Edict, the ſecond, againſt a

bloody-minded Knight. As for the firſt, it is full of moſt bitter
rayling, & arrogant exaſperations, as euery man that hath
read it can tell; beſides fooliſh ſcoffings againſt great perſons,
which no man of wiſedome and charitie would haue vſed
in theſe times, vnleſſe he had meant to whet a double edged
ſword to cut Catholicks throats. The ſecond was a fond
and fooliſh reuiuing of a dead matter, not worth a ruſh; no
man either thinking, or regarding the follies of ſuch a pamphlet.
But by his raking againe in the old forgotten dunghill,
he hath raiſed vp ſuch new ſtirres, and drawne ſuch perſons
into the matter, that (as euery man may ſee) the dead
matter is now new on foote, and aliue againe, and in a more
hurtfull ſort then before. Let him ſee what the Deane of
Exceter, Ma. Doctor Sutcliffe, hath written in aunſwer of his
Wardword, and iudge whether the wound be not worſe then
before. The Knights obſcure toy, no man regarded: but I
dare not ſay ſo of Ma. Doctor Sutcliffs booke. And this was
the wiſedom of this good Fa: in aunſwering the Watchword,
needes he muſt haue his ieſt, though it coſt him deere.
               As touching his third pamphlet of Reformation, it is a
world to ſee the pride of the man to take vpon him, to meddle
with all eſtates, and giue rules and directions, what muſt
be done, as well in the Court, as Country: Clergie, as Laïty.
And when, forſooth, muſt this be done? Mary when our
Country is reduced againe to Catholicke religion. But when
or how muſt that be, doe you know? Preſently forſooth
by a Spaniſh conqueſt. For you muſt vnderſtand, that this
worke was hatched about the ſame time, or immediatly after
the booke of Titles, if not before: ſo that you ſee the booke
of Succeſſion was for the conqueſt, and this for Reformation
to follow.
               What ſimplicity was it for a man of wit, or vnderſtanding,
to thinke that after a Spaniſh conqueſt, hee ſhould haue the
managing of matters for our Country, to preſcribe orders, &
lawes: as though the Spaniard would haue deliuered all matters
into Father Parſons hand, and hee muſt haue beene Lycurgus,
to direct all. Alas poore man, or rather mad man, how
great a conceit ſoeuer you haue of your ſelfe, and how much

ſo euer you preſume of your greatnes with the Spaniard, you
muſt giue me leaue to thinke, that when that time had come
(as God forbid it euer ſhould) Ma. Spaniard would haue as
little regard to Fa: Parſons, in thoſe affaires, as to any of vs. I
will omit his fond ſuppoſall of eaſie reformation: becauſe
both our Clergie, and Catholickes, hauing liued in perſecution all
this time, would willingly concurre to a holy and perfect reformation:
as who would ſay, that all difficulty in that point ſhould
remaine in the prieſts, and Catholickes of our owne nation,
and not rather in the Spaniards, who then muſt be our good
Maiſters, and of like, the greateſt number, at the leaſt in all
authorities, both in Court, & Country (as in conqueſts happeneth)
and all men know the Spaniards to be the moſt licentious
people in Europe: eſpecially the ſouldier.
               Where is now your ground (fa: Parſons,) of an eaſie reformation?
but commonly great folly, and blindnes followeth
pride, euen in the wiſeſt men. And if father Parſons ſay, that
this Treatiſe of Reformation, was not intended vppon any
conqueſt (although it is euident that it was) yet is it both fooliſh,
and arrogant: Fooliſh, in that hee buildeth Caſtles in the
ayre, knowing neither when, by whom, nor how the reduction
of our country ſhall happen, and therefore an hundreth
to one, that his fooliſh Chimeras will be either forgot, or cō
                  temned
when that time happeneth. Arrogant, in that thereby
he ſeemeth to think, that at ſuch times our coūtry ſhould
want men of wiſedome, or piety, or both, to ſee what will be
then conuenient, and put the ſame in execution, vnleſſe, he
preſcribe them before hand, & tell them what they muſt do.
But to open a little more in particuler his great folly heerein,
ſuch as haue read the ſaid Treatiſe, (beeing prieſts and men
of credite, vnto ſome of whom Fa: Parſons himſelfe ſhewed
the ſaid booke, as ſecretly as now it is kept) doe report that
his directions are, that the municipall lawes of our Country
ſhall be ſo altered, that the Ciuill lawes muſt beare the ſway.
And this is the more probable, becauſe hee ſhuffleth it of,
ſaying little or nothing to this obiection, nor bringing in one
word of the Memoriall in proofe hereof, or of the diſpoſition
of the Innes of Court, how they ſhould be imploied, though

he toucheth both, but ſo as if he were afraid to ſhew what he
hath written thereof for ſhame. For our Clergie alſo, they
ſay, that all men ſhould be put to penſions in the beginning:
and the Colledges both in Oxford and Cambridge, in the ſame
ſort depriued of theyr lands and reuenues, and becom penſioners.
And this hath beene maintained to my ſelfe by ſome
of his fauourites, as a thing neceſſary (with great vehemencie)
both for edification, as alſo the diſpoſing of the ouerplus
to other good vſes, in the behalfe of the Church.
And that which is ſayd heere to this purpoſe in excuſe hereof
is ſo little, and nothing at all of Colledges, that it is apparant
he was vnwilling to manifeſt his follies therein. VVhat
he ſayth of the King and Counſell, hee will not tell you, for
doubtleſſe it is good ſtuffe. Of the nobility hee leaueth out
what he hath ſaid concerning theyr pompe, traine, reuenues,
and diet: & concerning the inferiour nobility, (which is our
gentry) as Knights, Eſquires, and Gentlemen, he noteth her
Maieſtie indirectly with oppreſſion, and contempt thereof
to her diſhonour: which ſheweth his pride, and careleſſe cariage
towards all ſorts.
               Touching religious orders, (which hee noteth, as a member
of his diuiſion of the Clergie, in his Epiſtle,) he ſayth not
one word at all, but ſhuffleth it off as forgotten, becauſe therin
he ſhould haue diſcouered his loue and affection to all orders
of religious people, beſides his owne. All which orders;
(one order onely excepted) he excludeth out of England (as
they affirme) for the firſt ſeauen yeeres or more, that Maiſter
Ieſuits in the meane time might haue the ſway of all, and enter
into the houſes, liuings, and poſſeſſions of other religious
orders, if they could. Thus he ſhuffleth and cutteth, ſparing
no eſtate; and yet heere he citeth you ſome fragments of the
beſt ſtuffe he could picke out of that proude pamphlet, to
make you belieue that his indeuours therein, were holy, and
zealous, meerely for the good of Gods church, & his country.
Sometimes he calleth them excellent notes, and obſeruations,
and ſo proudly extolleth himſelfe therein, as he dareth
to affirme, (though like a ſtage-player he taketh vppon
him an other perſon then his owne) that the contradictors of

this his fantaſticall worke, haue neither vertue, nor ability to
imitate him. Certainly, the man hath a great conceite of his
owne dooings, and is too much ouercarried with partialitie,
and ouerweening of himſelfe. For otherwiſe, let any man of
iudgement and indifferencie duly weigh euen that, which he
hath cited himſelfe in the beſt manner out 
                     •
                  f the aforeſaide
Treatiſe, and hee will iudge it to be but p
                     •
                  oude and fooliſh
ſtuffe, and meere Chimericall conceits, 
                     •
                  owſoeuer they carry
a ſhew of religious reformation: for that ſome of them
are inconuenient, and all without his ſphere. But to leaue
theſe his fooliſh vanities, let vs ſee what hee ſayth in the behalfe
of his booke of Succeſſion.
               
               Firſt in excuſe thereof he ſayth, that it came forth, with the
conſent of Cardinall Allen, and his liking and approbation:
which we aſſure our ſelues to be a malicious calumniation of
the worthy Cardinall deceaſed. For is it like that hee, who ſo
mightily diſliked the Oration made by a young ſcholler in

                     Ʋalledolid, wherein the title and right of England, was offered
vp into the Kings hands, together with themſelues, and
theyr parents, is it like (I ſay) that he would approue this ſeditious
booke, wherein all right to the Crowne of our country,
is caſt vppon the Infanta of Spaine? Who in the world
will belieue this? But it is a faſhion with father Parſons, to father
his ſedicious practiſes, and fooliſh actions, vppon other
worthy men, & commonly ſuch as are dead, as you may ſee
by the multitude of dead mens Letters, cited in the Apologie.
Howſoeuer he would draw the Cardinall into this work,
wee knowe that his affection in his latter dayes, was not ſo
great towards him, as to concurre with him in any ſuch fond
intentions.
               Adde to this,Do: Cicill, Maister Wright. that Fa: Parſons hauing written this treatiſe,
and ſhewing the ſame to two reuerend prieſts, when it was
but in papers, one after another, both of them diſliking, and
diſſwading him from the publiſhing thereof, hee promiſed
that it ſhould not be printed. But you will eaſily think, that
if he had obtained the Cardinalls approbation, he would little
haue regarded their opinions, or promiſed to haue ſuppreſſed
it, as he did: but would quickly haue ſatisfied them

with his good liking, and applauſe. And where he ſaith that
ſome of our ſelues at the firſt ſhewed liking thereof: howſoeuer
ſome one or other not ſeeing into the drift of it, might
ignorantly like the diſcourſe: ſure I am that none of iudgement,
looking into it ſeriouſly, euer liked it. And I am ſure
that both my ſel
                     ••
                  , and diuers others of more experience vtterly
diſliked, and condemned it from the beginning, as diuers
know. But 
                     〈◊〉
                  : Parſons wiſe and graue iudgement, eſteemeth
our heads greene: and therefore he ſaith, we carpe
at that we vnderſtand not. Indeede it is to walke in a maze,
and a labyrinth of cares, to follow his turbulent braines, in all
his ſedicious intentions. And yet by his leaue, this was but a
proud ſpeech of his: for all the world knoweth, that ſome,
if not the moſt part of thoſe, who diſliked this his heraldrie,
were in learning his maiſters, and in knowledge of the ſtate
of our Country, (what was conuenient, or inconuenient,
pleaſing, or diſpleaſing, pacifiding, or irritating,) better informed
then himſelfe, as being men, who liued vnder the
burden of affliction, and were not fled the field, as hee was,
neither were their wits ſo weake, as not able to ſee Fa: Parſons
cunning ayme therein. Though like a Gipſey he play
at faſt and looſe: yet men, that are acquainted with his olde
tricks, can geſſe at his new fetches. But whereas he ſaith, that
as times ſtood when the booke was written, it was neceſſarie to handle
that matter of ſucceſſion to the crowne: and that the first book
is of ſuch waight, that it is an irreligious point for any Cath: to be
ignorant therein, concerning the matter of preferring a Cath:
Prince; for the which, no good Cath: can dispenſe with himſelfe,
vpon any humaine respect, or conſideration whatſoeuer.
               
               Theſe his aſſertions are ſo headlong, fond, and deſperate,
as I know not well, how to deale with him. As the times then
ſtoode, you ſay. Meane you Sir, as the times then ſtoode in
Spaine, or in England? If you were throughly preſſed, to
name vnto vs a fit time for xx. yeeres paſt at leaſt, when wee
might conueniently haue dealt heere with the point of Succeſſion,
I beleeue it would poſe you. Such are our lawes in
that behalfe, as ſilence in ſuch matters had beene much more
fit for you, that liue abroad; and leſſe dangerous to vs, who

are ſubiect to ſome ſtormes at home. You muſt therefore
needes haue relation to the times, as they ranne in Spaine.
And ſo wee haue deſcryed the traytour. After the repulſe
1588. this good Fa: haſtneth into Spaine: and finding no
likelyhoode, that the King would againe attempt the like
courſe againſt this Realme: he thought it was time to intitle
him to the Crowne, if ſo be hee might ſet a new edge to his
former deſire thereof. If I miſſe of your meaning, you may
expound your ſelfe heereafter. Next: you commend vnto
vs exceedingly, the firſt book of your treatiſe, like a very wiſe
and a modeſt man. But when I peruſed it, me thought, I
was reading all the while your Maiſter in that art Buchanan
the Scot his booke, de iure Regni apud Scotos: vnto whom
you are very much beholden. If any will take the paines to
reade them both; let him condemne me for a ſeducer, if I
haue abuſed him heerein. Their full ſcope is: how they may
ſet vp the people againſt their Soueraignes. Well, well, good
Fa: when people are thruſt into ſuch courſes, they are not
eaſily ſtayd: and you are but a ſimple man for all your ſtatizing,
if you know not, that popularity in the ciuill ſtate, doth
not well diſgeſt a Monarchie in the eccleſiaſticall. You tell
vs further, that it is an irreligious thing for any to be ignorant,
who ſhall ſucceede her Maieſtie: and therefore you
(forſooth) thought it time to teach them. But the time was,
when ſuch trayterous courſes were vtterly forbidden, & that
in Spaine it ſelfe, by the fift Counſell at Tolet, vnder paine
of excommunication. But I know your ſhift: you will tell
vs: that there was no feare then in Spaine, but that whoſoeuer
ſhould ſucceede, hee would be a Catholicke: which is
not ſo with vs now in England. And if not ſo with vs, how
then Father?
               It is true I confeſſe, that there is no competitor vnto the
Crowne of England, that is Catholicke, in whom any probabilitie
in the world of enioying the crowne can be imagined,
as all men know. But what then? Are Catholickes bound
without all humane reſpect, to diſpoſe themſelues for ſuch a
Competitor as muſt be a Catholicke? Againe, if Catholicks
would ſo diſpoſe themſelues, what probabilitie is there, that

they could direct, or make ſuch a King, beeing the weakeſt
and the deiecteſt number in our country, and are beſides deuided
in themſelues, through the Ieſuits honeſt practiſes, as
euery man ſeeth?
               And as touching the Infanta of Spaine, neither is ſhee a
Competitor, more thē euery gentleman in England, that can
any way deriue himſelfe from any noble houſe, that hath any
way matched in the blood royall, (as the moſt auncient
Gentlemens houſes in England haue done.) Neither is there
any probabilitie of her Obtayning the Scepter, vnleſſe we be
willing to become ſlaues to Spaniards, and aliens: as this vnnaturall
Engliſh Ieſuit would haue vs. Now in this caſe, as all
things ſtand with vs in England, I thinke there is no man of
iudgement, that is not Ieſuited, and ſo Hiſpanized, but vvill
ſay that wee are not bound to oppoſe our ſelues for a Catholicke
Prince.
               I might adde ſome other reaſons to this purpoſe: as that
we may not doe euill that good may come of it. The common
rule of iuſtice requireth, that euery man ſhould enioy
that, which by right and inheritance belongeth vnto him. In
auncienter times, obedient and dutifull Chriſtians, liuing vnder
Tyrants, prayed not onely for them, but for theyr chyldren,
that they might ſucceede theyr fathers in the Empire,
though they, theyr ſayd children (for ought the Chriſtians
knew) were like to proue no better then theyr Fathers. Wee
are to commit the cauſe to God, in whoſe hands the harts of
Princes are, and who doth make, and pull downe Kings at
his will, praying that whomſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe his diuine
prouidence, to inueſt with the Crowne and ſcepter of our
Country, hee will vouchſafe to incline his hart vnto the Catholicke
Romane religion and fauour of his Church. For
where in mans reaſon, no poſſibility of things are, they are alwaies
to be referred vnto Gods holy prouidence, and diſpoſition,
who worketh beyond mans expectation.
               
                  Beſides, the reaſons which the Councell of Toledo yeeldeth,
why it was forbidden to name a Succeſſor to the crowne,
as long as Chintillus the King liued, doe fight with Fa: Parſons
tergiuerſations. It was held an vnlawfull thing ſo to doe.

But you ſhall haue theyr owne words; Quia et religioni inimicum,
et hominibus constat eſſe pernicioſum, &c. Becauſe it is
both contrary to religion, and hurtfull for men, to thinke of future
things vnlawfully, to ſearch after the falls of Princes, & to prouide
for themſelues for aftertimes, ſeeing it is written: It belongeth not
to you, to know the times, and moments, which the Father hath
put in his owne power. Wee ordaine by this decree, that whoſoeuer
ſhall be found to haue ſought after ſuch thinges, and during the
Princes life, to haue aymed at an other, for the future hope of the
kingdome, or to haue drawne other vnto him for that purpoſe ſhall
be cast out of the congregation of Catholicks by the ſentence of excommunication.
               By theſe things you may ſee whether the peremptory propoſition
of fa: Parſons, be not in our caſe a flat paradoxe: but
he neuer looketh to circumſtances of time, perſons, or place,
ſo hee may by generall propoſitions ſeeme to make a faire
ſhew of ſomewhat.
               But to come to the ſecond part, or booke of Succeſſion, he
ſaith, and that with proteſtation, that he dealeth indifferently
for all tytles, impeaching none, but ſhewing the true right of
euery one, without partiality of fauour, more to one, then
other. VVhich notwithſtanding his proteſtations (that are
more frequent, then faithfull) is moſt falſe, and vntrue. For
firſt, what title is there, which he doth not invalidate one way
or other, with baſtardie, or the like, the Infanta her title onely
excepted? Doth he not bring the marriage of the Earle of
Harford in queſtion to debar that line? Doth he not exclude
the Scot, by the aſſociation, and ſo in the reſt? onely hee leaueth
the Infanta ſole heyre, without ſpot, or ſtaine. Againe,
hath he not raked vp a title for the Infanta, frō 
                  Iohn of Gaunt,
and before; neuer dreamed of in the world till his time, to
bring in her as a Competitor. I am ſure hee might bring in
300 at the leaſt within our owne Country aſwell, and with as
good right and intereſt to the Crowne. Is this to deale faithfully,
and indifferently? But wee will leaue this poynt to be
farther ſearched by ſuch as I thinke haue taken a little more
paines herein for his ſake.
               Now to come to the pamphlet forſooth againſt the ſaid

booke of Succeſſion, attributed to Ma. Charles Paget, but by
Fa: Parſons not thought to be his, and (I verily thinke) iuſtly.
But howſoeuer weake it may be in aunſwering particulers,
by Fa: Parſons layd downe in the conference about ſucceſſion,
(which I think it intended not to proſecute) yet doth
it ſhew the worke to be inconuenient, as well for the King of
Spaine himſelfe, as for our owne Soueraigne, or the king of
Scots.
               He that ſhall diligently peruſe that treatiſe, & conſider the
drift of the Author, ſhall find it to be of a farther reach, then
fa: Parſons will ſeeme to diſcerne; as ayming at nothing, but
to ſhew his folly, his deſperate and trayterous courſes, which
by arming ſubiects againſt theyr Soueraignes, may touch in
time all Chriſtian Princes▪ as well as her Maieſtie.
               It is pitty that the Treatiſe is no more common, ſo as therby
the States in England might cleerly perceiue, what a gallimaufrey
he would make of lawes, cōmon, ciuill, & Eccleſiaſticall,
and of the whole Common-wealth, if Parſons might
haue his will, according to the plot hee hath layd in that his
worthy worke of Succeſſion.
               
            
            
               An aunſwer to the ſixt chapter, touching our pretended folly, &
deceiued ſpirit, in perſwading our ſelues to get credit by the
manner of our proceedings, with clamors and libels.
               IT is a common obſeruation, and noted of all men, that
when any perſon giueth himſelfe to a cuſtome of maintaining
abſurdities, hee will in the end grow to perſwade
himſelfe, that the things he maintaineth are true, be they
otherwiſe neuer ſo abſurd and falſe; yea and at the firſt ſo reputed
by the maintainer. And euen ſo fareth it with Father
Parſons, for certainly he could not poſſibly with any face deliuer
matters as hee doth, and ſo apparantly falſe, with ſuch
confidence, yea and iterations, if the cuſtome of wrangling,
and maintaining paradoxes, had not perſwaded his vnderſtanding,
that what hee will defend, muſt needes be as hee
ſayth, & ſo to be belieued as he telleth it. Tell me (I beſeech
you) who would ſo peremptorily haue affirmed, that we neuer

meant to proſecute our appeale, but onely to gaine time.
and libertie, (as he here doth) if ſuch a cuſtome of maintayning
vntruthes, had not wholy poſſeſt his vnderſtanding in
ſuch ſort, as he cannot perſwade himſelfe otherwiſe, then his
extrauagant imagination conceiteth; and that a ſtrong imagination
did not aſſure him, that all hee ſaid ſhould be belieued?
The world now ſeeth the contrary to this loud vntruth.
But to goe further with him. What man that regarded honeſtie,
and truth, if he were not poſſeſt with the aforeſaid humour,
and cuſtome, would ſay that one of our friends, ſent
before vnto the Nuncio, falling into the company of an Iriſh
man, ſhould ſay he was a Ieſuit to win credit? Ma. Barnbee
was the precurſer he aimeth at; who proteſteth that he neither
was in the company of any ſuch Iriſh man, neither euer vſed
the name of the Ieſuits.
               Againe, out of what other humour could hee auerre, that
they ſhewed diuers paſports to the Nuncio, viz: one of baniſhment;
the other more large, generall, and ample, full of
fauour, and priuiledge to paſſe, how, when, and where, and
with what they would; ſith it is moſt certaine, they had but
one onely paſport, and that of Baniſhment, this is the full
truth therein. Some of the company beeing ſtayed at Douer,
contrary to their expectation, they were enforced to ſend
back to London: and therevpon procured a note to the ſearchers
and officers there, that they ſhould paſſe freely, without
ſearch, with ſuch things as they had to carry with them.
In the ſame ſort doth hee deliuer you another vntruth, that
all that our friends could ſay, when they came before the
Nuncio in Flaunders, was that the Archpriest had taken away
ſome mens faculties, & did not equally diſtribute almes.
There can be no men amongſt you ſo ignorant, as not to ſee
this to be an egregious fiction. Was the matter of ſchiſme, &
all the wrongs therein done vs, whereupon all our ſtirres, and
contentions haue riſen, nothing? Were all our complaints of
medling in ſtate matters, whereby the Prince and ſtate were
offended, and affliction increaſed, matters of no moment?
Who doth not ſee the vanity of this vntruth? And vpon this
followeth another as notorious; that the Nuncio, hearing they

could ſay no more, tooke vpon him to end the matter, writing
backe to the Archpriest to require his aunſwer; but being
afterwards better acquainted with our malicious bookes
(as he termeth them) hee wrote againe into England in another
ſtyle concerning theyr beeing with him, then hee would
haue done (as after he ſaid) if he had beene ſo farre priuie to
theyr dooings, and meanings before.
               This is not onely an egregious abuſe of his holines Nuncio,
who moſt kindly entertained our friends, & beeing throughly
acquainted with their buſines, approued their courſe, as
moſt reaſonable, and writ vnto the Archpriest to reſtore all
in pristinum ſtatum, (which hee contemned) but alſo a meere
deuiſe, in that neuer any ſuch Letter appeared in England
from the Nuncio, for ought we can learne, of different ſtyle to
the former, nor can they produce any ſuch. Beſides that, the
Nuncio wrote to his holines concerning our affaires. But Fa:
Parſons muſt haue leaue to belye vs, when hee dare to belie
and abuſe his holines Nuncio.
               
               Like vnto this, and out of the ſame humour of cuſtome, is
his often malicious comparing vs to Luther, and ſundry hereticks:
which taſteth of a malitious, & vnconſcionable ſpirite
of defamation. I could ſay vnto him, that this humor of
maintaining paradoxes and cuſtome of lying, is, and alwaies
hath beene, the firſt ſtep vnto hereſie. But God keepe him
from the ſpirit of Machiauell and Atheiſme, which theſe
courſes too much 
                     •
                  auour of.
               An other vntruth alledged by him in this chapter is, that
we affirme, that his holines hath no authoritie to moue war
for religion againſt any temporall Prince. This is a manifeſt
lye; for his temporall authority concerning this point, was
not examined by vs, as I haue ſhewed aboue. After this, in
the 77. page, follow three vntruths conioyned as in one, that
we perſwade all the world, that all is ſedition, conſpiracie, &
rebellion amongſt Catholicks in England, and not matter of
religion; that vvee make them the true Authors, and occaſioners,
of all theyr owne trouble, vexations, and dangers, by
theyr owne indiſcreet, and temerarious actions; and that we
alſo iuſtifie the cauſe of the Perſecutors, and lay the fault vppon

the perſecuted. All theſe are ſo manifeſt forgeries, as
impudencie it ſelfe, without a brazen viſage, could not auerre
it; wee manifeſtly excuſing the body of Prieſts, and Cath:
and laying the fault onely vppon ſome particuler perſons,
where the true fault was indeed, thereby to ſhew the wrongs,
and iniuries that generally Cath: and Prieſts haue ſuſtayned
without iuſt cauſe, onely excuſing the Queene, and ſtate by
ignorance, not knowing the difference betweene the innocent,
and guilty; and not iuſtifying thei
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ard proceedings.
For it is one thing to excuſe a fault, and another thing to iuſtifie
the ſame: yea, we doe ſay, that the extremity of affliction,
exceeded in our opinions, the meaſure of the faults.
But to denie occaſions to haue beene giuen by Fa: Parſons,
and his complices, and ſome other alſo, who wee wiſh had
beene better aduiſed, we cannot, vnleſſe we had, as ſhameleſſe
countenances, as perhaps he frameth to himſelfe, when
he denieth ſuch apparant verities. And the ſame lye is iterated
againe in the page following; to wit, that we make ſufferings
in England, not to be for conſcience, but for practiſing
againſt the Prince and ſtate. I doe greatly feare he wil proue
in the end to haue Laeſam imaginationem in theſe matters: framing
to himſelfe a conceite, that all the calumniations which
hee can deuiſe againſt vs muſt be true, becauſe hee ſo dreameth.
               Another vntruth is in the 79. page, that we haue ſent to offer
our ſelues to the King of Scots: which is onely ſpoke of
malice, to bring vs into ſuſpition and iealouſie, with our own
ſtate at home, a thing he vehemently laboureth to doe, by all
the meanes he can vſe, as well by lyes and diſgraces, as by his
example of Constantius, alledged by him out of Euſebius and
Sozomenus, you may perceaue: which teſtimonie in very
truth doth more properly agree vnto himſelfe, in that he hauing
beene an open profeſſed enemie vnto her Maieſtie alwayes;
yet to purchaſe her fauour, and his credit with her againe,
wrote a letter ſome few yeeres paſt vnto her Highnes,
(a fact of no ſmall preſumption) offering her his ſeruice, and
that he would giue her intelligence out of all parts of Europe,
what was intended againſt her, and her eſtate.
               
                  
This Letter in his owne hand hath been ſhewed vnto ſome
of our friends, who know his hand, as well as himſelfe, that
he may not ſay, it was counterfeited, which yet if hee doe, I
think no man of wit or vnderſtanding will thinke probable.
For what aduantage ſhould her Maieſtie or the ſtate get by
counterfetting a Letter of Parſons, to ſuch a vaine effect? If
you will ſay to diſgrace him, I verily thinke, and aſſure my
ſelfe, that her Maieſtie, and the Counſell no more regard the
poore fellowes credit, or diſcredit, then you regard your old
ſhooes. And in reaſon doe but thinke, whether it is probable,
that ſo mighty a Prince, and ſo great a ſtate, ſhould reſpect
ſo meane a fellow. I verily thinke he is altogether forgot
of them, but when as at ſome times his practiſes make
him infamous to them, as the burning of Diana her temple,
made the obſcure Cripple to be talked of. By this you may
ſee, how fitly Constans his example may be applied to himſelfe,
or to the conceite of her Maieſtie, and the ſtate. But as
touching vs, his malice cannot reach to his ſcope: her Maieſtie,
and the State know well, that, as to them wee profeſſe
our ſelues moſt loyall, and faithfull in word, and action, ſo
ſtand we moſt reſolute in the profeſſion of our faith, & loyaltie
to God, and his Church: which God aſſiſting vs, wee
will continue.
               Another lying inuention of his owne, is, that we haue deuiſed
a new diſcourſe about Succeſſion, and haue dealt another
way in England, for the intitling of the Crowne, more
to the taſt (as he ſayeth) of ſome great perſonages of our eſtate.
This malicious falſhoode he hath inuented newly, to
bring vs into iealouſie and ſuſpition, and thereby hatred to
his Maieſtie of Scotland. See how this Robin good-fellowe
playeth his part on all ſides, to worke miſchiefe, and contention.
But hee ſhall neuer finde ſuch ſhuffling dealing in vs,
about matters that concerne vs not, as himſelfe hath practiſed.
Firſt, he began with the Scottiſh title, affirming difference
in Religion no ſufficient cauſe of barre in right to a
Kingdome (as you may ſee in Greenecoate, or Leisters Common-wealth)
howſoeuer now hee inueigh againſt his Maieſties
title, onely for Religion. Then hee practiſed with the

Prince of Parma, to haue his ſonne Ranutius marry to L. Arbella,
thereby to fortifie his title, deriued from the houſe of
Portugall. And laſtly, he practiſed with the Spaniard, and
hath intitled his daughter the Infanta. Theſe haue beene his
mutable iuglings, by which his Cath: Maieſtie might ſee,
how ſure a ſtaffe he hath of him, who hath runne through ſo
many titles, euer ſhifting to the greateſt, as occaſions doe require.
And I am perſwaded, that hee will returne againe to
his Maieſtie of Scotland, or any other, if he ſee them likelyer
once to winne the ſpurres, then the Spaniard.
               Now as he maketh no conſcience to ſlaunder vs, thereby
to worke our diſcredits to the vttermoſt of his power, ſo to
fortifie his falſhoods againſt vs, he doth arrogate vnto himſelfe,
and his, whatſoeuer good, and laudable action is done
by any of vs, or our friends. As for example, the motion of
a toleration, and mitigation of extremities in cauſe of Religion,
knowne to be firſt effectually propoſed by Ma: Bluet,
and Ma: Clarkes meanes, and as well the petition, as inſtructions
there-vpon, with informations of the manner of eaſe deſired,
drawne by them, and put into the hands of ſuch of
worth, diſcretion, and wit, as proſecuted the ſame: this (I ſay)
he arrogateth to his fauorites, and friends, though I know
that ſome of them did in many places inueigh againſt the

                     •
                  ute, and auerted men, as much as in them lay, from harkning
thereto, framing ſtrange falſhoods, and lyes about our
intentions, and the action it ſelfe. And I am halfe perſwaded,
that if the Ieſuits had not beene, the matter had found
better ſucceſſe: For it is well knowne, that they haue alwaies
beene enemies to all toleracions in Religion; becauſe they
think, that they ſhould perhaps be expelled, or forced to retire
themſelues, vpon the conditions of ſecurity, to be giuen
vnto the Queene, concerning her perſon, and ſtate: which
they perhaps are vnwilling to be drawne vnto, conſidering
thereby all their plots, and practiſes ſhould be cut of. Neyther
happily wil the State truſt them (in whom it hath found
ſuch trecherie) by reaſon of their mutuall bond, wherein they
are all tyed to follow the direction of Fa: Parſons, the Archeplotter
of ſtate practiſes againſt our Prince, and Countrey.

And to proue this part, concerning the Ieſuits affection towards
toleration. Fa: Parſons their ring-leader, and ſquare to
the reſt, openly in Rome before the Scholers (as diuers will
teſtifie againſt him) made a long ſpeech againſt toleration of
Religion in England, (in that as he ſaid) Cath: thereby would
grow cold, and loſe their feruencie, they had got by perſecution.
See whether the motion of toleration, was like to proceede
from theſe me
                     •
                  , and yet he inſinuateth ſome motiue
vnto her Maieſtie, and the Counſell to deale with him, or his
party; becauſe forſooth we being deuided, (as he ſayth) haue
little credite. By this alſo indirectly you may perceaue his
minde to toleration in Religion, or any benefit to Cath: ſeeing
he diſgraceth to his power, ſuch as deale for their good, when
he knoweth that her Maieſtie, and Counſell, will not truſt
him, or any of his faction, in whom they haue found ſo
much ſedition.
               But to proceede with the reſt of this Chapter, Fa: Parſons
would haue you in the beginning, wonder at our friends
confidence in Cath: Countries, in that they durſt not goe to
the Nuncio in Flaunders, without a paſport. But he might
more iuſtly haue told you, that our confidence in him, and
his fellow Ieſuits was ſuch, that our friends durſt not commit
themſelues into their hands. For if they had ſo done,
they had all beene layed faſt for euer comming at Rome; the
Ieſuits had ſo earneſtly practiſed with the Spaniſh Embaſſadour
againſt them, affirming that they were enemies vnto
the King, and I know not what. In ſo much that (notwithſtanding
their paſport) the Embaſſador came poſting down
about them, and Fa: Baldwine, Doct: Ceſar, Clement, and
others, ranne with open mouth againſt them to the Nuncio:
whereby one of them (as it is knowne) had like to haue been
taken by a policy, if he had been in his Inne. His horſe was
ſeiſed on, vntill the Nuncio ſent for the Gouernour, and gaue
him a checke. Conſider then whether they had not cauſe, to
feare the Ieſuits, whoſe irreligious oppreſſions our former
meſſengers had once taſted before. But more of this wil be
ſayd in another treatiſe. And as for their telling the Nuncio,
that they were in feare to come vnto him: it was true, they

ſaid ſo, and gaue their reaſons, not as fa: Parſons ſetteth them
downe, but that we had beene oft prouoked by our Archpriest
vnto him, and threatned with him by theſe words, that
he, the Archpriest had beaten vs with roddes, but the Nuncio
would beate vs with ſcorpions. Theſe only were the reaſons giuen
to the Nuncio, which were moſt true. And for the breve,
and his Commiſſion, to end the matter, our Meſſengers vvere
content, and did referre themſelues vnto him. Whereupon
he writ to the Archpriest, to appeare by himſelfe, or Proctors,
and the Doctor ſtaied in Paris to meete them. But the Archp:
refuſed (as ſeemed) for he neuer appeared one way, or other,
vntill his two Agents, ſome monthes after, went ouer to be
his Proctors in Rome, who paſſed indeed by the low countries,
but what they did there wee know not. Onely it vvas
ſaid, that beeing before the Nuncio, they could not deliuer
their tale, and that the Ieſuits were aſhamed of them. Inſomuch
that one of the Ieſuits of that Country demaunded, if
the Archpriest had no more ſufficient men in England to
ſend about his affaires. This was reported, whether it be true
or no, I will not auerre.
               Touching the Breve, the Nuncio plainly told our brethren,
that he had but a Copie thereof, and that the Archp: had the
originall ſent him long before, marueyling, as he ſaid, that he
had not publiſhed it: adding further vnto them, that they
were not bound to take notice thereof, ſith the Archpriest
had not divulged it. And whereas Fa: Parſons ſaith, that our
friends beeing at Doway, were exclaimed againſt by the Rector,
& ſeniors there, it is a manifeſt vntruth. They found nothing
but kindnes at their hands. For Engliſh men of worth
abroade, I thinke fa: Parſons cannot name one, that exclaimed
againſt theyr iourney. But I am ſure, that all of reconing
haue euer exclaimed againſt his vnconſcionable practiſes,
as well lay Gentlemen & Nobles, as of the Clergie: and
he can name very few of eſteeme of either ſorts, which haue
not complained againſt him.
               As touching his reports written concerning a toleration,
vpon condition, the Ieſuits and Archpriest ſhould be recalled,
I would it were true. And if hee had reſpect to the common

cauſe, he would wiſh ſo to; but they vſe more to regard their
priuate intereſt, then any publicke good. Concerning the
matter of ſchiſme, he writeth three vntruthes in three, or foure
lines. Firſt, that Lysters Libell was neuer publiſhed: ſecondly,
that ſoone after it came forth, it was recalled by the Archpriest
at the attonement. Heere are involued two falſhoods:
firſt, that the attonement was ſoone after the divulging of
that Libell, there beeing a full yeere betwixt them: ſecondly,
that then it was recalled, which is a lie, for hee promiſed
onely, the matter ſhould neuer be vrged, and that the Treatiſe
ſhould die, but he neuer performed eyther of thoſe conditions.
Thirdly, that it could not be ſaid to infame any,
which is an impudent aſſertion; aboue 30. de facto being defamed
by it, and ſo held, and practiſed againſt thereupon, beſides
an hundreth at the leaſt of neuters, & fauourers, whom
it concerned.
               But to leaue theſe apparant vntruthes, his beſt refuges, let
vs come at length to Card: Sega his Catalogue or Memoriall,
alleaged againſt the ſcholers of Rome. Fa: Parſons noteth the
cauſes of thoſe tumults in Rome, to haue been raiſed vppon
the ſame cauſes, & againſt the ſame perſons, that theſe heere
in England haue beene, and therein we yeeld hee ſaith truly.
And for the perſons, to wit: the Ieſuits, wee agree with him,
that as they were the men impugned by them there, ſo are
they alſo by vs heere. Touching the cauſe alſo, which he aſcribeth
to liberty, and freedome from ſubiection, as ſuch liberty,
and freedome excludeth tyranny, oppreſſions, & vniuſt
inſultations of the Ieſuits, wee likewiſe graunt it: but as
he maliciouſly cōmenteth vpon it, with hatred of order, diſcipline,
and ſuperioritie, we ſay, and will conuince him, that
hee ſpeaketh of malice, and againſt his knowledge. For hee
cannot denie, but that the ſcholers in Rome, excepting iuſtly
againſt theyr violent tyrannie, and oppreſſions, offered
notwithſtanding to admit of all the bonds, and rules, whereto
any of themſelues were bound by their order (their vowes
excepted) and to tye themſelues to the obſeruance thereof,
during their aboade in the Colledge. If then this were in hatred
of order, & diſcipline, he muſt needes graunt, that there

is no order, nor diſcipline obſerued in his owne order. And
if there be, let any man iudge, whether for voluntary Schollers
to liue after the manner and order of religious men, be
to contemne order & diſcipline. But this offer was reiected
by the Ieſuits, intending a farther ſlauery, and bondage ouer
them, as in the hiſtory of thoſe ſtirres ſhall appeare more at
large. And for our ſelues heere in England, Parſons confeſſeth,
that we were about a ſodalitie with rules, and ſuperiors.
How doth it then follow, that we hated order, & diſcipline,
who without conſtraint ſought for both? But whoſoeuer giueth
not conſent to Ieſuits inuentions, and fa: Parſons order,
and diſcipline, muſt be termed a libertine, and diſorderly
companion; though his inuentions containe plaine ſlauery,
and tyrannie, as is manifeſt in the Archipreſbyterie.
               
               Now touching the fragments which hee citeth out of
Card: Sega his Memoriall, all of them beeing ſquared to his
owne humour; they giue great occaſion to ſuſpect that they
were not his: for that hee is made to ſay, that the Ieſuits haue
more force, skill, and vſe in managing of ſoules, then euerie other
priest: and conſequenly to remoue them out of the Engliſh Clergie,
were as if one would let forth the beſt, & most digested blood out
of a mans body, thinking thereby to cure, and preſerue him. Is
there any man of iudgement, or vnderſtanding, that can
thinke this ſpeech could proceede from a Cardinall of grauitie,
and iudgement, beeing ſo contrary to all practiſe of
Gods Church? Beſides, it ſoundeth very ill, to preferre religious
men (onely dedicated to themſelues) in managing of
ſoules abroade, before the ſeculer Clergie: whoſe proper
function, is to giue themſelues wholy to the direction & help
of others, and to be prepared euen by their vocation (& that
of iuſtice) to giue theyr liues for their flock, which no religious
man (as he is a religious man) is bound vnto, more then
of charitie at the moſt. And heereuppon it is, that ſome Diuines
too probably defend, that to be a Paſtor ſuppoſeth a
ſtate of perfection, aſwell as to be a Biſhop; as the Sorboniſts.
               
               Againe, this ſpeech is to condemne the whole practiſe of
Chriſtes Church from the beginning, as to haue taken the
worſt, and weakeſt order for helping of ſoules. For ſhe hath

alwaies preferred the ſeculer Clergie to that office, and neuer
ſuffered the religious to intermeddle therein, but vpon ſpeciall
priuiledges, and graunts, and by diſpenſation. Furthermore,
the Church may ſtand without any particuler order of religious,
or all of them: but ſhe cannot ſtand without the ſeculer
Clergy. How then is it true, or ſound to ſay, that to remoue
the Ieſuits out of England, is to purge away the best, &
most digested blood, a man would think that were the beſt, and
most digested blood, by which the body were neceſſarily maintained,
and without the which it could not liue, and not that,
without which it might liue. And then muſt it follow, that
the ſeculer Clergie is the best and moſt digeſted blood, by which
the Church of Chriſt liueth, and without which it cannot
liue, and not the religious, whom ſhe may want.
               Iudge then whether this erroneous diſcourſe were like to
proceede from the Cardinall, or rather were not fained by
Fa: Parſons himſelfe. Another ſpeech of the Cardinall is ſaid
to be, that the Ieſuits, being vnited together, haue better notice
of the vertue, talents, and merits of euery particuler Priest, that
commeth into England, and conſequently can better aſſure Cath:
what is in them, and how farre they may relye vpon each one of
them. This diſcourſe tendeth onely to bring all into the Ieſuits
hands, & to miniſter occaſion of infinite oppreſſions of
ſuch Prieſts, as they ſhall not affect; as by many experiences
of diſgraces, done vnto Prieſts at their firſt entrance by the
Ieſuits, we haue found, as alſo in that great extraordinary priuiledges
haue beene graunted to men of ſmall talents, beeing
their fauorites. How like is it then, that theſe were the Card:
words? Again afterwards he is brought in to ſay, that he that
taketh away from that vnfortunate kingdome of England, the
labour of this ſocietie in theſe dayes, ſeemeth to me, not only to take
away the ſalt of that Land; but euen the ſunne of that afflicted
Church. Are theſe ſpeeches like to proceede from a graue
Cardinall? I meruaile how oft Fa: Parſons hath heard religious
men called, ſal terrae, or lux mundi, ſeu eccleſiae, they being,
by their inſtitute, properly to liue in obſcurity in Cells, and
Monaſteries, and not publique in the world. When Chriſt
vſed theſe ſpeeches, he ſpake vnto his Apoſtles, whom hee

ſent in to the world to preach, and inſtruct people, and to be
conuerſant with them, as well to edifie them, by example of
life, as wholſome doctrine, and not vnto ſuch as were to liue
ſequeſtred from the world, as religious men are, by their inſtitute,
and order. And if any way Fa: Parſons can writhe
theſe Metaphors to appertaine vnto religious perſons, it is as
they are by particuler priuiledge, and diſpenſation ſent into
the world, and not as they are religious men, ſequeſtred from
the world. Iudge then how the Ieſuits can iuſtly be ſaid, to
be the ſalt of England, or ſunne of our Church, and not rather
the Prieſts, vnto whom the function of preaching, and teaching
belongeth of office, and not vnto the Ieſuits. This
application therefore of ſalterrae, and lux mundi vnto the Ieſuits,
doth not ſeeme to proceede from a Cardinall. Againe,
it is affirmed that he ſayeth, that it was neither conuenient, nor
poſſible to remoue the Ieſuits from the gouernment of the Colledges,
without ouer-throwing of all. This is ſo notorious a paradoxe,
as it ſeemeth incredible to proceede from the wiſedom
of a Cardinall. Were there no ſufficient men in the world, to
vndertake the gouernment of the Colledges, with preſeruation
of things, but that all muſt goe to ruine, if the Ieſuits vpheld
not all? vvhat pride, what arrogancie is this? Could
the Seminaries of Doway, & Rhemes, be maintayned, & vpheld
almoſt 40. yeeres without them, and muſt now all goe
to ruine without their managing? Are all our Engliſh men
in the world abroad ſo inſufficient, as that no one can be
found able to take vppon him the gouernment of a poore
Colledge? I wiſh it would pleaſe Ma: Ieſuits, to leaue the
gouernment thereof a while (which they ſay their Generall
hath deſired to doe) and make triall, whether we could not
finde men ſufficient, for the managing of our Colledges, yea
more ſufficient then any Ieſuit they haue, which neuer yet
could maintayne that one poore Colledge of Rome foure
yeeres together, without ſome tumult, or other: which in
twenty yeeres happened not in the Colledge of Rhemes, gouerned
by our owne ſeculer Prieſts, Doctor Allen, and Ma:
Baily: But, for all their complaints, they finde too great a
ſweetnes, to forgoe the gouernment of the Romaine Colledge.

Neither doth the Counſell of diſmiſſing ſome with
theſe termes of wanton, or laſciuious Colts, ſeeme to proceede
from the Cardinall; eſpecially if we conſider, that the chiefeſt
of ſuch, as were to be diſmiſſed, whom he termeth wanton
Colts, were 
                     〈◊〉
                   be addreſſed for our Country, as they were.
How vnfitting ſuch men were for ſuch an excellent vocation,
the world may 
                     •
                  udge, and thinke, whether in conſcience
they could giue them faculties, yea, and ſome of them particuler
fauours alſo for our Country. This conuinceth that either
there was no ſuch ſpeech vttered by the Cardinall, or
elſe vttered without true ground vpon partiality to the Ieſuits.
Vnto whom it ſeemed he leaned too too much, in that
hauing another (one M Monſignior oro) ioyned with him, as

                     Ʋiſitor in theſe ſtirres, and finding him inclined to equity,
and no whit partiall to the Ieſuits; he ſhaked him off, taking
the matter wholy into his owne hands. Which might make
vs to thinke, that he was ſome-what partiall in his memoriall
deliuered vp; but if he were ſo partiall as Fa: Parſons relateth,
it was admirable, and moſt vniuſt, as we haue ſhewed.
               After this memoriall Fa: Parſons addeth two circumſtances,
which hee applyeth to the proceedings, as well of the
Scholers in Rome, in thoſe tumults, as to ours heere in England.
Firſt, hee ſaith, that whereas in thoſe it was onely ſuſpected,
that the heretikes, & common enemie had their hands,
as ayders, or abetters, to make theſe demaunds of remouing
the Ieſuits from England, and the Colledge; now it is openlie
knowne, and confeſſed, that they are indeede the chiefe
dealers, and ſtirrers therein. This is a common practiſe with
Ieſuits, when any thing maketh againſt them, then to bring
in the common enemie, as an actour with vs, thereby to grace
themſelues, as impugned by heretiques, and diſgrace their
oppoſers, as pertakers with the common enemie: but it is as
ridiculous a ſhift, as common. For who of wiſedome, or vnderſtanding
will thinke that the ſtate of England cannot deliuer
themſelues of a handfull of Ieſuits, without the concurrence
of a few poore ſecular prieſts, or that they reſpect, or
regard ſuch ſimple helps. Theſe buzzes are for fooles, and
children, and not for men of iudgement and diſcretion, to

regard. The ſecond circumſtance is, that as the ſtudents in
Rome ſought to procure ſome Princes Embaſſadours to fauour
their cauſe, by making it matter of ſtate; ſo in like manner
we ſhould deale with the King of Fraunce, that he may
back vs. But Fa: Parſons muſt vnderſtand, that wee are not
ſo ſimple, but that wee doe know it to be a matter of ſtate.
And that point is now moſt euident by the vniforme banding
of the Ieſuits, and Spaniards, in this our cauſe. The
Spaniards doe openly profeſſe themſelues to be for the Ieſuits,
as in the behalfe of their owne intereſt, and to requite
them, the Ieſuit doth openly profeſſe himſelfe in Rome, to be
for the Spaniard, engaging him in the cauſe. Whereby come
all the demurres and delayes in that Court, where-with our
brethren are there now perplexed, and driuen off from the
deciding of our cauſe. What the ſtrength of the Spaniard
can worke againſt them, they ſhall be ſure of. Our cauſe
therefore concerneth not onely his Maieſtie of Scotland, but
alſo of Fraunce, and all other Princes adioyning. For if the
Spaniard ſhould preuaile againſt England, (where-vnto all
theſe indeauours of the Ieſuits tend;) then is not onely his
Maieſtie of Scotland depriued of his poſſibility, but alſo the
King of Fraunce, and other ſtates indangered by his mightines,
and neighbourhood. A thing which Princes will conſider:
ſay Fa: Parſons what he can to the contrary.
            
            
               An aunſwer to the 7. chapter, concerning fiue other of our
bookes, falſly termed by Fa: Parſons abſurd, and ſlaunderous
Libels.
               I Remember that this father Parſons, in the diſcouerie of
Iohn Nichols, ſaith, that the fellow when he came to Rome,
went onely to the Brothell-houſes, Canalls, and baſe, and
ſtinking corners of the Citty, where he might finde moſt
lewdeſt, and filthieſt ſtinkes, and not to any publique places,
as Court, Churches, or the like, where he might ſee maieſty,
order, reuerence, or deuotion, &c. And thus, or to the like
effect he writeth of him, becauſe of the venome, filth, and reprochfull
ſlaunders which hee diſgorged afterwards againſt

that holy place. And euen ſo may it be ſaid, that he himſelfe,
this good Father, in the ſuruey of all the bookes that haue
beene writ by any of our friends, hath imployed his greateſt
paines to auoyde all ſubſtantiall, and ſound matters, ſuch indeede
as conuinced the vnderſtanding of the Reader, and to
rake onely in by-corners, and matters of leaſt moment, carping
at ſharpe, and cholericke ſpeeches, deliuered in heate,
running vpon ſome ſuch particulers, as were writ vpon relation
onely. Where if he find any circumſtance failing (as cō
                  monly
in matters related at the ſecond hand falleth out,
though the ſubſtance thereof be neuer ſo true) there hee faſteneth
his hold, and maketh ſuch clamors and outcries, as
though the matters were meere inuentions, really, and totally
falſhoods, and neuer any ſuch things had beene in rerum
natura. And ſo doth he deale in the ſeauenth Chapter,
as well concerning the booke entituled, The ſparing Diſcouerie,
as the reſt. His firſt entrance vpon the ſayd Diſcouerie,
is with generall inuectiue; and then he carpeth at the poſie,
or ſentence: vidi calumnias, quae ſub ſole geruntur, which hee
will retort vpon the writers. But if you conſider the proceedings
of the Ieſuits, and their faction againſt vs, in the beginning
of the erection of Ma: Blackwell to his dignity, with
what reproches, indignities, and calumnious ſlaunders they
abuſed vs; you will ſay we had reaſon to vſe that ſentence in
the diſcouerie of ſuch dealings. It is an eaſie matter to dally
in this ſort. We could with more ſhew of reaſon catch at his
ſentence, prefixed to this libell of Manifestation, viz: theyr
folly ſhall be manifest to all men: Which ſaying, how fitly it
may be retorted vpon fa: Parſons, you wil perceaue, if you do
but conſider his actions, and intermedling in matters, as well
vnpleaſing as vnbefitting, and vnbeſeeming him; whereby
hee hath not onely kindled a flame of ſedition heere in our
poore afflicted Church; but alſo drawne a great burden vppon
his owne necke, in oppoſing himſelfe againſt our whole
Clergie: which he needed not to haue done, as alſo perpetuall
diſcredit thereby, and a note of a factious, tumultuous,
ſeditious, headſtrong man. All the world certainly that ſhall
ſee the effects of this his turbulent ſpirit, as well in theſe our

affaires, as in matters of continuall practiſes againſt our
Prince, and country, muſt needes ſay, that his folly is exceeding
great, & apparant, in giuing vs occaſion of publiſhing
ſuch his idle fancies, furies, and vndiſcreet attempts vnto the
world, which by moderate, & indifferent dealing, hee might
peraduenture haue auoyded.
               His ſecond ſentence is, of the vncleane ſpirit, which (if wee
conſider his fore-ſaid actions, and the great oppreſſions,
wrongs, and vniuſt, and vncharitable iniuries, & vexations
wrought thereby) may not very vnfitly be applied to himſelfe.
For the deuill where he commeth, is alwaies buſie, thruſting
the party on to miſchiefe, and the greater & more miſchiefe
a man doth, the more doe we ſuppoſe the deuill to be
buſie with him. Now hee that ſhall conſider fa: Parſons continuall
contentions from the beginning, with all men, euen
of his owne order (as hath beene ſhewed) as alſo his mighty,
and great attempts in matters of ſtate, (whereby hath riſen
great vexations of innocent Catholicks,) his deteſtable diffamations,
not onely of our poore ſcholers in Rome, but alſo of
our whole nation in them: his ſetting of our quiet Cleargie
together by the eares (a worke proper to the deuill) with infinite
wrongs to particuler men, may tell me at leyſure, whether
the parable of the vncleane ſpirit, & ſeauen more returning,
might not be retorted vpon himſelfe. But we rather wiſh his
reformation▪ then any ſuch oppreſſions of ſeauen ſpirits, as vncharitably
he chargeth vs with.
               His ſpeech of S. Hillary, proficit ſemper, &c. might alſo be
returned to the manifeſting of his owne follies daily more &
more, in that notwithſtanding the euidencie of our cauſe,
proued by vs, and ſtill by him reproued, he ſtill oppoſeth him
ſelfe: which in the end will prooue wilful indiſcretion. Alſo
his often commending of himſelfe, and vrging of his owne
good deedes, and benefits done to vs, argueth no great wiſedome.
Sure I am that many of vs, neither euer ſaw, or taſted
of his great bounty: but many haue felt the ſmart of his exorbitant
actions.
               But to paſſe ouer this trifling, induced thereunto by his example,
in the progreſſe of his diſcourſe, hee canuaſeth an

humble, and good religious peticion of Ma. Watſons, (wherin
hee deſireth charitable remembrance of his poore ſinfull
ſoule) in ſuch ſort, as he ſheweth very little charity, or religion,
rather ſcoffing at the ſpeech with words of diſdaine, as ſinfull
ſudds, &c, then otherwiſe. And when hee commeth to his
perſon, he bewrayeth no ſmall enuie and gall, by deſcribing
him with ſuch diſdaine, & ſo falſly alſo, (as all men that know
him may ſee) that it ſeemeth it grieued him, that hee vvas
made a man, and within the number of reaſonable creatures.
Afterward, and conformable heereunto, doth he goe about
to taxe his minde (an higher enuy then the former) with a
vaine bragge, and proude aſſertion of the Ieſuits in generall,
as men of contrary life, ſpirit, iudgement, will, workes, and
manners to him, by a ſequell, as it were involuing ſuſpicions
(as vſually the Ieſuits doe) of I know not what imaginations
of diſorderly life; moſt falſly, and moſt vncharitably. But let
fa: Parſons temper this kinde of ſuſpicious, and vncharitable
writing, or wee will promiſe him, we will open ſuch matters
of his holy bretheren, as ſhall make both him and them aſhamed
thereof. Yet are wee not willing to rippe vp the liues of
any, knowing, that the infirmities of euery Chriſtian, ſhould
rather be pittied, and relieued by prayer, then reioyced at, or
reuealed, as the Ieſuits vſe to doe in what they can, by all that
oppoſe theyr proceedings: diſcrediting the perſons of thoſe,
whoſe cauſe they cannot infringe: which is a tricke rather of
a Machiuilian, then a good Chriſtian. This courſe wee haue
hetherto auoyded (as all men can witnes) neuer entring into
the particuler liues of any Ieſuit, or fauourite of theirs: and
wee wiſh not to be vrged vnto it againſt our wills, by ſuch
kinde of dealings, leaſt happily fa: Parſons, and all his company,
repent that they euer prouoked vs therevnto.
               After his vncharitable deſcriptions of his body & mind, he
falleth to flat railing againſt him, calling him a lost ladde, the
ſtaine of his religion, and order, permitted by God, and vſed by the
deuill, and the like vncharitable ſtuffe: with no leſſe vncharitable
ſurmiſes of his peace made with my L. of London, as
though it had beene for ſome trechery, or other. All which
calumniations diſcouer enuie, & malice without reaſon. For

it is well knowne by ſuch, as dealt for him, that his peace was
made vpon honeſt conditions, and moſt lawfull, and that he
ſtoode both nice and ſcrupulous about the admittance of the
offer at the firſt; which argueth, that it was neither ſought by
himſelfe, nor accepted vpon any baſe, or vnlawfull conditions.
Beſides, it is well knowne, that ſince his comming in,
and his peace made, hee hath done much good as well to diuers
in particuler, yea and ſome of the Ieſuits friends, who little
deſerued it at his hands (if hee had reſpected perſons, or
ſought to requite wrongs) as alſo to the good of all the Catholicks
in generall.
               And whereas father Parſons noteth out of Cominaeus, that in
time of ſedition the worſt men grow faſteſt, who in a quiet
ſtate ſhould not be reſpected, it ſeemeth to be a great touch
of his owne credite, who (as wee haue noted before) neuer
loued in his life to be out of factions, and garboyles, rayſing
and maintayning tumults in all places in the world amongſt
Engliſh Catholicks whereſoeuer hee came, and continuallie
tempering in our Engliſh affayres, as well againſt our prince,
ſtate, and whole country, as our Clergie, & Colledges: both
which he, and his haue toſſed, and turmoiled from time to
time with ſuch ſeditious plots, practiſes, and garboyles, that
it is a world to conſider his buſie working humor in theſe affaires.
By which meanes chiefely, hee hath made himſelfe famous,
and infamous to the world. See how well father Parſons
hath profited by his example out of Cominaeus. For Ma.
Watſon, all men know that he hath been in very great eſteem
amongſt Catholicks abroade, before theſe troubles, & more
then now he is, by reaſon of the Ieſuits good words againſt
him, calling him into ſuſpicion, and iealouſie of trechery, in
reſpect of his ſuppoſed peace made with the ſtate: which argueth,
that he hath not ſo much growne by trouble, or factions
(as indeede Fa: Parſons hath done.)
               After all this, to ſhew more his particuler malice againſt
him, hee runneth backe vnto his firſt going beyond the ſeas,
and his comming to Rhemes, whether comming (as hee ſayth)
a poore begging boy, he was taken in of charity, and his first allowance
was, for a good time, pottage onely, and licking the diſhes,

which other men had emptied before, and afterwards was admitted
to ſerue at the Table, and carry away diſhes, and then to make
beds, and ſuch other offices: in which kinde hee ſerued one Ma:
Boaſt a Priest, &c. All this he ſpitteth out againſt Ma. Watſon,
wherein you may note a particuler malice againſt the
man; as he ſhewed before in the Apologie againſt Ma. Doct.
Bagſhawe. For you muſt note, that thoſe alwayes, that moſt
ſtand in this Fathers way, on them he layeth loade; as if all
his powers were recollected to wreake his teene (as the ſaying
is) or worke reuenge. But this kinde of faſhion will ſooner
diſcouer his malice amongſt wiſe men, then procure him
credite in his raylings. For if he were innocent, and not indeede
really toucht by Ma. Watſon, where his ſore lyeth; what
neede he to kick ſo faſt; reaſon and quiet reply would ſooner
haue ſhewed his innocencie (if hee had beene innocent)
then this outragious ſcolding. Beleeue me if I were altogether
ignorant in theſe affaires, I ſhould ſuſpect Fa. Parſons to
be galld, and rubbed vpon the olde ſore, by his intemperate
inuectiues againſt him: for that he hath taken vpon him to
diſcouer his actions, and practiſes, and ſo I thinke the like ſuſpicion
wil theſe immodeſt inuectiues breed in all wiſe mens
heads. Conſider whether fa: Parſons impatience, & paſſions,
make him not to forget himſelfe, and ſhew ouer-much folly;
but he that itcheth, muſt needes ſcratch.
               Now as concerning Ma. Watſons firſt going ouer beyond
the Seas, in ſuch meane eſtate (as he reporteth) it is nothing
ſo. For being diſcended of good, and honeſt parentage, both
by father and mother; out of both which ſtocks hath deſcended
worthy men, as the laſt Biſhop of Lincolne, and two
Abbots, one of the which was the Abbot of Blancheland, and
one Lord Prior, out of his mothers lyne, it cannot be imagined,
that he came of any baſe, or contemptible ſtocke, though
indeede his parents, through ſome deſaſtrous fortunes, were
not in their latter yeeres in that aboundance in the world, as
they had, and might haue beene, had not ſuch chaunces, incident
vnto men in this life befalne them, as might haue made
the richeſt Monarches meane, and poore: which notwithſtanding
was ſuch, as alwayes brought him vp in good ſort.

And for his going ouer, it was with ſuch difficulties, and ſo
often repulſes hauing been nine times vpon the Seas for that
purpoſe, that it might conſume no ſmall ſtore of mony, and
exhauſt a well lined purſe. Yet notwithſtanding, all this
his reſolution was ſuch, and Gods concurrence ſo effectuall,
that at the length he arriued according to his deſire at Rhemes,
where he was louingly entertayned, when as by reaſon of the
pouerty of that place, diuers others were reiected, and forced
to retire to the Campe, or become Seruing-men elſe-where,
and his entertaynment was equall with other mens children
of better birth, friends, and parentage, then euer Fa: Parſons
was, and not as a begger, or of charity, (but as the admittance
of euery one, that there was admitted, was opus charitatis)
nor in ſuch meane: and baſe ſort, as maliciouſly without
reaſon, or truth, Fa: Parſons affirmeth; but as a Scholer of the
houſe with the ſame priuiledges, that other had, and ſo employed
vnto his booke, wherein he profited, as all men ſee.
Neither (as we vnderſtand) was hee imployed in making of
beds, as this Fa: inſinuateth to his diſcredit, although ſuch an
office in a Colledge to a prieſt, as Ma: Boast was, and the other,
but then a youth, was no diſgrace, nor empeachment of
credit, as all men know.
               But to the poynt, Ma: Pibuſh, now I hope a bleſſed ſaint,
was the man that attended in that kinde vppon Ma. Boast,
not Ma. Watſon. Sed malicia, quò vades? Thus you ſee how
blinde Fa: Parſons enuie towards this man is, in obiecting
things, as diſcredit, which if they had beene ſo, had not been
any diſcredite at all, if not honour: but being not ſo, doth
manifeſtly conuince him of an enuious diſpoſition towards
the man. If wee ſhould now doe, as Fa: Parſons heere hath
done, enter into the Genealogies of his fathers, and aſſociates,
we could emblazonF: Parſons. one for a black-ſmiths ſon, if ſo well;
F: Garnet. another, for a very poore, and meane mans child;F: C
                        •
                     rrey. a third,
for a Tanners ſonne;F: Oldcorn▪
                   a fourth, for an Apothecarie his
Prentice;F: Percy. the fifth, for a poore boy, ſent ouer by a prieſt,
one of our friends;F: Bankes. another, for a Taylours ſonne, & heire,
and in that yet ſom-what. And how many more might wee
reckon of as meaneſtate, if birth ſhould diſparage their degree,

and function? but this is a conceit diſtaſting the iudgement
of any wiſe, or indifferent man: ſith not birth, but merits,
and vertuous qualities maketh prieſts. Neither doe we
regiſter theſe we haue done, as any touch to their dignities,
and prieſthood, but only to check Fa: Parſons exorbitancie,
and diſcouer his folly in bewraying himſelfe, and his beſt
friends.
               After all theſe diſgracefull ſpeeches ſteeped in gall, he toucheth
his lapſe, with more enuie, then all the reſt, taxing him
therein of many vntruthes, as is knowne to ſuch as were beſt
acquainted with all circumſtances thereof, and vnto whoſe
refutation we will leaue all particulers, as alſo the falſifying of
his letters, which yet as Fa: Parſons alledgeth them, taſt of
more true vertue, and humility, then he ſheweth charity, in
proſecuting the ſame. Hee hath forgotten belike how daſtardly
he fled himſelfe in time of perſecution, as Ma. Doct:
Bagſhawe noteth in his aunſwer to the Apologie. Soone after
this, he ſpeaketh of his breaking of priſon, which may worſt
of all be noted by him: ſith it is a thing ſo familiar, and ordinarie
with his pupills, both with greater ſcandall, and leſſe
cauſe, then euer was in his; as may appeare both by Ma. Lyſters
departure out of the Marſhalſeas, (his fellow priſoners
hauing giuen their words for his true impriſonment to the
Keeper, whereby they were left in no ſmall danger) as alſo
Ma. Barrows, and Ma. Rowſe, their apprehenſion cauſed by
his eſcape. Such danger, and ſcandall, by breach of faith, and
promiſe, neuer happened in the others eſcapes. And as for
the death of Miſtris Warde, for cooperating to Ma. Watſons
eſcape, ſhe might haue auoyded it, if ſhe had not returned to
the place from whence ſhee came with the boat after his departure,
by which ouer-much zeale ſhee was apprehended,
examined, and there-vpon executed. Her zeale of repairing
to that place, to haue him prayed for, and to heare if he were
ſafely departed, being more really the cauſe of her death, then
the cooperation to his eſcape, which ſhe had auoyded, if ſhe
had not repayred thither, whereof he alſo warned her before
hand, and ſhee promiſed him ſhe would not: neither knew
he of her apprehenſion, vntill newes was brought him of her

death, which greeued him ſore, as being knowne to carry that
ſtout, and gratefull minde, as hee would eyther by returne
haue ſaued her life, with loſſe of his owne, or elſe haue offered
himſelfe to death with her.
               Now as concerning his gallantnes, with chaines, iewells, &
I know not what, it will be a thing worth the noting particulerly,
for father Parſons credite, and his followers, and fauorits.
Thus then was the matter: There was a Pettyfogger of the
Ieſuits, a fawner on their fauours, and one that to his petty
poſſe was a factour for them. This good fellow, a Goldſmith
by his profeſſion (and ſom-what more) fold a certaine Iewell
to Ma. Watſon, which hee priſed vnto him at ten pound,
which Iewell, when it came to be looked into by another
Goldſmith, one Ma. Pareman in Tower ſtreete, it proued
worth not aboue eight ſhillings. This was the great Iewell
that made Ma. Watſon ſo gallant; in which how honeſtly he
was vſed by this petty-factor of the Ieſuits, you may ſee, and
not he alone, but others likewiſe: For he ſold certaine rings
vnto a Gentlewoman for gold, which in the wearing proued
copper, and the beſt, but ſiluer, and guilt. Was not this a
pillory matter? and yet was this Fa: Gerards man of olde: againſt
whom, as alſo againſt all the Ieſuits, he was wont afterward
to exclaime moſt bitterly, vntill that after three or foure
coſening tricks plaid to Ma. Watſon, and ſo many moe brothers
of our friends, ſome whereof might depriue him both
of eares, & life, (were we ſo bloody, as perhaps others would
be in this caſe) he being diſcarded for a baſe conſening companion
from amongſt vs, ranne to the Ieſuits ſide againe, to
raile againſt Ma. Watſon, and others, as at Framhingham he
did of late: and is not this a credite for the Ieſuits, to haue ſo
famous a diſciple of their owne brood, to build vpon in detraction?
This (I ſay) was that great Iewell; for other Iewels,
vnleſſe it might be a ring on his finger, hee neuer had
ſuch ſtore, as this Father reporteth, which argueth the honeſtie
of Fa: Parſons, in taxing him ſo vniuſtly with Chaines,
Iewells, Rings, Bracelets, &c. and thoſe got by importunitie,
and ſhifts. How were ſuch things gotten by importunity &
ſhifts, which he neuer had, more then heere I haue noted?

which indeede was purchaſed by a ſhift, but ſuch a ſhift, as
Fa: Parſons would be loth to purchaſe another ſuch of the
like price.
               Hee ſayth that he could recount diuers other particulers
if hee had but halfe the deſire to diſcredite him, as hee ſaith
Ma. Watſon hath malice to belie the Ieſuits. But belieue him
not (good people) for hee that would inuent lyes, as you ſee
to diſcredit him: would ſure neuer haue omitted truthes, if
he had knowne any, that would haue impeached him, either
in fame or credite. And wee know father Parſons not to be
ſcrupulous in taxing mens fames, and credits, as you may ſee
in his Apologie, and this his Manifestation, wherein no one of
his aduerſaries paſſeth without his blazon, eyther in generall
or particuler, as well in the relation of matters in Wiſbich and
Rome, as alſo our late affaires heere in England.
               He that taketh father Parſons, or moſt of his pupils heere
in England to be ſcrupulous in this point, is mightily deceaued.
For it is, and hath been the beſt weapon they fight withall,
maintaining theyr vniuſt, and vncharitable attempts, and
practiſes againſt Innocents by diffamations, & diſgraces caſt
vpon them, by calumnious ſpeeches, and vntrue ſupicions.
And that appeareth euen in the very next lines, where he affirmeth,
that Ma. Bluet made Ma. Watſons peace with my
L. of London, vpon condition that he ſhould raile againſt the
Ieſuits, the Archprieſt, and theyr friends, and to write, and
print bookes by the Biſhops direction. Which is a notorious
vntruth, beſides the malicious intention of bringing them
both into obloquie amongſt Catholicks for ſuſpicions of trecheries,
&c. no man better knoweth the falſhood thereof thē
my ſelfe, and the good hee hath doone to diuers Catholicks
in diſtreſſe, ſince his peace made, doe conuince the contrary.
I may not omit this Fathers bleſſing in the end and cloſe of
this vntrue, & vncharitable ſuſpicion, which is thus: This was
William Watſons holy vocation in the ſtate, and dignitie of perdition,
wherein now he ſtandeth. A learned cenſure of a Ieſuit,
and father of all our Engliſh Ieſuits. I maruaile how he durſt
thruſt himſelfe ſo peremptorily into Gods chaire. But of likelihood
the man hath ſome gift of diſcerning of ſpirits, or els

ſome other ſuch ſuperexcellent illumination, as Ma. Wiſeman
his friend ſpeaketh of. Goe to, goe to, proude Ieſuit: remē
                  ber
who ſayth, that it is not lawfull for thee to condemne thy
brother in this ſort.
               But now let vs ſee,The Sparing diſcouerie. what he ſaith to the booke of Sparing
diſcouerie. Firſt of all hee cauileth at a compariſon made betwixt
hipocriticall religious men, ſuch as liue, in a religious habite,
an irreligious life; which is ſo true a compariſon, as no
man will, or can infringe it. Neither was the example, or cō
                  pariſon
brought in, as of all religious perſons generally: but
of ſuch as inwardly, and in theyr actions, and life performe
not, what outwardly they make ſhew of by their habit. From
this cauill he proceedeth to the iuſtifying of Wiſemans ſeditious
pamphlet,Wiſeman wholy Ieſuited, if not a Ieſuite. written in diſgrace of prieſts, with a phariſaicall
extolling of the Ieſuits, cōmending by the fained ſpeech
of an Angel, all Catholicks to the Ieſuits direction, or to ſuch,
as are by them appoynted: (for to that end, was it writ, howſoeuer
he diſcourſeth in generall termes of ſuch, as liue vnder
obedience) becauſe forſooth they are more free from error,
more familiar with God, more particulerly illuminated, & more
ſpecially indued with the ſpirit of guiding ſoules. Which is both a
ſeditious, a falſe, and erroneous ſpeech, contrary to the practiſe
of Gods Church frō the beginning (as we haue ſhewed:)
which hath alwayes committed from time to time, the guiding
of ſoules to the ſeculer Clergie, as both more fit, and
more able, and not to the religious, but by ſpeciall priuiledge,
and as coadiutors onely therein, and not principall Agents;
and if at any time any religious perſon for his ſanctity, & extraordinary
diſcretion, haue beene called to take the charge
of ſoules vpon him, he hath thereby beene made a member
of the ſeculer Clergie, and exempted from his religious order,
as happeneth in all Biſhops taken out of Monaſteries &
religious orders. Whereby you ſee that a religious man (as ſo)
is not ſo fit, nor adiudged by the Church to be more ſpecially
indued with the ſpirit of guiding ſoules, then the ſeculer Clergie.
I will not ſay, that this hypocriticall vaunt ſmelled of Lucianiſme.
Neither doth S. Bernards words, rariùs cadunt, velociùs
ſurgunt, ſecuriùs ambulant, ſaepiùs irrorantur, proue that therefore

they be more ſpecially indued with the ſpirit of guiding
ſoules. For then would it follow, that Paulus Simplex was
more fit to haue beene a Biſhop, then moſt Biſhops in Saint
Bernards time, becauſe of his excellent vertues, aboue any Ieſuit,
that I know aliue. But ſuch is the fondnes of father Parſons,
when he will maintaine paradoxes.
               Touching the confident ſpeech, vttered in the prieſts behalfe,
of Gods ſufficient direction in the execution of our function,
it is no vaine, nor proude bragge, but an aſſured repoſe in the
power of prieſthood: which God in the execution thereof,
by his holy ſpirit directeth to the effects intended according
to the inſtitution thereof; which is ſo farre from Luciamſme,
as it were hereſie to denie the ſame. Neither doe wee ſay, as
falſly Fa: Parſons affirmeth, that by the character of prieſthood,
we are made free from ſinning, or erring, nor is there
any aſſurance arrogated vnto our perſons, by that ſpeech (as
to the Ieſuits by the former,) but onely vnto the power, and
authoritie of our prieſt-hood, which hath the greateſt aſſurance
in the world. It is alſo falſe that he ſaith, we ieſt at familiaritie
with God, frequent meditation. &c. but reproue that vanity
in ſuch fond Priſcillianiſts, as will arrogate vnto themſelues
ſuch priuiledges, and prerogatiues, of illuminations, familiarities,
(and I know not what) to the contempt of the ſeculer
Clergy, as Tertullian did after hee fell to be a Montanist,
vſing the very ſame text of Scripture againſt the Catholicks
and Clergy then, which father Parſons now vſeth againſt vs,
and to the ſame effect; to wit, animalis homo non percipit quae
ſunt ſpiritus dei: calling the catholicke Clergy carnall men,
becauſe they reproued ſuch fond illuſtrations, and illuminations,
in theyr two Propheteſſes, Priſcilla, and Maximilla,
whom father Parſons doth herein reſemble.
               After this, in the 87 and 88 page, he reciteth a taxation of
the Ieſuits in the aforeſaid Sparing diſcouerie: for theyr politicall
deuiſes, and Machiauilian rules, as alſo for theyr ſlaundering
the iustice of our Country. For the firſt poynt, theyr deuiſes politicall,
& Machiauillian practiſes, (whether out of generall rule
of theyr order, common to all, which I belieue not, or out
of particuler preſcripts, to ſome of thē by themſelues, onely

for better compaſſing of theyr deſignements) they are ſufficiently
demonſtrated, by theyr actions, true effects of ſuch
deuiſes, and manifeſt proofes thereof, both in this reply, as alſo
in all other diſcourſes written of late. Wherin you may ſee,
with what ſlights, cunnings, and policies, they firſt practiſed
in Wiſbich, then in Rome amongſt the ſcholers, and laſtly, in
theſe late affaires heere, for the erecting and maintaining of
an Archpriest by deceit, and force amongſt vs.
               Concerning the ſecond poynt, it is not affirmed generally
of all the proceedings of our ſtate, (which we goe not about
to defend, as euen in the Important conſiderations you may ſee)
but of ſome euident facts, both notorious & manifeſt, which
they haue gone about to deny, and colour, accuſing both the
Queene and ſtate therein moſt falſly. As both in Fa: Southwells
ſupplication, you may partly ſee, and alſo in other bookes
writ by them, & by theyr continuall rumors buzzed abroad,
both in other countries, and here in our owne alſo at home, as
all men know. Which ſlaunders beeing in things apparant,
and by open confeſſion acknowledged, (as that of the Duke
of Norfolke, Parry, Throgmorton, Babbington, and his complices,
Heskot, Squire, and the like) haue done much harme,
and auerted the ſtate very much from Catholicks.
               And another thing, which followeth in the ſame page, of
the Ieſuits ordinary practiſe in equiuocating, when they haue
beene examined; is ſo manifeſt, and notorious, as in very
deede almoſt euery ordinary officer vnder her Maieſtie, hauing
been acquainted with examining of them, are ſo vvell
acquainted therewith, as ordinarily they will vrge thē therewith;
yea and commonly ſay, that they know not when to
giue credite to theyr aunſwers, making all the exceptions of
ſuch equiuocating they can: and this poynt they beſt know,
that haue come vnder theyr fingers, and haue beene vrged
therewith by them. But I haue already ſaid ſomething of this
poynt, concerning theyr common practiſe heerein, by the
teſtimonie of a reuerend prieſt, conuerſing vvith one of
them.
               In the next page he denieth that Cardinall Borromaeus put
them out of his Seminaries in Milan, which is a thing ſo euident,

as the Biſhop of Caſſana (if he were aliue) would iuſtifie
the ſame; and there be others yet aliue, that know the
ſame alſo to be true. In the ſame page alſo he ſayeth, we ſcoffe
at ſpirituall exerciſes, which is moſt falſe (as you may ſee, if
you reade ouer the pages by him cited) for onely, their practiſes
in ſuch ſpirituall exerciſes, (whereby they make gaine,
and tye men I know not with what vowes vnto themſelues)
are vtterly diſliked; not the thing it ſelfe, if it be well performed,
and ſincerely, for the profit of the ſoule exerciſed, and
not to other reprouable reſpects, as we know they haue vſed
them. And wee ſee ſuch as they haue once had vnder theyr
hands, in thoſe exerciſes heere in England, eſpecially women,
became ſo reformed thereby, as they grow to proud
and peremptory humours, taking vppon them as Propheteſſes,
and Doctreſſes to cenſure Prieſts, and exclaime againſt
them in open aſſemblies, a vertuous effect of a ſpirituall exerciſe.
And of theſe I could name two notorious to all men
in this kinde; the one a maried Gentlewoman, the other,
a mayde.
               In the next page 89. Fa: Parſons waxeth cholerick in his
owne behalfe, (being toucht indeede to the quicke,) with
words, of fierie darts, helliſh hatred, ſerpentine tongues, mad, and
poſſeſſed men, &c. which he ſo fiercely thundreth out, as if he
were Iupiter Altitonans himſelfe: and yet he ſayth, that in all
our writings you ſhall finde no one poynt of moment, alleadged
by vs againſt him. If this be ſo, I would faine know
of him, why he is ſo cholerick? And why he taketh the matter
ſo heauily to the hart. If the matters concerne him not,
what skilleth it what rage or anger is ſhewed againſt him?
For if the matters be of no moment, they will diſcouer themſelues,
and then Ma: Parſons may reſt patient, and not ſo
much diſtemper himſelfe with ſuch outrages. A little more
heate would verily haue driuen him into a burning feauer:
Certes his paſſions ſhew he was prickt, and for triall thereof,
whether the matters obiected in our wrytings againſt him,
be of no moment, I referre you to the euidences of facts, and
proofes cleerely ſet downe, both in this reply, and the former
bookes themſelues. If happily you will retort the choler of

ſome of our wryters in like manner, to proue them guilty;
you muſt know that the caſe is altred: For heere Fa. Parſons
ſheweth his choler in his owne particuler defence: which is
both vnſeemely, and a note of touch; but our friends, if happily
hote words haue paſſed them, which wee wiſh had not
done: it is not in their own perſonall quarrell, but in a common
cauſe of the whole Clergie, and to be maintayned by
all, in regard of the whole, and not of any particuler. And
therefore no ſuch retorture can iuſtly be made, vnleſſe by the
ſame reaſon you will condemne S. Hillary, wryting againſt
Constans, in the common cauſe of Gods Church, with many
bitter inuectiues, and S. Hierome againſt 
                     Ʋigilantius, in the
like manner. But hee which ſhewed ſo much choler in his
owne defence, ſhewed little leſſe pride in the lynes following:
where hee compareth himſelfe with Chriſt, by the
words onely appropriated to him by Simeon: to wit, that he
was to be in ſignū, cui contradicetur: Alſo he draweth in Atheists,
Heretikes, Apostataes, ſeditious, contentious, tumultuous, deſaſtrous,
and diſſolute, to be inueighers againſt him; as though
he were the only innocent, and pillar of truth, againſt whom
all ſuch people did inueigh; and that all thoſe who did contradict
him, were Atheists, Heretikes, Apostataes, ſeditious,
or the like: A proud, arrogant, and contemptuous ſpeech.
For it is well knowne, that the beſt of fame, and reckoning
of our nation, both beyond the Seas, and here at home, haue,
and doe contradict his courſes, witnes the Biſhop of Caſſana,
Doct. Gyfford, Doct. Pearſe, Doct. Turner, Doct. Barret, and
infinite more of the Clergy, with Cardinall Allen himſelfe (as
we haue ſhewed) & all our Nobility, & gentry generally beyond
the Seas, onely 2. or 3. excepted of their fauourites.
               All theſe by this Fa: ſequell, muſt be eyther Atheists, Heretikes,
Apostataes, ſeditious, contentious, tumultuous, deſastrous,
or diſſolute. Touching our Latine book to his Holines:
if there be nothing in it, but calumnies againſt him, I hope
he will proſecute the ſame now in Rome, whilſt our Agents
are there, and make his aduantage thereof; which yet wee
heare not, that he hath, or can doe. Concerning Fa: Parſons
illegitimation, I haue oft wiſhed it had not beene vrged,

be it as it will be, being not much to the purpoſe. But ſith
it hath beene vrged, and that hee denieth it: I will but aske
him, why he was expelled Bailioll Colledge in Oxford, and
whether the chiefeſt matter obiected, was not periurie, in taking
the oath of the houſe to the ſtatutes, amongſt the which
this was one, 
                     Ʋolumus, vt omnes huius Collegij alumni ſint legitimo
thoro nati; which was vrged againſt him, and offered to
be proued openly. For the auoyding of which publique infamie,
he made his owne reſignation, writing it with his own
hand, as is yet to be ſeene. This is more, then I meant to
haue ſayd in this matter, being a perſonall touch; had not Fa:
Parſons ouer-much vrged the obiection, not onely as an vntruth,
but alſo inuented, and framed by vs. Heereby you
may ſee, that the matter was not coyned by any of vs, nor ſo
voyd of verity, as he affirmeth. You may reade more concerning
his expulſion out of Oxford, in Ma. Doct: Bagſhawe his
aunſwer for himſelfe to the Apologie. In the 91. page concerning
the matter of Squire, whereby the Doctor, and others
were brought into danger of their lyues, hee ſayeth for
Squire, that it was a meere fiction, & neuer any ſuch matter:
which (he telleth vs) is already proued, and appeared ſo to
be, by the fellowes death: And that Doctor Bagſhawe was
neuer in danger about it, but in ſpeciall fauour with the ſtate;
teſtified by his friendly calling vp to London, and vſage in
the Tower. In all this ſpeech, there be almoſt as many vntruthes
as words, if not moe. Firſt, that he was in danger of
his life: I remit my ſelfe to all mens teſtimonie, that were acquainted
with his intreatie; being 11. or 12. weekes cloſe priſoner,
and direct order giuen to the Earle of Eſſex for his racking.
Reade more of this, in his aunſwer to the Apologie.
Secondly, his aſſertion, that Squires attempt is already proued
to be a meere fiction, is an vntruth, for ought I know. Once
I ſaw a little Pamphlet, to cleare Ma. Rich. Walpole, as actor,
or plotter of ſuch a matter: but that proueth not that
the Doctor was not in danger; neyther did I ſee in my vnderſtanding
any conuincing argument in the diſcourſe to
cleare Fa: Walpole thereof; but that as vehement ſuſpicions
remayned, as were before. The chiefeſt reproofes conſiſted

(as I remember) in two poynts; the one, that he was named
William Walpole, for Rich. Walpole; which being no eſſentiall
poynt, nor circumſtance of importance in the accuſation, in
that a mans name may be miſtaken, his perſon being well
knowne, and eſpecially in the Ieſuits, who ordinarily are called
Fa. Parſons, Fa. Creſwell, Fa. Walpole, &c. without addition
of the Chriſten name, doth conuince nothing at all.
               The other was about the poyſon, which he affirmed, could
not be made, by the opinion of all learned Phyſicians; which
I affirme to be a very meere toy, and falſe, referring my ſelfe
for proofe hereof to any Phyſician of iudgement; whether
a confection of poyſon may not be made ſo ſtrong, as that
it ſhall infect thorough a Gloue, or ſingle garment, yea, or
thorough the leather of a ſhooe, and yet be carried in ſome
veſſell, or thing for the purpoſe, in the palme of a mans hand,
thorough which, it cannot worke. Doth not Aqua fortis
eate into yron, & not into lead, braſſe, or other mettals? Hath
not Quickſiluer the like ſtrange effects in ſome things, and
not in other? Doe not in phyſicke diuers potions worke in
diuers humours, not hurting the contrary? Will not ſome
venome, be contayned in one thing, and not in another?
Quickſiluer wil be caried ſafe in a quill, yet not in ſome other
things. Why then may there not a confection be made, which
will infect one way, though not another? Beſides, might
not Squires poyſon taynt her Maieſties ſaddle, and ſo her
hand, and yet himſelfe haue remayned ſafe many wayes.
Theſe things no Phyſician in the world of iudgement will
denie. And then what proofe is this: that no ſuch matter
was, becauſe no ſuch poyſon could be made? If theſe be all
the reproofes, (& as yet I haue ſeene no other of waight) how
is Fa: Walpole freed by this, and the matter a meere fiction?
But for the vehement ſuſpicions of the matter; conſider firſt
Roules and Stanleys diſcouerie of it, a whole yeere after (for
the which they remaine in the Tower, and affirme as much
ſtill:) then that Squier at his death confeſſed the plot, though
he denied his intention to performe it; ſo loud an vntruth it
is, that at his death (as Fa: Parſons ſaith) it appeareth to be
but an inuention. The fourth vntruth is Doctor Bagſhawes
                  
ſpeciall fauour at that time with the ſtate; being as I haue
ſhewed, 11. or 12. weekes in cloſe priſon, order taken to carie
him to the racke, and daily expectance of arraignement about
it, if miraculouſly God had not opened the plot. The
fift vntruth is, his friendly calling vp to London, the contrarie
whereof, euen father Parſons friends, of the oppoſite part in
Wiſbich, can witnes. For when the Purſuiuant came, hee delt
ſo rigorouſly with him, that hee would neither ſuffer him to
goe into his Chamber, nor take his leaue of his fellow priſoners;
but carried him preſently foorth into the Towne, neyther
would ſuffer him to write, or ſend any priuate meſſage
into the Caſtle backe to any. Doth fa: Parſons call this kind
ſending for?
               A ſixth vntruth, is his friendly vſage in the Tower, whether
he was not committed, but to the Gatehouſe (as all men
can tell:) where his entertainement was for 11. or 12. weekes,
as I haue told you. And this laſt vntruth cōuinceth this booke
of Manifestation, not to haue beene made by the vnited
prieſts, (vnder whoſe names it walketh,) but by a forrainer,
(whoſe intelligence herein failed him) for the prieſts in England
could not be ignorant of his commitment to the Gatehouſe,
& not to the Tower. But God would haue father Parſons
diſcouer himſelfe, though hee march vnder other mens
colours. I pray thee (gentle Reader) tell me in ſober ſinceritie,
were there not 6. vntruths well packt together in a ſmall
roome? belike it was for the more eaſie cariage. But who
now will belieue Fa: Parſons henceforward by his own rule,
though he ſay truth, ſith he heapeth vp ſo many vntruths together
in fardels, without bluſhing.
               In the ſame page, and the next following, he laboureth to
extricate himſelfe of an obiection, concerning his offering to
ſweare to Iames Clarke in London, that he neuer meant to be
Papiſt, but onely to goe to Padua to ſtudie Phiſicke. In which
the cunningſt ſhift hee hath, is to ridde the ſame by an equiuocation:
becauſe forſooth the word Papist is odious in
England, and not a terme profeſſed by vs. This is the clenlieſt
and beſt ſhift he hath, as there you may ſee. VVhereby
you may note, that hee had learned Logick before hee went

ouer; and knew the difference betwixt vniuocum & aequiuocum,
which practiſe hee hath not loſt ſince, for ought I ſee.
After this hee braggeth of his good deedes, for feare they
ſhould be forgot; & in the next paragraffe ſaith, it is a violent
lie, that Cardinall Allens opinion was of him, that hee was of
a violent nature: but for that reade Ma. Charles Pagets aunſwer
to the Apologie.
               
               In the next paragraffe he commeth to Stukleys matters cō
                  cerning
Ireland, which he layeth vppon Doctor Lewis, ſaying
that he had no part therein: which he confirmeth by that
he had beene then but two or three yeeres of the ſocietie, and
was not Prieſt. Of this we haue ſpoken in the fourth Chapter:
but that he had beene but two or three yeeres of that ſocietie,
and was not prieſt, argueth not, that he was no dealer
therein. For if he could be of that credit and reſpect, that he
entred then into difference with Doctor Lewis, Archdeacon
then of Cambray, and Referendary to Pope Gregory the 13.
about ſome matters concerning that buſines (as here he confeſſeth)
I ſee not but that hee might in the ſame manner, be
of like credite with his order to haue a hand therein alſo. And
all men know Fa: Parſons was forward enough at his firſt
going ouer, in ſuch buſie affaires; and the greatnes of the Ieſuits
with Pope Gregory, might giue occaſion & way enough
thereto.
               In the next page 92. hee noteth Ma. Blackwells bewayling
his comming into England; and his riſing in his order by practiſes,
and vntruthes, of which he ſaith, and many more if wee can
proue any one poynt, hee will ſay wee are honeſt men in the
reſt. Now then for our credits with fa: Parſons, for his riſing
by practiſes, or factious diſpoſition, I will ſay no more, but
what is iuſtifiable à parte rei, viz. that the moſt ſtirring, medling,
practiſing heads amongſt all of our Engliſh nation, (to
goe no farther) haue alwaies come to credite & preheminencie
amongſt them. Witnes this per inductionem Fa: Parſons,
whoſe factious diſpoſition hath been euery where ſufficiently
diſplaied with proofes ſufficient. VVitnes father Haywood,
and his buſie factious inclination at his comming into England,
of which fa: Parſons can beare witnes, being at variance

with him, and many other prieſts yet liuing in England, ſome
of them hauing beene preſent at his Synodes, where he made
himſelfe Preſident in the Popes name. VVitnes father Holt,
of whoſe diſpoſition you may read in Ma. Charles Pagets anſwer
to the Apologie. Witnes fa: Creſwell, as you may ſee in
Doctor Elyes aunſwer to the Apologie. Witnes father Garnet,
the onely chiefe actor in all our ſtirres heere in England. I
might adde Fa: Crighton the Scot, with the reſt; and father
Holt (if he were aliue) would take my part. Theſe then are
pretty inducements to thinke father Parſons roſe in his order
by his factious diſpoſition.
               But for the other point concerning Ma. Blackwell, let him
be examined, vpon his oath, whether he came not vnto Ma.
Bluet, then priſoner in the Marſhalſeas, vſing theſe or the like
words; VVhat meant Doctor Allen to ſend this man ouer,
he will vndoe vs all. And being asked why: hee aunſwered,
that his expulſion out of Oxford was ſo infamous, that it
would be obiected by the Proteſtants, to the diſgrace of the
cauſe. Let Ma. Blackwell (I ſay) be vrged with this, & I adiure
him, as hee will aunſwer it before Almighty God at the
latter day, to ſay the truth: and then fa: Parſons ſhall ſee wee
haue wonne our credits euen in both theſe points, beſides an
hundred more already prooued.
               As for his action in Paris, to get himſelfe releaſed thence,
I haue heard men of credite report the ſame thing, and that
Verstegen alias Rowland, was one of the three that came to
enquire late for him. For his euaſion that hee was not there
ſubiect, I would aske Fa: Parſons, whether when a Ieſuit maketh
aboade in any prouince, hee be not ſubiect to the Prouinciall
of that prouince? for as then fa: Parſons was no Prouinciall,
but a priuate Ieſuit, though he had indeed the ſuperiority
of ſuch, as came with him into England.
               Touching the ſtory of Doctor Gyfford, and father Baldwine,
before the Nuncio in Flaunders, read Ma. Charles Pagets
aunſwer to the Apologie, and you ſhall ſee the contrarie to
this fellowes words from the Nuncio his owne mouth. In the
93 page. b. hee denieth the Biſhop of Caſſana to haue beene
generall Viſitor ouer them, becauſe he had an other, viz. the

Biſhop of Mont Reall ioyned in Cōmiſſion with him, which
is but a cauill. For they were both Viſitors generall, & therefore
the Biſhop of Caſſana had authority ouer them, to viſite
and reforme them, if he would haue put it in practiſe againſt
them: which hee would not doe to auoyde theyr clamors of
partialitie againſt them, for that they held him theyr enemie,
although he had many memorialls deliuered him vp againſt
them, euen of diuers of their owne order, which he ſhewed to
ſome prieſts yet liuing; God forgiue him for his omiſſion
herein. Concerning the Letters writ againſt the ſaid Biſhop,
cōtaining theſe words, vel Turca, vel mors, vel daemon eripiat eū
á nobis: there be yet witnes thereof aliue, who ſaw him burne
it with his owne hands, vſing theſe words, pereat memoria earum
cum ſonitu.
               
               For the poyſoning of Sixtus quintus, Cardinall Allen, the
Biſhop of Caſſana, and others: whether they were poyſoned
or not, God knoweth, and by whom. But for Sixtus quintus,
it is notorious, that hauing beene ſicke of a burning Feauer,
and beeing newly recouered, he ſuddenly fell downe againe,
(and as was ſaid) with drinking of a cuppe of Greeke wine,This was the Ieſuite report in Rome.
he died within the ſpace of ſixe houres (if I be not deceiued.)
The ſuſpicion you ſee is great, of his poyſoning; and that the
Ieſuits ſhould concurre hereto, the conceit may ariſe by their
euill affection towards him; in reſpect of his reſolution to
reduce them to the forme of other religious orders a little before
his death. But that they did concurre to this fact, I will
not for any thing accuſe them, as beeing a matter I cannot
certainly know, & therefore will leaue it to that day, in which
all things ſhall be opened.
               Touching Cardinall Allen, the Phyſicians opening of him,
and finding no certaine cauſe of his death, might make the
ſuſpicion: and a Letter written vnto the Cardinall out of the
Low-countries not long before his death (as they ſay) intimating
the danger of his life, might aggrauate the ſaid ſuſpicion.
Concerning the Biſhop of Caſſana, and Maiſter Thomas
Throckmorton, diuers report theyr deaths confidently to haue
beene by poyſon: and a man of worſhip▪ & good reckoning
then at Rome, proteſted to me vpon his conſcience, that hee

thought them to be poyſoned. And the Phyſitian, after the
death of the Biſhop, being requeſted to open Ma. Thomas
Throckmorton, vſed theſe wordes, á che propoſito? è la medeſima
febre: to what purpoſe? it is the ſame feauer. And at the opening
of the Biſhop, hee beeing asked the cauſe of his death,
ſaid; beſogno dire, che é vna febre, wee muſt ſay, it is a Feauer.
Which words, and the manner of theyr deaths, & the black
ſtuffe which came from the Biſhop, made all men ſuſpect,
and plainly affirme: that they were both poyſoned. The like
Doctor Hugo the Biſhoppes nephew affirmed of himſelfe:
after that by the ſtrength of nature hee had ouercome the
dramme.
               Sir Griffen Markham had there a little phyſick preſcribed
him by the Phiſitian Signior Marcello, which wrought with
him ſo extreamely, that he had like to haue died of it, as himſelfe
I thinke will affirme: and ſending for the Phyſitian, hee
wondred at the effect of the phyſicke, ſaying; that phyſicke
which I preſcribed, ſhould not haue wrought thus: whereby
you may geſſe, whether there were not knauery in the
Apothecary at the leaſt. I will not, nor doe charge the Ieſuits
heerewith, but it is knowne that they affected none of theſe
parties; and I remember what one ſaid once vnto one of
them, My Maisters you haue very good lucke, for I ſee not any
man take part against you heere, that liueth long after it.
               
               Touching father Haywoods ſending to Calabria, which in
the 94 page father Parſons denieth; it is manifeſt that he was
ſent from Rome (with great diſguſt, and diſcontentment)
towards Calabria, marry indeede I thinke it was but to the
vtter parts of the kingdome of Naples: as his Letters in peticion
for reformation, writ vnto his holines did ſhew. As
concerning Cardinall Allens greeuing at the Oration made
in 
                     Ʋalledolid to the old King of Spaine: there is yet a reuerend
prieſt in England, to auouch the ſame, who preſented
the Oration vnto him.
               To conclude this Chapter of ſcandalous Libells (as Fa: Parſons
termeth thē) he falleth into a miſerable bitter inuectiue, as
though he had much choler yet vndiſgeſted, in this ſort, ſ
                     •
                  t:
Wherefore to conclude, ſeeing that this whole Libell is nothing

elſe, but a commixtion of monstrous lyes, abſurd prophanities, malicious
fictions, and conſcienceleſſe calumnations, wee will follow
them no farther, eyther in defence of the whole Societie, or Fa:
Parſons in particuler, whoſe actions are ſo openly knowne, by apparant
publike facts, to the generall good of our 
                        •
                     ountry, as theſe
wretched, and miſerable mens harts, that write ſo despightfully
against them, may ſooner breake with enuie and rancor, then any
least diſcredite, come vnto them by theſe furious barkings, in the
ſight of wiſe and indifferent Readers. Thus he inueigheth on
the one ſide, and claweth himſelfe on the other. Doe you
think he was in perfect charity all this while? With himſelfe
it may be hee was, by his good words: but you will neuer
thinke he was ſo with vs. And you would ſay ſo indeede, if
I ſhould recite, what followeth immediatly, being much
more fiery, and bitter, then his former rayling outrage. But
I will not aunſwer him in that kinde: God ſend him more
patience, and better charity.
               After his quicke,The Dialogue. and ſcandalous diſpatch of the former
bookes, he commeth vnto the Dialogue, wherein he will (as
he ſayth) be the ſhorter, becauſe he hath beene ouer-long in
the former; and I beleeue him, as well for the one as the other,
for it is euident (by what we haue already ſayd) that he
hath beene ouer-long, hauing ſaid little, or nothing to the
purpoſe, abſtracting from falſhoods, by-matters, impugnations
of open truths, and vncharitable inuectiues. And in
this, he both is, & muſt be ſhort; vnleſſe by longer diſcourſe
he would prolong his folly. For ſo moderatly, ſo charitably,
and ſo patiently is it penned; with ſuch regard of verity, and
truth in euery poynt, as for a man to contradict any thing
therein ſaid, were but to make the world to ſee, that he rather
loued wrangling, and iangling, then manifeſtation of verities.
All men of iudgement, and indifferencie, that euer read
the booke, doe moſt highly commend it. And therefore Fa:
Parſons extenuating the worke, (thereby to giue a touch vnto
the author:) ſheweth apparently vnto all the world, that
paſſion, partiality, and emulation hath weakned, or cleane
darkned his iudgement; or elſe you muſt needes ſay, that
onely Fa: Parſons is wiſe, and all men elſe are ſots, and fooles,

yea many of his owne faction commend the booke, both for
moderation, charity, patience, and well compoſing thereof.
But let vs ſee, I pray you, what he ſaith thereto: firſt, we will
begin with his moſt ridiculous comparing of Ma. Watſons
preface to this t
                     ••
                  atiſe (in that he ſheweth all men to be ſubiect
to ſinne, by the weakenes of mans nature, happening by the fall of
Adam) vnto the diſcourſes, made (as he ſayth, for you are
not bound to beleeue him heerein) in King Edwards dayes,
to allure olde prieſts to marry, by telling them, that concupiſcence
doth remaine after baptiſme, and conſequently all must haue
wyues, or doe worſe. See how learnedly the man bringeth in
his matters: mans nature being weakned by the fall of Adam,
is therefore ſubiect to ſinne; ergo concupiſcence remaining
after baptiſme, Prieſts muſt needes marry. Will not euery
child deſcrie Fa: Parſons ſimplicity▪ or wilfull folly herein,
eſpecially in that he further ſayth: that Ma. Watſons diſcourſe,
and induction, is the more fond of the two. Surely
if it be a better argument to conclude, that prieſts muſt marrie,
or doe worſe, becauſe concupiſcence doth remaine after
baptiſme: then to diſpute thus: mans nature is weakned by
the fall of Adam: ergo the Ieſuits may ſinne. You giue a great
blow to the Church, in maintayning an vnmarried Clergie.
I am ſorry to think that he ſhould open his weakenes 
                     •
                  or follie
ſo apparantly to the world, hauing been hetherto thought
ſo wiſe a man. But what think you (ſaith he) to the booke it
ſelfe, that hath ſaid ſo little, and ſo wiſely to the Epiſtle? Beleeue
me, he ſayth neuer a word at all: but onely rayleth at
Ma. Muſhe, (whom he ſuppoſeth to be the author) for his ingratitude,
taxing him with ſecret Apoſtaſie, becauſe he had
forſooth a vow of their Society. And who is it, that hauing
a vow of Religion, may not iuſtly be diſpenſed there-with,
vpon diuers reaſons, and freed from the performance thereof
in couſcience? What reaſon then hath Fa: Parſons to taxe
him with ſecret Apoſtaſie, that might haue (as I think he had)
a diſpenſation for it. For he was in Rome in Cardinall Allens
time, and as it was ſaid, about that matter. Beſides, it is
not Apoſtaſie to leaue the Ieſuits order, before the laſt vow,
(which few of them haue taken) vpon iuſt, and reaſonable

cauſes. How then could it be Apoſtaſie in Ma. Muſhe, to
leaue that vocation, into the which he neuer entred? Hee
ſaith, that the fiue chiefe poynts, of which we are cleared by
this booke: to wit, Schiſme: dealing with the Counſell: our appeale
to Rome: hatred to the Ieſuits: and dealing in matters of
ſtate: were neuer obiected againſt vs, by the Ieſuits; but that
eyther wee accuſed our ſelues thereof, or elſe went about to
purge our ſelues before we were accuſed. Verily it is more
then ſtrange, to ſee ſuch apparant verities denied, by ſo graue
a man, a religious perſon, and one whom ſo many admire for
wit, and rare qualities. Why? all the world will controle him
in the deniall of theſe things, and himſelfe, both in the Apologie,
and this booke of Manifestation, ſhall be a witnes againſt
himſelfe. Doth he not often-times taxe vs, with dealing with
the ſtate, Ma. Bluet by name, Ma. Doct: Bagſhawe, Ma. Watſon,
and others? And doth he not ſay in the laſt Chap. 122.
leafe, that we yeelded to goe farther with the ſtate, in matters
againſt Cath: doctrine, for fauour, and credite, or to make
others odious, then in conſcience we could? Doth hee not
alſo ſay, that Ma. Bluet dealt with the ſtate, to make Ma:
Watſons peace: vpon condition, that he ſhould raile againſt
the Ieſuits? How oft doth he inculcate our dealing with the
ſtate in treacherous ſort; aduiſing Cath: in the laſt Chapter,
to beware of vs, and keepe themſelues out of our reach, for
feare we betray them? What will not this man ſay, and vnſay
for his aduantage? But his vntruthes are ſo common, and
frequent, that it is impoſſible for him almoſt, but to contradict
himſelfe ſometimes: for (as you know) oportet mendacem
eſſe memorem: hee that lyeth often, muſt haue an extraordinary
memory. The reaſon is, becauſe falſhoods haue
not the like foundations, that truthes & verities haue; whoſe
ground is ſo certaine, that the frame ſtandeth ſure, and ſtrait;
but contrariwiſe vntruthes, being fained, haue no certaine
foundation, and therefore the frames and buildings therevpon,
are vncertaine, crooked, and apt to alterations. Againe,
for our appeale to Rome, doth not himſelfe alſo ſay, that it was
but a cauill, and ſlight▪ to winne time, and purchaſe liberty,
and that it was reuerſed by the Pope, and therefore not auailable?

Doth he not in euery Chap: both in the Apologie,
and this booke, raile againſt vs for malice, enuie, and emulation
againſt his Society in generall, and diuers particuler men
thereof? Were his wits on wool-gathering (where there are
no ſheepe in the Country) that he cannot rememeber the very
chiefe ſcope of his writing all this while? vvhich hath been
nought elſe, but of our hate, malice, enuie, and emulation to the
Ieſuits for the moſt part? Wherefore were all his diſcourſes
in the Apologie of ſo many examples brought in of Iohn
of Gaunt, King Henry the eight, Queene Mary, &c. of hurt
that came by the emulations againſt religious men? To what
purpoſe are all his inuectiues in this Libell againſt vs: if not
in fauour of the Ieſuits by vs impugned? ſtrange was his
forgetfulnes, or admirable is his folly. Againe, doth he not
taxe vs in the Manifestation, for dealing with the Scot, then
with the French, and laſt of all, of a new plot in England, for
the fauour of ſome great perſon, to frame or inuent a new
ſucceſſion to the Crowne? And yet heere he ſaith, that the
Ieſuits neuer accuſed vs of theſe matters, but that we accuſed
our ſelues, or went about to purge our ſelues thereof, before
we were accuſed. Beſides, theſe open proofes out of his owne
writings againſt himſelfe, I referre the matter to the Readers
conſcience: whether of his owne knowledge (if he were not
extraordinarily ignorant in theſe our affaires) he could with
any conſcieuce affirme theſe things, not to haue beene commonly
obiected againſt vs. And for the poynt of ſchiſme,
it is ſo notorious to all the world, that I cannot but bluſh in
Fa: Parſons behalfe: to thinke that he hath the face to denie
ſo open, ſo apparant, ſo generall, ſo publike a thing. Thus
you ſee Fa: Parſons honeſty, and this is all he ſayeth of the
Dialogue.
               
               The next matter this Fa:Ma: A. C. his letter to his Coſen. handleth, is Ma. A. C. his letter
to his Coſen. In the diſcourſe whereof, hee ſo vncharitably
inueigheth, againſt the ſuppoſed author, that you would
much wonder if you read it. It is but ſhort, yet ſo couched
with pricks, thornes, and ſharpe needles of choler, ſo bitter,
and ſo biting, that it is a world to ſee how hee ſtraineth himſelfe
to bring the honeſt gentleman into obloquie.
               
                  
Hee maketh mee to remember a tale of a certaine poore
Catholicke recuſant now in priſon, who hauing been a petty
Muſician, and a wilde fellow in his young yeeres, was for his
pleaſant conceits deſired of diuers Iuſtices of peace in the
country, eſpecially at Chriſtmas time, and much made of. It
pleaſed God to touch the hart of this Muſician, and hee became
Catholicke, and withall ſtaied, and reclaimed from his
former madnes, and wilde behauiour. Soone after (beeing
knowne to be a Catholicke) hee was apprehended, brought
to Wincheſter gaile, & called before the Iuſtices. Being conuented
before them, ſome of them began to rate him, and inueigh
againſt him, exprobrating vnto him his former courſe
of life, and mad, and lewd behauiour. Whereunto the poore
Catholicke made this, or the like aunſwer. It is a world (ſaith
he) to ſee, how you now runne vppon mee for theſe things:
when I was ſuch a fellow, as you ſpeake of, I was a welcome
man to all your houſes, much made on; & who but I: now
it hath pleaſed God to call me to better courſes, you vpbraid
mee with my old faults, which then you delighted in. And
euen ſo, in ſome part it fareth with father Parſons, in his rayling
againſt this Gentleman: ſeeking all the aduantages that
he can in his young yeeres; which happily might haue a taſt
of youths vanitie, yet neuer ſo vnſeemly, that his honour, or
reputation might iuſtly be called in queſtion thereby, that euer
I haue heard: & all men, that now know him, will witnes
that he is both very ſtaied, vertuous, & religious: & without
exceptions, a man of very good cariage: notwithſtanding
Fa: Parſons vncharitable, and vnſeemly ſpeeches againſt him,
beeing a gentleman of worthy diſcent. And therefore ſuch
baſe inuectiues, to wiſemen, will ſeeme to proceede, not from
any generous diſpoſition (which alwaies regardeth men of
ſort, according to theyr birth and education) but from ſome
dunghill of baſenes it ſelfe, whoſe thoughts ſauor but draffe,
and ſwill.
               For the particulers which father Parſons vrgeth out of this
Letter, I will paſſe them ouer, aſſuring my ſelfe, that, if the
Gentleman he noteth were the author of that letter, hee will
frame an aunſwer to all, that heere is obiected, which (God

knowes) is but little and weake, as men of iudgement vvill
ſoone ſee. Onely I cannot let paſſe his vrging of the excommunication
againſt him, becauſe he defendeth the innocencie
of the prieſts in the matter of ſchiſme, which (he ſaith) was
forbidden by the breve to be diſputed of, vnder paine of excommunication.
I wonder fa: Parſons could vrge this, & forget
that all bookes in like ſort, whereupon odium diſſidiumue,
&c. in theſe affaires might ariſe, were forbidden in the ſame
Breve, and then by conſequence (if this Breve be of force, &
generall) Fa: Parſons hath incurred excōmunication by this
his Libell, without all excuſe; becauſe he taketh (as you ſee)
notice of the Breve. But if hee view the Breve well, hee ſhall
finde that Lay men are not included therein vnder any cenſure.
Beſides that, the Bull was fruſtrated euen by the Archprieſt,
and Ieſuits themſelues, as is ſufficiently proued in the
Anſwer to the Apologie.
               
               Againe, where Maiſter A. C. ſaith, that power was not
giuen to S. Peter by Chriſt, to transferre gentem in gentem, it is
both catholicke and true doctrine: and in vaine ſhall Father
Parſons goe about to infringe it. For the reſt, I leaue to the
author himſelfe, though there be nought elſe of importance
againſt him.
               Of Fiſhers Memoriall ſufficient hath beene ſaid in the firſt
chapter. But where hee affirmeth, that Doctor Gyfford hath
been a flatterer of Cardinall Allen, in ſtate practiſes, and
ſhewed the ſame in ſermons in Rhemes,
                  After the action in the yere 88. no man can ſay that the cardinall dealt in any attempt againſt our country. and in his orations
to the Duke of Guiſe, I doe verily thinke all theſe to be meere
calumnies. For firſt, Cardinall Allen was in Rome, when the
action of 88. was intended, and there concurred in what hee
did concurre. The other, (to wit, Doctor Gyfford,) was then
in Rhemes, where no concurrence in the world was, or could
be giuen, (being farre out of the way for concurrence either
by aduiſe, or otherwiſe) vnleſſe it were in priuate conſent of
mind, which I think father Parſons was not of counſell with.
And for his ſermons, my ſelfe haue heard diuers of them, yet
neuer did I in three yeeres ſpace, heare him in his ſermons
deliuer any, eyther vndecent, or vndutifull word againſt her
Maieſtie or ſtate, but onely lament the times, and exhort to

labour for the conuerſion thereof by preaching & praying.
And touching his orations to the Duke of Guiſe, I heard one
of them, and to my knowledge, there paſſed not a ſentence
in derogation to the ſtate of England, or drawing to the hurt
thereof. But I know the Doctor will ſufficiently purge himſelfe
of all ſuch vncharitable, and vniuſt accuſations, which
rather fauour of malice, to draw him into obloquie (as himſelfe
is) then of truth, honeſtie, verity, or charitie.
               Adde alſo vnto this, that if Doctor Gyfford had been a forward
man in any ſtate practiſes againſt our country, it is more
then probable that he ſhould haue been a dealer, either in the
action of Frauncis Throckmorton, being his neere kinſman, or
Babbingtons, by reaſon of Gilbert Gyfford, with whom he was
very inward, and familiar; yet father Parſons cannot accuſe
him in eyther: for the firſt, hee was in Rome a ſcholer when
it was in hammering. For the ſecond, the contrary appeared
by his Letters writ to Gilbert Gyfford, whilſt hee lay in Paris:
which (as I remember) were found in Gylberts ſtudie when
hee was apprehended. Thus you ſee how improbable it is,
that he ſhould be ſuch a forward man in ſtate practiſes, as fa:
Parſons without all proofe affirmeth, beſides, his proteſtations
in his late Letters, are to the contrary, and vtter diſlike of
ſuch proceedings.
            
            
               An aunſwer to the eyght Chapter, concerning his directions vnto
Catholicks how to diſcerne the truth: & how to beare
themſelues in this time of contention. &c.
               WE will let paſſe in the firſt aduertiſement his dangerous
tearmes of neceſſity and ineuitabilitie, in
theſe diſguſtfull accidents: vvhich in the firſt
ſence abſolutely vnderſtood, taſte vnſauory, if
not heretically; to put abſolute neceſſitie and ineuitabilitie in
thoſe actions which are ſubiect to mans will, reaſon, and free
election, as all the reaſonable actions of man are. In the ſecond
vnderſtanding, taking the whole ſentence together, it
includeth a contradiction in ipſis terminis, in the very tearmes
of the propoſition. For to be neceſſary, and to be accidentall,
                  
are oppoſite in the very tearmes, in that, to be neceſſary, or of
neceſſity, is to exclude chaunce; and to be accidentall or by
chaunce, is to take away neceſſity, becauſe that which is by
chaunce, may hap, or not hap, but that which is of neceſſitie,
muſt needes be, and cannot be otherwiſe.
               As for example, where the ſunne is, there muſt needes be
light, becauſe light is a neceſſary effect of the ſunne; neither
can the ſunne be without that effect: but that it ſhall raine at
noone daies, is by chaunce, according to the diſpoſition of
the ayre, and multitude of vapors gathered together in it. So
that the ayre being indifferently ſubiect to either diſpoſition,
viz. of much ſtore of watry humour, or otherwiſe: it falleth
out to be accidentall, whether it ſhall raine at noone dayes, or
not raine. And euen ſo in the reaſonable actions of man, beeing
ſubiect to the will, a man may freely make his election at
his pleaſure, this way, or that way, without conſtraint, or neceſſity,
whereby you ſee this propoſition of fa: Parſons, as he
hath deliuered it in tearmes, is eyther fooliſh, becauſe contradictory
in terminis, or dangerous, putting things vnder abſolute
neceſſity, & ineuitability, which are ſubiect to mans will,
and free election, and therefore accidentall.
               
               But though his propoſition be deliuered in dangerous, or
ill termes, we will conſtrue his meaning the beſt way, and as
by the words of ourMath. 18. Sauiour, & the1, Cor. 11. Apoſtle alleadged,
we think verily he meant; to wit: that although they be accidentall,
in the reſpect of mans free will, vpon which they
depend; yet are they neceſſarie, ſecundum quid for the probation,
and true touch of thoſe that are Chriſtes, and ſo ineuitable,
not abſolutely, but ſecundum quid, ſuppoſing the inclinations
of mens wills, and the courſes taken in theſe affaires, vppon
which ſcandalls muſt of neceſſity follow. And this we
haue ſayd to cleare Fa: Parſons dangerous aſſertion, that no
man miſtake the verity of the Cath: doctrine: which putteth
no reaſonable action of man, nor effects there-vpon following
vnder neceſſitie, or ineuitability. For of the ſame nature
are the cauſe, and the effect; ſo that if the cauſe be neceſſary
then the effect depending in eſſe, et fieri, vpon that
cauſe, being a proper effect of the cauſe, is alſo neceſſarie,

                  quia poſita cauſa ſurgit effectus, ſicut poſito ſole reſultat lumen:
ſo in like manner, if the cauſe be accidentall, the effect thereon
depending, muſt needes be accidentall. As for the winde
to be in the Eaſt, or Weſt, is accidentall, becauſe the being of
the exhalations, which cauſe the winds, is a
                        ••
                     identall. The reſt
that followeth of the neceſſity, and vtility of ſcandals, &c. is
oratio communis, or exordium commune▪
                   and may, as it pleaſeth
the Orator, be applied this way, or that way, to this part,
or that. But if any man of iudgement will ponder, and without
partiality weigh, what hath beene done on eyther ſide,
ſince theſe garboyles, and which part it is, that hath ſuffered
the greateſt wrongs, and oppreſſions of the other: hee will
ſoone iudge, that the vtility of theſe ſcandalous afflictions,
hath rather beene on our part, then the Ieſuits; wee hauing
beene ſo narrowly ſifted by them, as we haue been. Whereby
a man may rather imagine by all probabilities, that the
perſons, whom God would haue tried, and proued to the
vttermoſt, haue beene amongſt vs; againſt whom the Archprieſt
and Ieſuits, raiſed ſuch whirl-winds of ſlaunders, infamies,
opprobries, contumelies, vexations, inſultations, clamours,
out-cries, penuries, and what elſe might be deuiſed;
that on their parts there was enough done againſt vs, to haue
ſhak
                     •
                  n men of moſt conſtant reſolutions. Was not the moſt
hatefull note of ſchiſme, and rebellion againſt Gods Church,
moſt vniuſtly, moſt falſly, and moſt opprobriouſly caſt vppon
vs by the Ieſuits, and Archprieſt? Were we not by that
ſlaunder reiected of Cath: driuen from the Altar, forbidden
the Sacraments, eſteemed as out-caſts from Gods Church?
Was not a ſeditious Libell with moſt vncharitable inuectiues,Liſters Libell.
of ſinne, ſchiſme, Idolaters, Sorcerers, publicans, ethnicks,
rebells, ſeditious, factious, and the like opprobrious,
and contumelious names, framed againſt vs by a Ieſuit, and
allowed, approued, and publiſhed againſt vs by the Ieſuits,
and Archprieſt? Were not our neceſſary friends forbid to
entertaine vs, releeue, or help vs, and threatned for the performance
of any charitable office towards vs? Were they
not had in obloquy, & note, that reſorted vnto vs, & threatned
to be excommunicated, that ſpake in our behalfes?

Were not good Cath: told, that it was a mortall ſinne to ſend
ſuch of vs releefe, as lay in priſon? Were not all Cath: generally
taught by them, that they might not in conſcience communicate
with vs, eyther at Maſſe, or in other Sacraments?
Were we not tax
                     •
                  d of eſpiall for the ſtate, trecherie, and villanie
againſt our brethren, and open betraying of Cath: when
wee were moſt ready to ſhed our bloods in their behalfe?
Were wee not made almoſt odious to Cath: by theſe infamies,
and opprobrious ſlaunders, layd vpon vs by the Ieſuits,
and Archprieſt?Tompſon. Were not the baſeſt of their vaſſalls, and
ſome of them,Coulſon. ſuch as proued murderers, and theeues afterwards,
yea, and then had been no better, maintayned to raile,
blaſpheme, and inueigh againſt vs, as reprobates, and out-caſts
amongſt men?Waine. Were not diuers hired, and well feed to
make faction againſt vs?Cope. Were not ſuch as liued in priſon, &
knowne to be moderate, and indifferent neglected in diuident,
and almes, that ſhould be giuen to priſoners, becauſe
they would not raile againſt vs?Ma: Pencheuell. Were not generally all men
accounted honeſt, and ſound Cath: that could open theyr
mouthes to raile at vs, and reuile vs, were they otherwiſe neuer
ſo bad, or notorious in their behauiours? Of which ſort
I could name diuers, beſides the two firſt alleadged; but that
I will not diſcouer them, to impeach theyr credites 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
world. And on the contrary part, were not all that held with
vs, called into ſuſpicions, and iealouſies therefore? Will not
all wiſe, and indifferent men (iuſtly conſidering, and pondering
theſe wrongs) thinke that God permitted theſe things,
rather to try, and manifeſt the vertues, and conſtancies, of
ſome on our parts, (who endured theſe afflictions;) then on
the Ieſuits part, who vniuſtly inflicted the ſame? doubtleſſe
they will. And now I would haue Fa: Parſons to ſhew the
like wrongs, oppreſſions, and iniuries done to them by any
of vs. Were they euer accounted Schiſmatikes, Ethnicks, or
Idolaters by vs? Were they euer brought into extreame
wants, and miſeries, by our meanes? Did we euer teach, that
Cath: might not releeue them as prieſts? Did we euer hire,
or maintaine murderers or theeues, to raile againſt them? neuer
in our lyues. How when were they tried, and made manifeſt,

as vertuous, or conſtant men in theſe troubles? If he
ſay, becauſe they held with the Archprieſt, and ſubordination
got by their cunning meanes, and againſt all law, conſcience,
and reaſon, thruſt violently vpon vs againſt our wills;
therein they ſhew how much wrong they haue done vs;
which doth rather manifeſt them, to haue beene the cauſers
of all this miſchiefe and ſcandall, then in any thing diſplay
their vertue, or conſtancie. If they vrge cholerick words, vttered
in ſome of our bretherens writings, they haue payed vs
home for the ſame, both in words, and action alſo. If they
vrge matters layd to their charge, concerning ſtate practiſes,
and theyr proceedings in theſe affaires againſt vs, wee maintaine
them ſtill, not as wrongs done, but as moſt true, & are
ready to iuſtifie the ſame, as by this reply you may ſee. But as
for the wrongs (aboue ſpecified) which they did againſt vs,
all the world ſeeth them to be vniuſt; wee beeing (as now is
euident) moſt cleere from note of ſchiſme, ſinne, diſobedience,
rebellion, &c. whereupon all thoſe iniuries aroſe.
               Thus you may perceiue how well this exordium commune,
of (vtility) doth agree with our part; and how little reaſon
there is, to apply the ſame vnto the Ieſuits, Archprieſts, and
their followers. But let vs conſider how hee applieth the
fame to himſelfe, and his aſſociates; the firſt application is,
that many as well abroad of other Nations, as of our owne,
and alſo in England, ſeeing this ſcandalous fact of diuiſion,
ſet in our Church, haue meruailouſly ſhewed theyr compaſſion,
loue, and zeale in behalfe of vnion. An application,
which is ſo generall, as may be applied to eyther part, according
to the humour of the Reader, which ſide hee will
iudge factious, and breaker of vnion, and by reaſons aboue
alleaged, will ſeeme more to note the Ieſuits, by whoſe action
of intruding vpon vs an Archprieſt againſt our wills, and
all law, iuſtice, and equity, this breach of vnity aroſe. The
ſecond application is, that thoſe that liued onely to themſelues
before, by this occaſion haue ſtirred vp themſelues to
knit, and ioyne with others of the ſame zeale, to reſiſt the enemies
malice heerein. This alſo is a common aſſertion to
be applied to either part; neither hath he named one quiet, or

indifferent man beyond the Seas, that liued to himſelfe, who
hath beene ſtirred vp by this occaſion, to ioyne with him, and
his adherents heerein: onely the Ieſuits and Spaniards proſecute
this matter againſt vs, and their faction. But now for
our part: what quiet men haue beene ſtirred vp to meddle, I
will ſhew you. Firſt, Doctor Ely hath in our behalfe written
a treatiſe againſt the Apologie; whom, all the world know to
haue beene a quiet indifferent man. Secondly, Doctor Parkinſon
(as by his letters, cited in The aunſwer to the Apologie,
you may ſee) hath ſhewed himſelfe for vs. And thirdly, all
men almoſt of worth, as well of the Clergie, as Laïty, that liue
abroad beyond the Seas, haue pittied our oppreſſions, as it is
well knowne. The ſecond effect, by Fa: Parſons noted, is:
that mens harts, and inward cogitations heereby are made
manifeſt, which otherwiſe might haue lurked vntill better
ability, and thereby haue wrought more miſchiefe, which
now burſting forth, will be ſeene, and auoyded, &c. This effect,
being alſo as generall, as the other, and admitting any
application; ſo fitly agreeth with Fa: Parſons, and the Ieſuits,
as all the world could not haue found out an office more
agreeable for the purpoſe. For may not (I beſeech you) by
this ſcandalous breache, and the occaſions and circumſtances
concurring, euery man of wiſedome ſee what the plottings
of the Ieſuits haue beene, and their ſecret workings vnder-hand,
as well for the ouerthrow, and ſubuerſion of our
Country, by inuaſions, practiſes, and treacherous deuiſes, as
alſo the ſubiection of our Clergie, to an vnheard of ſlauerie:
which if by occaſion of theſe ſtirres, and fallings out, they had
not beene made manifeſt, might haue lurked, and lien ſecret,
and vnknowne, vntill their plots, and practiſes had beene
ripe, and their ability, ioyned with the Spaniſh forces, able
to haue wrought the ouerthrow of both: which I hope by
the prouidence of God, and concurrence of all good Engliſh
ſubiects, as well Catholicks as others, will be auoyded:
beeing, by theſe occaſions made open, and manifeſt vnto
them.
               As for Fa: Parſons vncharitable prophecie, that the chiefe
and principall of our part, are like enough to goe farther, &

become as Bell, and other Apoſtataes: wee hope in this hee
will rather proue one of the falſe prophets of Ball, then any
true prophet of God. But ſuch preſages, as theſe, taſt not of
the greateſt Chriſtian charitie, or modeſty, which father Parſons
might haue had. Theſe are all the effects and applications
of his neceſſity and vtility, which father Parſons maketh;
vvhich hovv generall they be in themſelues, and hovv
weakely by him applied, or whether by this our returning
them vpon himſelfe, and his, they carry not more weight &
reaſon by odds, I leaue the indifferent, and diſcreete Reader
to iudge.
               After theſe effects, page 122. he beginneth to direct Catholicks
how to beare themſelues in this time of triall, as well
in reſpect of the enemy, and perſecutor, as the troubleſome, as
he termeth vs. And for the firſt, he giueth ſo good directions
and aduertiſements of humility, patience, longanimitie, obedience,
and true ſpirit of Chriſtian ſufferance; that if he, and
his complices, and ſome few other had obſerued the ſame
from the beginning towards theyr ſoueraigne, and country:
it had been (doubtleſſe) farre better for all catholicks in England
at this day, then now it is. But he can ſpeake well, though
he haue done neuer ſo vnhappily (as in the fourth Chapter
you may ſee) and this is but a tricke of a polititian, to vſe the
beſt words, when he meaneth leaſt good. And whereas hee
taxeth vs in generall tearmes, to haue yeelded to goe farther
with Proteſtants in matters againſt religion, and Catholicke
doctrine then wee might, it is a meere calumnie, and for his
life hee cannot name the leaſt particularitie of this, but onely
(after the old manner) ſpetteth out generall accuſations, with
out any particulers in the world, whereas we are able particulerly
to charge him, and ſome other Ieſuits, to haue gone farther
in their practiſes againſt her Maieſtie, then any Catholicke
doctrine, conſcience, or religion can warrant them: cō
                  cerning
the taking away of her life by ſecret murdering, and
conſpiracies (ſee the fourth Chapter) and I farther ſay, that
Fa: Parſons practiſes, firſt with the Scot, then with the Spaniard
(and as they ſay, with the Duke of Parma alſo, but I
am ſure father Holt did) for inuading his naturall country, &

ſubiection thereof by fire and ſword (which muſt needs haue
followed) were and are vnnaturall, becauſe againſt his natiue
ſoile, and naturall Soueraigne: vncharitable, becauſe the increaſing
of Catholicks affliction at home: and vnconſcionable,
becauſe without that iuſt, & due reſpect of either, which
in conſcience, he ought to haue had. Now let the world ſee
whether we deale in generalitie with fa: Parſons, as he dealeth
with vs.
               VVee will omit his inuectiues againſt vs, as men in a frenz
                        •
                     e,
and poſſeſſed with violent, and raging ſpirits, and his warning
to Catholicks▪ to keepe themſelues from comming vvithin
our fingers, or reach (as though wee were traytors, & would
betray them:) which ſheweth his ſmall charity, not to adde
malice. VVee will alſo paſſe ouer his long and tedious diſcourſe
of the ſpirits of men, & trying of ſpirits: which word
ſpirits, he hath ſo canuaſed thorow all this his Libell, as if hee
had been ſome Zwingfieldian, or preciſe Anabaptiſt, indued
extraordinarily with the ſpirit. But I will not omit his falſe &
hereticall interpretation of the place of S. Iohn, Try the ſpirits,
&c. thereby leading his Reader into a preſumptuous error of
iudging all, both men and matters, contrary to the true meaning
of the Apoſtle: as you may perceiue by Gerſon, & Ma.
Gregory Martin vpon that place.
               In the cloſe, and concluſion of this his diſcourſe of diſcerning
of ſpirits, he doth ſo ſet out himſelfe, as if hee had no other
marke, or ayme: for all men know him to be (and as he
might thereby be diſcerned) of a moſt violent, and headlong
ſpirit. And for the humility, obedience, pouerty, patience,
and charity of the Ieſuits, which hee noteth for effects and
ſignes of the ſpirit of God, I refer it to the iudgement of ſuch,
as haue knowne theyr proceedings in theſe late affaires, with
what inſolencie, and violence, they haue proſecuted the matter
of the Archpreſbyterie, and ſchiſme againſt vs; theyr inſatiable
deſire of rule, and gouernment ouer vs, firſt in Wiſbich,
then abroade; theyr exceſſe in apparrell, expenſes, horſes, &
attendants; poſſeſſing indeede the whole collections almoſt
of all that is giuen in pios vſus: theyr impatience in being cō
                  tradicted,
or controlled, rather mouing ſedition in the whole

afflicted Church of our country, then they would be croſſed
of theyr wills, or let fall theyr vniuſt deſignes; theyr bitter inuectiue
writing againſt vs,Lyſters Libell. with the moſt opprobrious terms
that could be deuiſed, before we euer put penne to paper, or
gaue them any cholerick word. Whereby any wiſeman may
ſee, how fa: Parſons hath ſhaped the declaration of the ſpirit
of Sathan (which vncharitably he would impute vnto vs, and
haue all Catholicks ſo to thinke of vs) which by due, and indifferent
conſideration, might more fitly be applied vnto
himſelfe, & his aſſociates, if I were ſo vncharitable, as to proſecute
it, and did not rather pray, that Sathan may haue no
power at all ouer him, or any of his order.
               Now are we come vnto the Quodlibets,
                  Quodlibets. the laſt booke, and
that which he moſt inueigheth at, beeing indeede ſomewhat
ſharpe, and cholerickly written, according to the diſpoſition
as well of the matter, vrging choler, as to the naturall diſpoſition
of the writer, which being (if a defect) yet a defect in
nature, is not to be ſo much condemned. But howſoeuer, fa:
Parſons in this worke hath cried quittance (as by the table of
his words, and phraſes in the end of this reply you may ſee:)
and therefore he may the better reſt ſatisfied therein. In his
diſcourſe heereof, hee ſo ruffleth, as if it were a Pedante amongſt
his ſcholers, or that he had Ma. Watſon on the hippe
to cruſh him at his pleaſure: whereas indeed he hath for the
moſt part, either altered his words in reciting them, miſtaken
and miſconſtrued his meaning, or ſtretched the words and
phraſes farther then theyr proper ſence by him intended. I
will alledge you ſome examples. And firſt in the Epiſtle to
the Quodlibets, page 8. Ma. Watſon writeth thus: If that by
way of quodlibet, or Theſis propoſed, a man may without blaſphemie,
ſinne, ſcandall, or any offence in the world, aske whether God
or the deuil be to be honored: whether our ſauiour Chriſt could ſin,
or no: whether our bleſſed Lady were an adultereſſe, or common
woman, or not: and withall, to bring arguments pro et contra, for
auerring, or impugning the ſame: then to put foorth a question,
whether a Seminary priest, or a Ieſuit ought ſooner to be credited,
cannot iustly incurre any reprehenſion or blame. Which ſpeech
cannot be contradicted, all queſtions in ſcholes being lawfull

to be propoſed, and arguments brought on both ſides, ſo that
the concluſion be in the defence and approbation of truth,
and verity. But marke how fa: Parſons citeth the ſaid words.
He ſetteth them forth in this ſort: In this kinde of writing it is
lawfull for him to diſpute, whether God or the deuill be to be honored?
whether our bleſſed Lady were an adultreſſe, or common woman,
or not. &c. and then mightily inueigheth againſt him, as
of an audatious, and impudent ſpirited perſon, for propoſing
and putting in print ſuch queſtions. O the honeſty of father
Parſons! VVhereas Maiſter Watſon by way of ſuppoſall, If
a man may aske ſuch questions without ſinne, ſcandall, &c, then (á
fortiore) is it lawfull to put the questions following: hee maketh
him to ſay, that it is lawfull for him to diſpute, whether God, or
the deuill be to be honoured, &c. therby to turne the ſence more
odious, and euill ſounding: which is but a very Ieſuiticall
tricke. For although, euen as Fa: Parſons ſaith, it be lawfull
pro et contra, to diſpute thoſe queſtions, if iuſt occaſion be offered,
or in ſchooles for the exerciſe of learning, &c, yet as he
hath altered the ſpeech, you ſee the ſence more vnpleaſing
then in the former. For he doth not propound them as queſtions,
but onely ſaith, that if in the ſchooles ſuch queſtions
may be propounded. If he inſiſt vppon the naming of ſuch
things in print, he doth but cauill. For who knoweth not, that
many ſuch queſtions are diſputed by the Schoolemen in
print?
               Againe, where Ma. Watſon maketh a diſcourſe of the fall
of all religious orders in former times from theyr firſt puritie,
and feruencie, (which diſcourſe is moſt true, as we ſee before
our eyes in the Benedictins, Dominicans, Franciſcans, Auguſtines,
and other orders, where they are not of late reformed,
how farre they differ from the puritie, and pietie of their firſt
inſtitution, in theyr founders dayes) this diſcourſe fa: Parſons
will haue to be diſtorted againſt all religious men, and
theyr orders ſimply; as affirming them to be all corrupted.
Thirdly, where he preferreth ſeculer prieſts in England, before
Ieſuits, and other religious perſons, as well in preferment
of degree, worthines of perſon, and ſuperioritie in place, as
alſo in the ſtate of perfection, hee ſaith it proceedeth of the

ſpirit of pride, emulation, ignorance, temerity, and folly, and
that the doctrine is againſt S. Tho. of Aquine, S. Chriſostome,
and others, not quoting the places where. But I will ſay to
Fa. Parſons, and ſtand vnto it, that for him, or any Ieſuit to
defend the contrary, is therein to ſhew their pride and ignorance.
For in chalenging place aboue their betters, both in
degree, and honour in Gods Church, is contrary to all cuſtome,
and law of the Church, as Ma: D
                     •
                  ct. Elye in his anſwer
to the Apologie, hath ſhewed at large.
               Howſoeuer ſome men may make queſtion betweene parochus
in genere, and a religious perſon, and the ſtates of both
(which the Sorbonists defined on the paſtors behalfe:) yet no
man can doubt betwixt a religious ſtate, and ours in England,
where we are daily prepared to giue our liues for our flock,
of which Chriſt himſelfe ſayth; Maiorem charitatem nemo
habet, vt ponat quis animam ſuam pro amicis ſuis. And therefore
the ſtate of Ieſuits, or any other order whatſoeuer, is not
to be compared with the ſtate of our Prieſts in England:
let Fa: Parſons infringe this propoſition, if hee can. But to
make the caſe more plaine, and euident, we will put this generall
axiome, or ground, that no man may leaue a more perfect
ſtate, to goe vnto the leſſe perfect, being in vow bound
vnto the more perfect; but any religious man may leaue their
Monaſteries, and domeſticall diſcipline, yea, and in ſome caſes
are bound therto, for the health of their neighbours ſoule:
as for example, if there be no other meanes probable of his
recouerie: therefore to cooperate with Chriſt in the gaining
of ſoules, is a more perfect ſtate, then the profeſſion of any
particuler order of diſcipline, or religion. For to that end, a
ſtate is ſaid to be more or leſſe perfect, becauſe it ſuppoſeth
more or leſſe perfection: but that ſtate of life ſuppoſeth
more perfection, which ſuppoſeth ſuch inflaming charity, as
to be ready to giue their lyues for their neighbours ſpirituall
good, then that which onely ſeeketh his owne good: therefore
the life of a Prieſt in England, which ſuppoſeth ſuch a
charity, and ſuch a reſolution, as to be ready to die for the
good ſpirituall of his flocke; is more perfect then a religious
life, which onely attendeth to himſelfe, and therefore ſuppoſeth

no more, then obedience, obſeruance of rules, and ordinary
charity. Furthermore, religion is but the way or meanes
to perfection, and therefore a man entreth into religion, becauſe
hee would become perfect: but that ſtate wherein a
man hath dedicated his life for his neighbours ſaluation, is
not a way, or meanes to perfection, but ſuppoſeth the higheſt,
and greateſt perfection in this life: therefore the ſtate of
a ſecular prieſt in England, is more perfect then any religious
ſtate in the world. Yet doth it not follow, that euery prieſt
is more perfect then a Ieſuit, or other religious man: no more
then it followeth, that euery Biſhop, becauſe of his ſtate of
perfection, is more perfect, then any prieſt, or euery Ieſuit,
then any Lay man; becauſe euery man liueth not according
to the ſtate he profeſſeth. And thus much for Ma. Watſons
propoſitions, in the grace & preferment of the ſtate of prieſts
in England.
               Fourthly, he citeth Ma. Watſon, to ſay that their order is no
religion, and the perſons thereof neither ſecular nor religious.
This is falſly auerred againſt Ma. Watſon, for in diuers places
of this book, he confeſſeth it to be an approued order: only
heere he ſayth, that as they now vſe the matter, according to
the manner of life amongſt ſome of them, and their politick
courſes in the world, they are neyther religious nor ſecular,
becauſe they ſhew themſelues to be, the one in name, and the
other in practiſe. And euen in that place he doth commend
their founders principles, which (hee ſayth) many of them
peruert and corrupt in practiſe: ſee the place, page, 61.
               Fiftly, hee alleadgeth places out of Ma. Watſon, wiſhing
ſome Ieſuits to leaue the order; which hee noteth in him, as
counſelling to Apoſtaſie, which is moſt falſe: Firſt, in that
he doth not abſolutly counſell it, but vpon ſuppoſition of
bad courſes (that many good natures, and men otherwiſe of
good parts are drawne into) to auoid ſo great euils, which is
charity. Secondly, to counſell to forſake the order of the Ieſuits,
is not to counſell to Apoſtaſie, in that all Ieſuits may
freely leaue the order, before the laſt vow (which few in reſpect
of the multitude haue taken;) and ſuch onely he counſelleth
to come out of their order (as Ma. Iohn Gerard, &c. For

otherwiſe Ma. Wright, Fa. Arden, Cardinall Montalt
                        •
                     
                   his
Theologo, Fa. 
                     〈…〉
                   were Apoſtataes, which is malicious
to affirme. Neither is the Ieſuits order, as other orders are,
and were in S. Bernards time; from whence after their firſt
vow, which is after a yeeres probation, they can neuer depart:
and therefore S. Bernards words cited, ſerue him to no
purpoſe at all. We will let paſſe his vncharitable and ſlaunderous
ſuſpicion, that a notorious Apoſtata or two, haue had
their fingers in compiling the Quodlibets: for theſe calumnations
you ſee, are as familiar with him, as his familiar ſpirit.
Sixtly, hee noteth out of the Quodlibets, certaine inuectiues
againſt their ſingularity of choiſe, in the admitting of ſuch,
as would enter into their Society: which ſoundeth as if Ma:
Watſon had inueighed againſt the ſpirit of diſcretion, & probation
in ſuch, as are admitted; wherein hee peruerteth his
ſence, as all the precedent diſcourſe ſheweth. For indeede
he onely inueigheth againſt their temporall, and politick reſpects
in their admittance:Quodlibets, page, 137. 138. which is too too frequent with
them, if the party that would enter, be not eyther of great
parentage and friends, much wealth, great qualities of learning,
&c. or very practicall in the world, and of extraordinarie
wit, he is not for them. But if he haue any of them, or be
of any extraordinary expectance, they will not onely eaſily
admit him, but earneſtly ſeeke after him. This partiality and
theſe reſpects doth Ma. Watſon ſpeake againſt, which in very
deede are not tolerable in any religious order inſtituted, not
for policie, but for perfection, and therefore ought to be open
to all ſorts, the meaneſt as ſoone as the greateſt, the ſimpleſt
as ſoone as the wiſeſt.Marke Fa: Parſons familiar ſpirit of prophecie. And for his marginall note, that
diuers of that crew (meaning the prieſts) haue been refuſed,
by Gods prouidence, and wiſedome of the fathers, that foreſaw
their conditions. I will aſſure Fa: Parſons, for his better
information heerein, that diuers of vs haue beene particulerly
dealt with-all by the Ieſuits, as well in their exerciſe, as otherwiſe,
to haue drawne vs vnto their Society; yea, and ſome of
vs haue felt their auerſions, becauſe wee refuſed. How oft
hath this complaint beene made againſt them in Rome, for
ſolliciting the Scholers to become Ieſuits?
               
                  
Seauenthly, hee ſayth, that Ma: Watſon would haue new
lawes made for the inflicting of greeuous puniſhments vpon
ſuch, as ſhould ſend their children to the Seminaries, which
is a notorious falſhood. Onely he ſayth that Fa. Parſons dealing
with the S
                     •
                  udents, concerning the Infanta her tytle to
the Crowne of England (which is a matter of treaſon) may,
and is likely to giue occaſion of more ſeuere proceedings, or
ſtricter lawes concerning ſuch, by reaſon that now he is head
and director, and manager of all the Seminaries, and miſſions,
reade the place page, 179. 180.
               Eightly, he bringeth in a marginall note of Ma. Watſons, againſt
detraction, as a moſt dangerous ſinne, which hee applieth
againſt him, becauſe of his cholericke inueighing againſt
Fa: Parſons a little before, concerning a letter writ by
him from Naples. Indeede I confeſſe that I wiſh he had not
beene ſo hote: but yet this I ſay, that hauing ſeene the foreſayd
letter of Fa: Parſons, it is ſo wicked, ſo vncharitable, and
ſo vile a letter, that no man liuing (I thinke) but would ſpet
at it, if he ſhould but heare it reade. You may ſee part of it,
cited the 128, page of the Quodlibets, and I aſſure you verbatim:
for I haue reade the letter it ſelfe, which if you reade,
you will excuſe much Ma. Watſons choler.
               Ninthly, he ſayth, that in the 134. and 135. page, Ma. Watſon
affirmeth the Ieſuits doctrine to be erroneous, and hereticall,
for that they teach the Popes ordinations to be obeyed.
This vntruth is exceeding groſſe, for there is no one ſuch
word in the places cited (as you may reade) nor any ſpeech
at all of the Popes ordinances; onely hee calleth ſuch doctrine,
as to teach men to back-bite, ſlaunder, and detract thoſe
that are oppoſite to the Ieſuits deſignes, (as alſo ſedicious
medling with the affaires of Princes, teaching innouations,
rebellions, inuaſions, conſpiracies, &c.) erroneous, falſe, and
hereticall doctrine, which no man dare to denie.
               Tenthly, hee maketh Ma. Watſon to ſay in the page 150.
that wee meane to abſtract matters of ſucceſſion for our
Realme, from matters of religion; and this alſo is a notorious
falſification. For he onely ſayth, that matters of gouernment,
ſucceſſion, & ſtate affaires, are cleerely abſtracted from

poynts of faith, and religion: which is a poſition ſo true, as
no man can infringe it.Quodlibets. page 198. I will omit his fooliſh cauill at a deſired
quiet in a frownd on ſtate, as ridiculous, wiſhing the Reader
to peruſe the place, and he ſhall finde it to be a moſt honeſt
and a diſcreet ſpeech I will alſo let paſſe his ſcoffing at Puny,
and other ſpeeches of Ma. Watſons, concerning the preferring
of prieſts, before Ieſuits, as they are onely religious perſons,
which beeing a very diſcreet, and true diſcourſe in him,
is fooliſhly gybed at by fa: Parſons, as if you read the whole
diſcourſes, 51. and 117. you ſhall ſee.
               What hee alledgeth onely by way of quotation, page 12,
13, 17, 38, 133, 194, 25, concerning the diſcouery of many
Gentlewomen, and noble perſonages, or ſedition ſet betwixt
the houſes of Arundell, Howards, & Dacres, or the threatning
of Catholicks: with new perſecutions, or barking, byting,
and leaping in the faces of the Ieſuits; is eyther falſe, &
no ſuch matter, or friuolous, and of no importance, tending
to no ſuch wickedneſſe as hee noteth. Read the places in the
Quodlibets aboue cited, and then iudge. Eleuenthly, hee noteth
the words of Ma. Watſon, page 312, that the King of
Polonia is defeated of the kingdome of Swethland, onely by
the Ieſuits trecherous, ambitious, and tampering aſpires;
whereas Ma. Watſon onely ſayth, that this defeating was occaſioned
by their ambitious, & tampering aſpires. &c. which
was a generall report; viz. that theyr incroaching vppon the
Swethlanders, beeing ſent thether to preach, made them to
driue them all out of theyr Country. Whereupon the King
(by theyr ſuggeſtions) making warre againſt the Swethlanders
to reduce them by the ſword, they choſe his vncle Duke
Charles for theyr King, and ſo defeated him of his inheritance.
If this relation be not true, (as it was for certainty auerred
to be true) take it as a relation of newes only, & blame
the firſt Author.
               Hee denieth alſo in the ſame paragraffe, that euer hee writ
Letter to the Earle of Huntley in Scotland. But for that hee
may aske Ma. Muſh now in Rome. I verily thinke he can tell
him ſomething thereof. He alſo noteth for a forgerie in the
ſame paragraffe, that Ma. Watſon ſaith, hee ſent a Ieſuit to the

Earle of Eſſex, for his taking a penſion of the king of Spaine.
Indeede I thinke Ma. Watſon might miſtake in naming him
a Ieſuit, but Roules and Stanley had commiſſion from him, to
deale with the ſaid Earle in that behalfe, they are both in the
Tower, about the practiſe of Squire, and haue confeſſed the
ſame as I haue beene informed. In the ſame §. alſo hee noteth
for a calumniation, that Ma. Middleton was cuſened by
him of 300. pound. If it be an vntruth, Ma. Middleton is too
blame, from whom (as I vnderſtand) the information came.
Twelfthly, he bringeth in diuers things▪ affirmed by Maiſter
Watſon, out of his Memorial, alias his High counſel of Reformation,
moſt of which things by him cited, I haue heard reported
by reuerend prieſts, that haue ſeene and read the worke,
and one of them, vnto whom he ſhewed it within his twelue-months
in Rome. Somewhat more particulerly we haue ſpoken
of this before.
               After all theſe collections out of the Quodlibets, (vvhich
you ſee to be either falſe, or not of any moment, hee falleth
into inuectiues, running againe to prophecies, and predictions,
page 113. where he alſo affirmeth, and ſaith: it cannot
be denied that Prieſts, and Ieſuits, ioyning all together at the
beginning of the Seminaries, both at Doway, Rhemes, and
Rome, did ſet our cauſe firſt on foote, & haue promoted the
ſame euer ſince, with conioyned labours, &c. Before in the
fourth chapter, you haue heard fa: Parſons ſay, that no Engliſh
Ieſuit was in place, or credite, when ſome matters were in
action againſt our Country, as that of Stukley, Doctor Saunders,
and others, onely to excuſe them in thoſe practiſes: now
heere hee ſaith, that the Ieſuits ioyned theyr labours, with
Doctor Allen, Doctor Saunders, Doctor Stapleton, Doctor
Bristow, Doctor Webbe, and many others, at the beginning
of the Seminaries, both at Doway, Rhemes, Rome, and other
places, to ſet on foote our cauſe, I would aske him if they cō
                  curred
with Doctor Saunders in promoting the cauſe of our
Country: wherein was it, if not in the Iriſh affaires, ſith hee
dealt in no other for our coūtry? Before in the fourth chapter
hee denieth it ſtoutly, beeing preſſed therewith, oportet
mendacem, eſſe memorem, God will ſtill haue him to bewray

himſelfe.Chap. 4. folio. 39. Againe, if (as in the fourth chapter hee ſayd) no
Engliſh Ieſuit was then in place, or credite, how did they
then ioyne at the beginning of the Seminaries of theſe men,
for our common cauſe? I am ſure no Ieſuite entred the harueſt
of our Country for ſome yeeres after the miſſions of
Prieſts, not vntill two yeeres after the erection of the Romaine
Seminarie, which was ſome yeeres after the beginning
of the Seminary at Doway. If hee ſay, that the Ieſuits of other
Nations ioyned theyr helpes in this action, then ſay I by the
ſame aſſertion, that in ioyning with Doctor Saunders, they
concurred to the Iriſh attempts, which was the onely affaire
for our country (or rather againſt our country) in which hee
dealt, and then I haue what I intended; to wit, a proofe that
the Ieſuits haue dealt in all actions againſt our Country, almoſt
from the beginning.
               After this hee entreth into a diſcourſe about the erection of
the Archprieſt▪ & the writing of the Treatiſe of ſchiſme,
                  Folio. 133. neyther
of which (he ſayth) was a ſufficient cauſe to make theſe
garboyles in ſuch a time and place. But to this I aunſwer, that
both beeing the moſt vniuſt actions that could be, the one in
preiudice of the whole Clergy, intruding a ſuperior, without
ſuffiicient warrant to tyrannize ouer vs, as hee did, (which is
ſufficiently ſhewed, almoſt in all our diſcourſes) the other in
preiudice of our fames, and credits in the higheſt degree (as
is aboundantly proued, and dare not be maintained by any
Ieſuit, be he neuer ſo audacious) how could we do leſſe, then
defend our rights, ſtanding onely vpon iuſtice? And iudge
whether the offence were in vs of theſe ſcandals (ſtanding
but in the defence of iuſtice, as now all men ſee) or in them
that moſt iniuriouſly againſt all law, conſcience, charity, and
equity, maintained the ſame againſt vs, (as Ma. Doctor Ely
proueth in his aunſwer to the Apologie.
               
               In the end of this chapter, and of this booke, hee maketh
his concluſion, with the ſame charity he began, and hath hetherto
proſecuted the ſame, in comparing vs to Luther, and
other hereticks; and that all we haue done, hath beene vpon
ambition, liberty of life, promiſes and obligation to my Lord
of London: which he ſaith wee hold out in ſpe contra ſpem, againſt

the remorſe of our owne conſciences. Theſe are his
charitable ſpeeches, which in part we could retort, and more
iuſtly vpon himſelfe, but wee hartily pray almighty God to
giue him more light of conſcience, that he may ſee what an
abhominable thing it is in the ſight of GOD, to maintaine
iniuſtice, and impiety, vnder the cloake and maske of religion,
and piety: leaſt otherwiſe hee pay ſummam menſuram
delicti one day, for the manifold afflictions, and miſeries hee
hath brought vppon our afflicted church, and the infinite
wrongs and iniuries, that he and his haue done againſt ſo many
well deſeruing men of our Engliſh Clergy. And thus I
will end this reply, ſubmitting both my ſelfe, and it, vnto the
cenſure of Chriſtes holy ſpouſe the Catholicke Church, vnder
whoſe banner I fight, proteſting that if any thing herein
contained, be in the leaſt iote contrary, or diſſonant to the
Catholicke doctrine, (as I verily hope there is not) I will be
ready hereafter to reforme it.
               DEO GRATIAS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table of the paſsionate, and vncharitable
words and ſentences, vſed by Fa:
Parſons in his Libell of Manifestation, as well againſt
our perſons, as our actions and proceedings: with
the Chapter and leafe noted, where you may
ſee them.
            The preface is an inuectiue diſcourſe vpon enuie, which
he applieth in his booke vnto vs, with other reuiling ſpeeches,
as ſal infatuatus, infatuated prieſts, fuch as haue loſt not
onely all ſauour of prieſtly wiſedom, & ſhining light of true
vnderſtanding, but alſo the true ſpirit of Chriſtian prieſts,
and prieſthood: with an application alſo of the vncleane
ſpirit departing from a man, and returning, entreth with ſeauen
worſe then himſelfe, and infinite other inuectiue ſpeeches,
as proud, turbulent, irefull, impudent, &c.
            
               ¶In the first Chapter.
               Fol. 1. Paſſionate writers, of diſtempered humors: our
bookes ſeditious, full of iniquity, vanity, ſcurrility.
               fol. 2. Paſſion and perturbation of minde, folly, imprudencie,
clamorous in writing with contempt.
               fol. 3. Men free of ſpeech, and conuerſation giuen to liberty.
               fol. 4. Contemners of all helps for the increaſe of ſpirit,
vſed by vertuous men, that we be de larga manica, of ſcandalous
conuerſation: turbulent ſtanding in defence of diſorder,
liberty, and diſſolution: imputation of whoredome, drunkennes,
dicing, pewter ſtolne, &c. all this againſt the prieſts
in Wiſbich.
               
               fol. 5. Extreame ſurfet of vnchriſtian malice, paſſion, leuitie,
anger, high and odious malice, malice and ſtomacke,
perturbation of minde.
               fol. 6. Shameleſſe Libellers: open, & apparant malice.
               fol. 7. Petulancie.
               fol. 8. Exceeding madnes, impotent blindnes of paſſion,
ſlaunderous tongue, malicious obiection.
               fol. 9. Want of good conſcience, enuie her ſelfe, odious,

and malicious ſtuffe, impudency, and folly: rayling, and reuiling
without ſtop, or ſtay, eyther of ſhamefaſtnes, or conſcience:
men expreſſing the ſinnes of drunken men, and
curſers, or euill ſpeakers, by their intemperancie of tongue,
ſlaunderous and malicious, ignorance or malice.
               fol. 10. Giber
                     •
                   fitter for Ruffians and Souldiers, &c, intemperate
tongues, paſſionate brethren.
               fol. 11. Folly, phrenzie, furious inuectiues, ſpite, highly
enuying others gifts and graces, priuate mutiners, publique
enemies, bidding warre, and defiance to all, &c. madnes.
               fol. 13. Iuſtifying the proceedings of heretikes, and perſecutors,
&c. excluding all ſpirituall authority, &c. defenders
of paradoxes, & abſurd poſitions, paraſiticall adulation, pernitious,
eroneous, and hereticall, wicked, and reproachfull:
trayterous, ridiculous, impious, baſe, and wickedly minded,
publike proctors of heretikes and perſecutors; open accuſers
againſt the perſecuted Catholickes, ſundred in wicked attempts,
ſecular in order, degree, minde, harts, & deſires.
               fol. 14. Transformed by paſſion of enuie and malice, ſold
their tongues to the common enemie, ridiculous and contemptible,
rayling without modeſty or meaſure, tyed to no
law of truth, probability, proofe, or modeſty.
               fol. 15. Libellers, by paſſion conſpiring with heretikes,
defenders of irreligious paradoxes, compared to Anabaptiſts,
and Luther: confident in follies, pride, ignorance, folly,
falſhood.
               fol. 16. Baſe flattery of new fawning brethren, impious
brauing againſt the Pope.
               fol. 17. Of Prieſts made Souldiers, fighting againſt theyr
chiefe paſtor; anger, enuie, paſſion, giuing conſent à posteriore,
to ſpilling of blood, &c. accuſers of their brethren, flattering
and perfidious, champions that will fight euen with
God himſelfe, &c. perfidious to their owne people, Sycophants,
poſſeſſed with one of the ſeauen wicked ſpirits.
            
            
               ¶In the ſecond Chapter.
               Fol. 18. Diſcontented and diſtempered brethren, of indiſcretion
& bad ſpirit, odious arguments, defence & patronage

of diſorder and liberty; open rayling, and rebellion againſt
ſuperiours, errors in doctrine, extreame paſſion, lacke of
iudgement, modeſty, and moderation: contemptible, and
odious: no reaſon, deſire of truth, zeale of reformation, loue
of vnion, ſpite, choler, enuie, malice, deſire of reuenge, and
other pernicious inductions, inſufficiencie in wiſedome, learning,
and all other vertues.
               fol. 19. Fury of paſſion, and rage of reuenge, gall, choler,
enuie, hate, folly, and lacke of diſcretion, venome, malice,
gallings, and ſpightfull ſpeech, ſimplicity, folly, want of wiſdome,
and more neceſſary vertues, folly, malice, contemptuous
ſpirit.
               fol. 20. Outrageous iniuries, rebellious ſubiects, intemperance,
angry, contumelious cenſure, high folly, and higher
maleuolence, folly, frenzie, paſſionate people, troubleſome,
and diſſolute, vnchriſtian cenſure, ſpirit of ſcoffing.
               fol. 21. Clamours, odious braules, diſorders, contempt,
ſcoffing at piety, ſcoffers, and ſcorners, fooliſh caueling and
calumniation, againſt good things, malicious, interpretations,
diſdaine.
               fol. 22. Folly, paſſionate proceedings, folly, ſimplicity,
blindnes of paſſion, folly, paſſion, ſimple, paſſionate.
               fol. 23. Wrangling, brethren, pickers of quarrells, cauill,
calumniats.
               fol. 24. Cauillations to procure a worſe breach, groſſe folly,
gone in blinde paſſion, egregious folly, higheſt folly, immodeſt
ſcoffings, railing ſpeeches.
               fol. 25. Pride, phrenzie, compariſon to Luther, rancour,
malice.
               fol. 26. Malice, ſcold, inſolents, and intemperate raylings,
notorious ingratitude, folly, bitter gauling, and venomous
ſpeeches, bitternes of raylings, ſpightfull, venomous ſlaunderings,
ſoft and delicate nicenes in words, ſcandalous behauiour,
diſorders, diſcontented brethren.
               fol. 27. Paſſion, fury of paſſion, paſſion, blindnes, & obſcurity
of paſſion, paſſion.
               fol. 28. Ioyning with moſt bloody enemies impious.
               fol. 29. Malice, paſſion, folly, paſſionate ſpirits.
            
            
               
               ¶In the third Chapter.
               Fol. 29. Angry men, paſſion, lauiſhed out, and bidding
battell, all in their wayes ſpirituall, ſinne, pride, and preſumption.
               fol. 30. Diſordinate brethren, contumeliouſly, preſumptuous,
and haynous ſin
                     •
                  e, infinite diſcredite, folly, no credite
but with heretikes, great paſſion and folly, hate for religions
ſake, notorious inconſideration, hired by the common enemie,
contumelious iniuries, intemperate tongue.
               fol. 31. More impudent, then heretikes intollerable ſpightfull
inſolency, barbarous ingratitude, inconſiderate and paſſionate
people, pride, audatious, contemptuouſly.
               fol. 32. Contumely to the Pope, intemperate behauiour,
make warre againſt the Popes higheſt authority, tranſported
by the force of paſſion, intemperate ſpeeches.
               fol. 33. Diuers falſe ſlaunders againſt Doct: Bagſhawe,
and Ma. Bluet, Ma: Champney, and Ma: Barnebee, deſperate,
petty Doctors, young Maiſters.
               fol. 34. Younkers, malicious imputation, odiouſly, hatred
and enuie, paſſion, malice, folly, bid warre to all good and
learned men of our Nation, fooliſh aſſertion, abſurd Libells,
take vpon them the parts and perſons of heretikes, raile, lye,
diffame the actions and intentions of beſt Catholikes, ſlaunderous
calumniation, contemptuouſly, moſt ſpightfully.
               fol. 35. Calumniation, raile extreamly, contentious words,
enemies in hart, hatred, and faction to Cardinall Allen, follies,
madnes, enmity, and principall hatred, intemperatly, paſſion
of hatred, conſpiring and coniuring factious attempts,
and deſires.
               fol. 36. Clamorous bookes, ſlaunders, ſcoffes, contumelious
ſpeeches, much malignity, ſhamefull, paſsionate brethren,
raging and rauing, wonderfull extreame paſsion,
with open mouth, and moſt violent ſpirit impugne true
Martyres.
               fol. 37. Flattering the ſtate, betraying their companions,
like to make other men Martyrs by betraying them, falſe &
malicious calumniation.
               
                  
fol. 38. Paſſion, hoſtility with Martyrs, troubleſome and
ſedicious, proud and diſobedients.
               fol. 39. Pride, folly, lacke of diſcretion, reproach, contempt,
belyed the Seminaries to make them traytours that
come from thence, paſſion, enraged by force of choler, and
impotent appetite of reuenge.
            
            
               ¶In the fourth Chapter.
               Fol. 39. Follies, improbabilities, open vntruthes, paſſionate
brethren, bad or no conſcience at all, cuſtome of telling
vntruthes, not reflecting vpon conſcience or credite, falſhood
vttered with facility, notorious falſhoods and vntruthes.
               fol. 40. Manifeſt and open vntruthes, ſlaunders, and calumniations,
forſworne.
               fol. 41. Lyes, falſe calumniations, little conſcience, poyſon
of malice, malignant fruites, cries, clamors, oathes.
               fol. 42. Malice exceeding the malice of heretikes, malignant
proceeding, malignities, malignity exceeding malice.
               fol. 43. If they be brethren, if they be Prieſts, odious
ſpeech, malignant & falſe, calumniators.
               fol. 44. Sedicions, ioyning with enemies and heretikes, cynicall,
or ſycophanticall.
               fol. 45. Opprobrious and contumelious calumniations,
ſedicious people.
               fol. 46. Barbarous inſolencie of ſlaunderous companions,
contempt, hollow harts, oath, and conſcienceleſſe proteſtation,
ſpightfull and iniurious arraignment of Catholikes, perfidious,
and vnchriſtian malice, loſt lads, apparant falſe calumniations,
lye notoriouſly againſt their conſcience.
               fol. 47. Blinde rancor, wilfull malice, lacke of conſcience,
malignant paſſion, mad and furious inuectiue, ſpightfull, calumniations,
ridiculous, malicious ſycophancie.
               fol. 48. Fooliſh malicious people, calumniations, malignant
enuie, malignity.
               fol. 49. Diſtracted paſſionate clamours of diſcontented
people, calumniate, diſcompoſe, wrangle, trouble, cry, and
curſe, ſhameleſſe calumniation, lyes.
               fol. 50. Poeticall fictions, falſe, ſlaunderous, malignant vntruthes,

open calumniation, ſeditious writer, make-bate, manifeſt
ſlaunder.
               fol. 51. Malicious fictions, lying detractions, malicious cauillation,
abſurd calumniation.
               fol. 52. Bold & ridiculous aſſertion, vnprofitable wrangling
people.
               fol. 53. Contumely farre from wiſedome, &c. extreame,
audacity, abſurd and ridiculous matters.
               fol. 54. Meere faction, audacity, little ſhame and conſcience,
wrath, raile, follies, open falſities, immodeſty, paſſionate
and inconſiderate brethren, folly, falſhood.
               fol. 55. Fond rayling, without end or meaſure, exceeding
folly and malice, conſpiracie, ſeditious deſignments, folly,
paſſion.
            
            
               ¶In the fift Chapter.
               Fol. 56. Enuie, emulation, anger, paſſion, boyſterouſly,
furiouſly, paſſionate people, outragious dealing, enuie exceedingly,
rancor, malice, enuie, rayling and calumniation,
all their vertue, & humanity extinguiſhed with enuie, greefe,
and enuie.
               fol. 57. Falſity, falſly, calumniation, notoriouſly falſe,
peeuiſh, and maligne calumniation, wrangling, and lying
humor.
               fol. 58. Detractors, want of vertue, malicious enuying
humor.
               fol. 59. Impugne the very name of reformation.
               fol. 61. Calumniators, calumniations, odiouſly, malicious.
               fol. 62. Spightfully doe maligne and cauill.
               fol. 63. Great paſſion, intemperate folly, malepert ſaucines,
younglings, inſolent dealing, indiſcreete, raſh greene
heads, deuoued to carpe, maligne, cauilations, men of humor.
               fol. 64. Intemperatly exclaime, diſpaſſionate, hereticall,
Libell, contradicting company, counterfet Doctor, impupudent
cauiller.
               fol. 65. Egregious foolery, wiſe Doctor, wiſe diſcouerer.
               
                  
fol. 66. Confederates of faction, reuolted Prieſts, hatred
and enmity, eger diſcouerer, ſedicions.
               fol. 67. Weakenes and folly, calumniation, malicious empeachings
of others, malicious, malignant, flattering malignant
diſcouerer.
               fol. 68. Flattering diſcouerer, mutinous partners maleuolous
calumniator.
            
            
               ¶In the ſixt Chapter.
               Fol. 68. Folly and blindnes, deceaued ſpirits, paſſionate
if not poſſeſſed, perturbation of enuie, emulation, malice, reuenge,
anger, and like enchauntments, and ſorceries of theyr
ſoules, furies of ſpirituall madnes, rage and runne a deſperate
courſe of rayling, and rauing out-cries.
               fol. 69. Clamors, mutinous and ſedicious people, out-cries,
ſtomack, ſobernes, notorious lye, flattery, falſe procupation,
groſſe and odious vntruthes.
               fol. 70. Falſe detraction, ſedicion, clamors, ſcandalous tumultuation,
deceitfull ſpeaking & dealing, malicious books,
ſcandalous and ſinfull action, folly, fury, ſhameleſſe Libells,
horrible ſcandall.
               fol. 71. Hired to make debate, and ſet diuiſion, ſpies, in
way to be heretikes, rebellion, tumultuous, ſcandalous tumultuation
of turbulent ſtudents, tumults, broyles, ſedicion, tumultuous
people.
               fol. 72. Tumultuous, tumultuous ſtudents, tumultuation,
hatred of order, diſcipline, and ſuperiority, tumultutous, tumultuous
people, troubleſome, tumultuous, tumultuous, tumultuous.
               fol. 74. Tumultuous, troubleſome, enuie, emulation,
malice.
               fol. 75. Troubleſome, out-cries, Horſes, Colts, fiercely
wanton, tumultuous, turbulent crew, folly and indiſcretion,
clamors.
               fol. 76. Troubleſome ſedition, ſedicious courſe, tumultuations,
vnchriſtian deuice, odious to God and good men,
maliciouſly, malicious, ſet ſedition, tumultuous, preſumptuouſly.
               
                  
fol. 77. Paſſion, venome of ſtomack, indiſcretion, intemperance,
lacke of conſcience, modeſty, ſhame, contumelious
ſpeeches, a moſt wicked and iniurious deuiſe, vnfortunate
men, hired by the publike aduerſary, capitall ſlaunder.
               fol. 78. Slaunderouſly, iniuriouſly, ſtrife, contention, great
and ſtrange paſſion, intemperate ſpirit, reuenge, enuie, and
precipitation, treaſon, traytors, contemptible.
               fol. 79. Betrayed, and iniuriouſly vexed by our own, ſmall
conſideration, mutable, weake and paſſionate.
               fol, 80. Folly, bad and mad courſe.
            
            
               ¶In the ſeauenth Chapter.
               Fol. 80. Tranſported brethren, exceeding the limits of
modeſty, anger, emulation, paſſionate motiues, no ſtay of
conſcience or religion, open breach to all licentious liberty
of vnſhamefull rayling, opprobrious, and contumelious ſcolding,
breach of modeſty, contempt infamy.
               fol, 81. Notorious lyes, manifeſt ſlaunders, falſe calumniations,
ſcurrilous, immodeſt, neither modeſty, ſhame, nor conſcience,
diſgorging gall, wanton, malapert, & mad ſpeeches,
wicked Libell.
               fol. 82. Hideous and horrible detractions, ſlaunders, and
infamations, ſinfull dealing, ſinfull burden, horrible ſinnes,
vnchriſtian calumniations, ſinfull lad, ſinfull ſuds, defectuous
and ſinfull, wrong ſhapen, blinking aſpect, looking nine
wayes at once, wanton imaginations, laſciuious phraſes, ſenſuall
and venerous apprehenſions, contemplations, and deſires.
               fol. 83. Sinfull and wretched poore fellow, loſt lad, true
ſtaine of his religion and order, falſly and wickedly, vſed by
the deuill, publique reproach of our profeſſion, infamous
books, factious, baſe and abſurd inſtrument, baſe inſtrument,
mutined brethren, rebellion, begging boy, contemptible &
ridiculous thing.
               fol. 84. Liberty & ſenſuallity, dizzards, and abſurdities.
               fol. 85. Bewraying; and betraying Cath: ſimple ridiculous,
no learning, voluntary conſpiring with the common enemie,
meere malice, enuie, pride.
               
                  
fol, 86. Miſerable fellow, ſtate of damnation, deſperate
caſe, licentious courſe, ſhifter, malice, diſorderly life, notorious
foolery, dignity of perdition, mutined and diſcontented
prieſts, mutinie, diſſenſion, no care of truth, raile, reuile, and
reuell, as turbulent ſpirits, ſhameleſſe, foo
                     •
                  iſh, malicious,
inſolently, faction and rebellion, impudent lyes, abſurd, wicked,
impious ſpeech.
               fol, 87, Hereticall obiection, a moſt ridiculous companion,
pride, as high preſumption as any heretike can profeſſe,
few companions, impiety, Lucianiſme, raylings, lyings.
               fol. 88. Proctors for perſecutors, wicked, impious, Herodians,
wicked deuiſes, bloody companions, odious diſpute,
impiety ſuggeſted by heretikes, ribauld ſpeech, notorious
lyes, ſhameleſſe, contemptuous and ſcoffing ſpirit.
               fol. 89. Infidelity, prophane irreligioſity, lacke of ſpirit &
ſence in Gods affaires, outragious detraction, fiery darts of
helliſh hatred, ſerpentine tongues, mad and poſſeſſed men,
raue and rage, ſedicious, contentious, tumultuous, deſaſtred,
diſſolute, malicious and enuious calumniation, paſſionate emulators,
malicious ſlaunders, impudencie, lyes, and malicious
inuentions, miſerable men, enuie, ſetters on of heretikes,
malice, wicked men, vnchriſtian and deuilliſh deuiſe, malicious
people.
               fol. 90. Wicked companions, exorbitant malice, conſcienceleſſe
rayling people, malice, ſcurrilous obiection.
               fol. 91. Malicious cauill, counterfet or cauiling Cath: malignity,
pure malice, ſwelling enuie, peſtilent bookes, violent
and virulent people, without wit or honeſty.
               fol. 92. Shameleſſe bookes, falſe Libellers, wilfull calumniations,
fabulous Lucianicall narration, ſpirit of ſpite, lacke
of ſhame.
               fol. 93. Infamy, fardell of lyes, impudencie her ſelfe, brazen
or iron face, deſperate behauiour, a life of loud lyes deſperatly
faced out, monſtrous lye, impudent lye, ſhameleſſe,
inſolent, impious.
               fol. 94. Wild, mad, inſolent, deſperate courſe, frantike &
poſſeſſed men, monſtrous lyes, abſurd prophanities, malicious
fictions, conſcienceleſſe calumniations, wretched and miſerable

mens harts, diſpightfully, breake with enuie and rancor,
furious barkings, outragious Libells, hatred, helliſh ſpirit,
poyſoned entralls, horrible puddle of lyes, ſlaunderous
inuectiues, deuilliſh detraction, baſe, vile, malicious, venome
of life, and looſe tongue armed with audacity, defended
with impudencie, ſtirred vp with enuie, enraged with
furie, bounded by no limits of conſcience, piety, or feare
of God, &c. loathſome ragges of a filthy dunghill.
               fol. 95. Vnworthy ragges torne and rent from the honorable
Clergie by wilfull mutiny and rebellion, wrangling
Clergie, pride, arrogancie, ignorance, obſtinacie, wicked &
odious both to God and man.
               fol. 96. Malicious things, deſperatly, ſecret Apoſtaſie,
ſedicions, a ſcold, wanton idle headed boy, younkers, leuity
of the lad, vnconſtant head.
               fol. 97. Infamous inuectiue, ſpleene, ſpight, malicious
ſtomacke, way to perdition, vnſuited Gentleman, ſhuttle
braines, laſciuious companion, beaſtly and ſenſuall imagination.
               fol. 98. Copes-mate, and Apoſtata in hart, impudencies,
deadly and deuilliſh hatred, trayterous & Iudas like natures,
ſlaunderous lyes and reproaches, malice, malicious deuiſed
calumniations.
               fol. 99. Sedicious falſhood, forged and malicious, ſhameleſſe
creatures, ridiculous, impious, fond, furious, mad men,
watt tumbler, contemptible and contumelious, audacious,
raſh, vnlearned, fantaſticall, ſcurrilous, infamatory, a moſt
lewd Libell fraught with foolery, ignorance, audacity, and
notorious impudencie, and irreligious impiety, egregious
impiety, contemptibility.
            
            
               ¶In the eight Chapter.
               fol. 101. Scandalous, clamorous, contradictious ſcandalous
fact, diſordinate and diſcontented Prieſts, ſedicions, aſſault
of ſathan vnder Prieſts coates, ſedition, dangerous, and
poyſoned humors, naughty will, rayling broyles.
               
                  
fol. 102. Become as Tho. Bell, paſſion, malice, brabling
people, vnquiet ſpirity, enuie, perfidiouſnes to God, paſſionate
diſordred brethren, friends in a traunce, men poſſeſſed
with violent and raging ſpirits.
               fol. 104. Spirit of pride, enuie, reuenge, clamors, ſlaunders,
calumniation, diſobedience, wicked ſpirit, quodlibetticall
companion, prophane, audacious, impudent ſpirit,
wicked ſpirit, irreligious companions.
               fol. 105. Pride, emulation, ignorance, temerity, and folly,
outragious malice.
               fol. 106. Folly, madnes, ſpiritus vertiginis, or arreptitius, enemies
againſt the Pope, deadly hatred.
               fol. 107. The deuill himſelfe, rayling, lying, malicious
faſhood, calumniator, wicked forgery, malicious people, odious
and irefull vaine of rayling, mad fellow.
               fol. 108. Contemptuous diſcourſe, Phariſaicall vanity,
baſenes, euill feature, contemptible qualities.
               fol. 109. Inſolencies, vaine, falſe, and wicked, without
all conſcience, modeſty, or reſpect of Chriſtianity, perfidious
detractions, ſeditiouſly, rancor, malice, ſedition, impudent
forged lyes, meere forgery, without remorſe of conſcience,
ſpirit of ſathan.
               fol. 110. Diſorderly Scholers.
               fol. 111. Lying ſpirit, notorious ſlaunders & lyes, ſhameleſſe
aſſertions, notorious lyes, blind Bayard.
               fol. 112. More then halfe franticke, meere madnes, ſpirits
of clamors, rage, reuenge, enuie, emulation, audacious
ſpeeches, diſobedience, contempt, &c. diſcontented people.
               fol. 114. Ambition, liberty of life, &c.
            
            I haue here ſet downe onely the words for the moſt part,
not the ſentences, for the auoyding of tediouſnes: referring
the reader for tryall, vnto the Chapters and pages cited: yet
haue I omitted not onely diuers bitter words and ſentences,
and all his vncharitable predictions and forſpeakings, but alſo

all his contumelious, and diſgracefull compariſons made
very often and frequent betweene Luther, Anabaptists, and
other heretikes, and vs: as alſo all his vntruthes & falſhoods,
which if I ſhould haue compiled heere together, would haue
exceeded the meaſure of this worke intended at the firſt:
wherefore I remit the Reader to the diſcourſe it ſelfe, where
he ſhall finde them diſperſed in great number thoroughout
the booke.
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶Errata.
            
               FOl. 5, a. line 1, for examples, reade epiſtles.
Ibidem, b, line, 35, for iudgements, reade inducements.
               Fol. 11, a. line 10. for example, reade epiſtle.
               Fol. 12, a line 2. for example, reade epiſtle.
Ibidem, line 15. for ſeemed, reade ſeeming.
               Fol. 15. a. line 5. for, to be, reade, to haue beene.
               Fol. 21, b. line 11, for vnknowne, reade knowne.
Ibidem, line 13. for acclamation, reade exclamation.
               Fol. 26, a. line 29. for deceaſed, reade diſeaſed.
               Fol. 28. a. line 17. for ſeruant, reade Cittizen.
               Fol. 67. a. line 7. for F. B. reade W. C.
            
            
         
      
   