
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE
TREATISE,
Conteynynge a playne and
fruitfull declaration of the Popes
vſurped Primacye, written in
Greke aboue .vij. hundred yeres
ſens, by Nilus, an ancient archbyſhop
of Theſſalonia and
newly trāſlated into englyſhe
by Thomas
Greſſop ſtudent
in Oxforde.❧
            
            Pervſed and allovved accordyng to
the Quenes maieſties iniunctions.
            
               Ierem. vi.
               Thus ſayth the Lord: Go into the ſtretes, conſider
and make inquiſition for the olde waye▪
and if it be the right and good vvaye then go
therin, that ye may fynde reſte for your ſoules.
But they ſay we vvill not vvalke therin.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            THe lande of Egypt which doth lye
            ſoutheaſt from Englande coſte
            And reckned is one of thoſe landes,
            Whiche Phebus beames doth roſt:
            Hath flowyng in it, one famous floude
            That Nilus men doo call:
            Which once eche yere doth paſſe his bākes
            And whelme the countrey all.
            Whoſe waters cauſe not bareynnes
            As flouds doo commonly:
            But cauſeth the earth al ſeedes and fruſtes
            To bryng foorth plentuouſely.
            To Egypt lande, we may compare
            The ſpirituall Egypte well:
            Who are all they, within whoſe hertes
            The fylthy Pope dothe dwell.
            Theſe grauely grounds, this Nilus lo,
            A byſhop of great fame:
            Doth moiſt with words of heuenly dewe,
            To great encreaſe and gaine.
            Seuen hundred yeares he (Reader) ſpake
            In Greke and foreyne tonge:
            But nowe he ſpeaketh in engliſhe eke
            By Greſſops labour longe.
            Fyrſt therfore thanke thalmyghty god,
            Then take in worthe his payne:
            That at the leaſt thy good report,
            He may deſerue to gayne.
            
               Finis ꝙ D. I.
            
         
         
            
            To the right vvorſhipful and
his eſpeciall good frend maſter T. Beacon
the true myniſter and faithfull ſeruant
of our Sauiour Chriſt, Thomas
Greſſop vviſheth the continual fauour
of God, and peace euerlaſtynge,
In our redemer
IESVS CHRIST.
            
               WHen I fyrſte tooke in
hande this lytel Treatiſe,
concernynge the
Popes vſurped primacie: I mynded nothing
leſſe then to publiſhe
the ſame, that it might
come into the handes of many I had ſo
little affiance in my ſelfe, and ſo ſymple
an opinion of myn owne doyngs, that
I thought them vnworthy to be red of
any other. But after that I had receyued
no ſmalle courage by your gentyll
and frendly exhortations, wherein you
willed me to haue reſpecte to the cōmoditie
that myght enſue to other, whiche
being ignorant of the Greke and Latin
tong, may attain ſomwhat herby, both
to the increaſe of knowledge, and alſo

of iudgemente in matters of religion:
I nothynge doubted after long deliberation,
to make that commune to other
which at the fyrſt, as a priuate exerciſe,
I thought to haue kept to my ſelf Therfore as the readers hereof, yf they receiue
any commoditie hereby, ought in
that behalfe to yelde all thankes vnto
you, by whome to their profyte, I haue
been encouraged to attempt this bolde
enterpriſe: ſo I in ſome parte to ſhewe
my ſelfe not altogyther ingratefull and
vnmyndful of your exceding fauor and
great gentilneſſe to me wardes: haue
thought good to dedicate vnto you this
my ſimple endeuour, and firſt fruite of
my laboures, as vnto one who after a
ſorte may ſeeme, as in your owne right
to chalenge this kynde of duetie at my
hande. For vnto whom ſhulde I offer
this Treatiſe of the Popes primacy, or
whom ſhuld I make patron therof, but
one who hath ben long exerciſed in this
and the lyke matters of controuerſye,
who alſo by vſe and experience is well
practiſed in defendyng and puttynge away
the ſtrokes and weapons of ſuche
as are ennemies to goddes euerlaſtyng

truthe? Suche a one haue you declared
your ſelfe in your bokes and ſermons,
not onely in bearynge of the dartes of
wyly Antichriſt, and his ſtout army of
arrogant prieſtes (as Gregory termethGrego. li. 4. Epi. 48.
them) but alſo in beatynge downe that
monſtrous Hydra, with the myghtye
ſtrokes of the ſpirituall ſworde, ſo that
both he and all his proude army of preſumptuous
prelates, are fayn cowardly
to tourne theyr backes, and dare not
once ſhewe their faces in open battalt
agaynſt you. Wherfore I moſte humbly
beſeche you, accordyng to your accuſtomed
gentylneſſe, to take in good
worthe this my bounden duetie, and to
receue vnder your protection, this worthy
archebyſhop, who lyke a ſtraunger,
farre from his owne countrey, now ſeketh
entertaynment at your handes.
            Whiche yf ye voucheſafe, ye ſhall perceyue
this lyttell Nilus, ſo ſtoutly behaue
hymſelfe vnder your banner, that
he ſhall lyke a myghty champion ſtrike
of the head of this aniichriſtian Golyath
with his owne ſworde, and lyke a
valyant conquerour, ſet it on his owne
ſpeare, to be ſeene of the whole hoſt, of

all true englyſhe Iſraelites. So that I
doubte not, but all engliſh men that erneſtly
profeſſe Chriſt, ſhal playnly ſee,
that the lambe and his hoſt, haue geuen
the ſerpent an ouerthrow, and haue put
to flyght all his ignoraunt armye, with
their blynde capitains. Yea all engliſhe
men, as I truſt, ſhall perceaue, that he,
which fighteth on our ſyde agaynſt the
olde bawde of Babylon,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and cacolike
whoore of Rome, is moſte myghty and
ſtronge, yea that he is a lorde valiant in
battaile: he ſhall fyrſt vanquiſhe them in
this life, with the mighty breath of his
mouth, in the miniſters and true preachers
and folowers of his holy worde:
ſcatteryng them as the duſte from the
face of the earth: and after this lyfe, the
terrible iudgement of the Lorde of hoſtes
ſhal condemne them for euermore:
when the iuſte ſhall reigne in heauen,
in ioyes that by no meanes can bee expreſſed.
The high ſhepeherde and paſtor
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, encreaſe you
with all abundant plentye of his
grace and plentyfull abundance
of his holye ſpirite. Fare ye
moſt hartily well in
Chriſt.
            
               From Oxford
            
         
         
            
            To the chriſten Reader.
            
               THou haſte here gentle
Reader, in this lyttle boke,
no ſmalle defence of the
Truthe, agaynſt that blaſphemous
mouth (mentioned
in the Apocalips) whiche ſpeaketh
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
preſumptuouſly agaynſte the lorde god
and his choſen people. Here mayſt thou
ſee, howe vaynely and falſely the Pope
and his membres boaſt theimſelues, of
that whyche in deede he neuer had, that
is to were, his pretenced primacye and
vſurped power ouer the vniuerſall congregation.
Here alſo mayſt thou plainly
perceaue, that the Romiſhe byſhoppe
hathe no preeminence geuen hym by
goddes holy woorde, but by the fathers
and Emperoures, and that none ſuche
as the Pope moſte arrogantely, and againſte
all right, nowe taketh on hym:
but only a certayne prerogatiue in honor,
ſuch as we vſe of voluntacy accord
to geue to our elders. Here maiſt thou
beholde, the Pope caught and ſnared in
the nette which he layeth for other, and
ouercome with his owne argumentes,

I meane the generall Counſelles and
olde Doctours (which he and his mayn
tayners affirme to bee all togyther on
their part.) The author of this Treatiſe
a man of great antiquitie was archbyſhop
of Theſſalonia, and ſucceſſour to
the holy apoſtle Saint Paule, who firſt
traded the Theſſalonians in the Chriſten
fayth, and to the confirmation therof, wrote an epiſtle to them, whiche we
haue at this tymered in our churches,
as a parcell of holy ſcripture. This ancient
archybſhop lyued not longe after
the dayes of Charles the great, aboute
whoſe tyme the ſeuenth Synode was
helde at Nice: whereof the authour in
this boke eft ſoones maketh mencion.
He wrote (as we may gather by coniectures)
about the yere of our lord. 787.
His ſtile and maner of writynge is very
playne and eaſy, and ſauereth much
of that reuerent antiquitie: as the lerned
in the tongue maye well perceaue.
This booke of his is but breefe, yet it
conteyneth many graue ſentences and
weighty reaſons: it hath ſtrong argumentes
and piththy cōcluſions, againſt
that loftye and arrogante authoritie of

the Romiſhe biſhop. Al the Popes lymmes
may bluſhe and be abaſhed, if their
faces were not harder than braſſe, to
ſay that the byſhop of Rome hath had
that authoritie and power, whyche he
now vſurpeth, in quiete poſſeſſion ſens
the Apoſtles tyme, ſithe it is proued by
the moſt ancient doctours and holy fathers,
that that whiche in dede he had,
was gyuen hym long after the apoſtles
tyme, and that which he nowe boaſteth
hym ſelfe of, hath ben at all tymes, and
in all ages, denied hym by ſuche godly
and lerned paſtors as this Nilus was.
Whoſe boke, as thou ſeeſt, I haue tranſlated
into engliſſhe, to thende that my
countreymen, whiche are not experte
in the toungues, may be ware of them,
whiche to the mayntenance of the Popes
authoritie, haue alwayes in their
mouthes antiquitie, antiquitie: AndThe Papiſtes antiquitie as olde as the diuell him ſelfe
that they may perceyue howe lyttell veritie
is ioyned with the aniquitie they
ſpeake of, the fyrſt founder wherof was
auncient Sathanas, their great grandfather,
the old forger and father of lies,
from whom procedeth all preſumption
vanitie, and vntruthe, whom the Pope

and his ſecte, ſo lyuely expreſſe in theyr
doynges, that a mā may behold in their
hypocriticall faces repleniſhed with all
diſſimulation, a perfect patern and liuely image of their holy father Belzebub.
In tranſlatyng, I haue endeuoured my
ſelf, to ſpeake playnly that the rude and
ignorant myght rede it, to the encreaſe
of their knowledge in the true religion,
and to the auoidyng of ſuch forged reaſons,
as the Pope and his complices
falſely alledge for the vpholdynge and
maynteynyng of theyr tyrannicall and
beaſtly kyngdome. If I wold haue ſtudyed
for fyneneſſe of ſpeche, or preferred
my priuate commoditie before the
profite that maye redounde to manne,
I myghte eaſyly in leſſe tyme, more to
myne owne furtheraunce, haue fynyſhed
greatter thynges, and with more
fauour, yea and thankes to, at ſomme
mennes handes, haue abſtayned from
this payneful and daungerous enterpriſe.
But I rather chuſe to haue reſpecte
to the glorye of Chriſte, and his
holy churche, then to myne owne eaſe
and eſtimation. Euery weapon wherwith
we may beate downe errours and

lies muſt be takē in hand to the defence
of the truth, neither ought we to conſider
how fine & eloquent it is, but rather
what ſtrength, force & efficacy it hath to
ouerthrow the enemies of gods veritie.
I beſeche thee therfore, (good chriſtē Reder,)
to accept what ſoeuer I haue done
to thy furtherance in the knowledge of
goddes eternall truth and moſt holy religion.
And where as my doinges may
peraduenture ſeme ſcarce thanke worthy:
yet for my trauayle in thy behalfe,
ſuffer me not, if any thynge haue eſcaped
in tranſlatyng, in that I minded the
good, to myſſe of thy gentyll pardon.
            Whiche if thou graunt me, I ſhall not
onely thynke my ſelf ſufficiently recompenſed
for my trauaile, but alſo thereby
I ſhalbe encoraged to attempt greater
things to thy cōmoditie. Now I proteſt
afore god, who knoweth ye ſecretes of al
hartes, that in tranſlating herof I haue
had reſpecte chiefly to the commoditie
of ſuch as for lacke of inſtruction, haue
ben to muche deceyued and ſeduced, by
the craftye ſophiſtications and ſubtyll
gloſes of the Pope and his impes, who
to the ſtuffyng of their gredy paunche

and maintenance of their beaſtly ydle
lyfe, are not aſhamed to paint their poſitions
with fayned gloſes and feble diſtinctions.
But almyghty god hath and
wyl reuele to his elect their falſehode &
ſubtilie, to their opē ſhame & cōfuſion.
Wherin as all true chriſtians ought to
refuſe no paynes, but to do ye vttermoſt
of their endeuors: ſo I by gods grace,
wyll neuer ceaſſe to doo all that I may,
eyther in tranſlatyng, or otherwyſe, to
the ende that all men may perceyue, on
howe weake a ground,The papi
                  
                     •
                  tes beſt argumentes. they haue gone
about by fyre and fagotte and all extremitie,
to compell men to laye the foundation
of theyr faith. And alſo how that
all that they teache, as well in this matter,
as in other poyntes of religion, conteineth not one iote of ſounde doctrine,
if it bee tried by the holye ſcriptures. I
ſpeake not this, that I malyce the pope
or his adherentes any thing, whoſe perſons, as God knoweth, I hate not, although
I abhore their deteſtable and
erronius doctrine: but that I myghte
drawe out of that ſtinckynge puddle of
wylful ignorance, as many as I could.
I hate the errour, and not the menne.

Whiche if they forſake, I ſhall gladly
yelde them all chriſten loue and due reuerence.
Therfore I lytle eſteme what
any man either of malice or ignorance,
ſhall report of theſe my doynges: knowyng
that whatſoeuer the one ſaythe,
procedeth of a peruerſe iudgement: and
what ſo euer the other reporteth, commeth
of raſhues, rather then of reaſon,
in iudgyng that which he knoweth not,
Wherfore as I regarde nat what they
ſaye of me in this behalfe, ſo I ſubmyt
bothe this and all my dooynges to the
iudgement of the true chriſtian reder,
whoſe hart god hath opened to acknowledge
and receaue the veritie of his holy
wyll, beſechyng almighty god of his
great goodnes and infinite mercye, to
bryng to the knowledge of his truthe,
all thoſe whom the god of this worlde,
yet holdeth in captiuitie: that they can
not perceyue the power of ſaythe, neyther
knowe the Lorde aright in his only
ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, our alone aduocate
and true head of the congregation
to whome with the father and the holye
ghoſte bee all honour and glorye
euerlaſtyng. Amen.
         
         
            
            LEt rankour not you rule,
            O men of Romyſhe ſecte:
            Expell thē poyſon frō your breſts
            That dothe you thus infecte.
            Let not that hauty whoore
            That boaſts her ſelfe for god:
            That rules the realms of Ceſars right
            With her vſurped rod:
            Let not this hag I ſay,
            Bewitche your earthly eyes:
            That here embraceth beaſtly ioye,
            And vertue dooth deſpyſe.
            Antiquitie ſhe ſayth,
            Gaue her this ſtately place:
            Lo here Antiquitie you ſee
            Dothe her and hers deface.
            Lo here dothe Nilus teache,
            A man of ancient tyme
            Howe muche ſhe is to be abhorde,
            Howe muche ſhe ſwelles with crime.
            Leaue her therfore in tyme
            Forſake her wicked wayes:
            Let vs and you agree in one,
            So God ſhall haue his prayſe.
            
               Finis ꝙ B. G.
            
         
         
            
            Fautes eſcaped in the printyng.
            ¶In the leafe of B. the .xi. page or ſide
the .xxvii. lyne, for indifferent, rede,
muche different.
            In the ſame leaf of B. the xvi page, the
vii. lyne: for yet, reade, it.
            ¶In the leafe of C. the .xii. page, the.
xxvi. lyne, for names, reade canons.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE OF
the Popes primacie by Nilus
Archbiſhop of Theſſalonia.
            
               THe adherentes of
the Romiſhe churche
affirme,
            Fyrſt, that S. Peter
was made chiefe of
thapoſtles by Chriſt
hym ſelfe, and therefore
had the keies of heauen worthily
deliuered vnto hym: and that the churche
was buylded on hym, agaynſt the
whiche the gates of hell ſhulde not preuaile,
foraſmuche as Chriſt had praied
for his faith, and had commanded him
bothe to ſtrengthen his bretherne, and
alſo to feede his ſhepe. They heape togither
alſo muche more, wherby they
thynke that the primacie of Peter may
be proued.
            Secondarily they hold, that the Pope
is Peters ſucceſſour, and that he hath
by ſucceſſion all his preeminence, and
therfore may doo in matters of religion,
all thynges after lyke ſorte and faſhion
as he might haue doone.
            
               
And therfore they ſaye, that it is vnpoſſible
for the Pope to falle frome the
true faith, for if that ſhuld happen, the
chriſten religion and the whole church
whyche is buylded vppon hym, muſte
needes periſſhe. To the proſe whereof
they alledge a teſtimonie of their own,
out of Pope Agathon, whiche in a certaine
Epiſtle affirmeth, that the churche
of Rome was neuer entangled
with any erroure, neyther hathe any
tyme ſwarued frome the true waie of
veritie. And therfore they ſay, that the
Pope hath had his ſupremacy always
ſence the Apoſtles tyme.
            
                Alſo they ſaye lykewyſe, that other
Metropolitanes and Archebyſhoppes
are ſubiecte to hym in lyke maner, as
the Byſhoppes and Prelates, whyche
are vnder the Arcebyſhop of Conſtantinople,
are ſubiect to the ſayd archbyſhoppe.
            
                Theu they ſaye, that the Pope hathe
appellation.
            
                They affirme moreouer, that he may
iudge all menne, and that none maye
iudge hym, neyther in his manners,
neyther in faythe, or doctrine.
            
               
               
Beſydes this, they hold that the pope
is byſhop of no certayne place, neither
is he ſo called as other are, but ſimply
without circumſcription, he is named
a Biſhoppe. To the profe wherof, they
brynge the Pope hymſelfe to wytnes:
who neuer in his letters, termeth hym
ſelfe Byſhop of Rome.
            
                Alſo they affyrme, that Rome onely
hathe been called the ſea Apoſtolike,
becauſe that Peter the Apoſtle, bothe
ledde his lyfe there a longe tyme, and
alſo dyed there.
            
                Item they affirme, that the Pope only
hath authoritie to call a counſell.
            
                Their laſt aſſertion is, that no lawe
can be made without the conſent of the
pope, neither any thynge ordeyned in
the churche. Then they conclude that
the Pope hath all the aforeſayde rightes
and priuiledges of Peter, and that
therfore, all men owe hym obedience,
and no man ought to gayneſay any of
his commandementes.
            All theſe thynges the adherentes of
the Romyſſhe churche, alledge for the
mayntenaunce of the popes dominion
and authoritie.
            
               
Vnto the whiche aſſertions of theirs,
I nothynge doubte what to aunſwere,
but afore whom I may pleade. For yf
I ſhould make anſwere before the Latins
themſelues, and adherentes of the
Romiſhe church, what rightful iudgement
myght I loke for, in ſubmyttyng
my ſelfe to the iudgement of myn enemies?
But yf I ſhuld pleade afore our
Grekes, then myght the Latines haue
iuſte cauſe to complayne of me, where
as I make the Grecians, iudges ouer
them, whom they thinke to be their aduerſaries,
in matters Eccleſiaſticall.
What then muſt we doo?Gods word muſte not be hidde. verily Gods
truthe ought not to be buried vp in ſilence
euerlaſtyng, but rather we ought
to ſpeake, freely, hauynge good confidence,
and wiſhing that thoſe to whom
this Booke ſhall come, deſire nothyng
more than the truthe. For ſurely ſuche
as fauour the truthe, ſhall hereby alſo
profyte ſomewhat.
            FYRST therfore, concernyng the
primacy of Peter, after what ſorte he
was chiefe of that holy congregation,
or what priuilege was geuen or ought
vnto hym: I thinke it not now ſo nedeful

to be reaſoned of. For be it after ſuche
ſorte, and ſo great, yea as it lyketh
any man to deuyſe: yet neuer truely
ſhall it therby be proued, that the Pope
hath ſuche right of Peter, where by he
may rule all other byſhops, whiche is
our aduerſaries ſeconde poſition.
            For, concernyng the Pope, two thynges
muſt be conſydered: the one, That
he is Byſhop of Rome, by the whyche
title the ſacred Synodes terme hym.
            The other, that he would be chiefe and
hygheſt of all byſhops. The fyrſt truely
he hathe of Peter, that is to wete, the
byſhoprike of Rome But the other his
primacie, he hath of certayne fathers
and kynges, whiche for deſyre of good
order, gaue it hym many yeares after
thapoſtles tyme. And to proue this to
be true, I wyll bryng forth wytneſſes
not two or three, or twiſe ſo many, but
ſire hundred and thirty, yea and choſe
holy fathers.
            Rede the xxviii. Canon of the fourth
holy Synode or councell of Calcedonia,
where are theſe woordes: We folowyng
the decrees of the fathers, and
waying the Canon euen now reherſed

of the. 150. Byſhoppes gathered togyther
at Conſtantinople, called newe
Rome, in the tyme of the moſte holye
Emperour Theodoſius, the ſame alſo
doo we ordeyne & decree, concernyng
the honoures and prerogatiues of the
ſaid church of Conſtantinople, or new
Rome. For vnto the ſea of old Rome,
the Fathers gaue worthyly the chiefe
honour and primacy, bycauſe that Citie
then ruled all the worlde, the ſame
cauſe moued the. 150. foreſayd byſhops
to geue the lyke honoure and preeminēce
to the ſea of new Rome, iudgyng
it reaſonable, that this Citie condecorate
with the empire, and ſenate imperiall,
and equal in dignitie with the old
imperiall ſeate, ſhould as muche excell
in matters eccleſiaſticall, ſeyng that it
is the next vnto it. Then what may we
lerne hereby? Verily nothyng els, but
that the Superioritie ouer other churches,
was geuen to the pope, not by the
Apoſtles,The Pope hathe not his primacy of the apoſtles. but by the fathers, and that
for no greater or iuſter cauſe, then that
the citie of Rome, at that tyme had dominion
ouer the whole world. For the
Canon ſayeth playnely, That the primacie

or ſuperiour dygnitie was geuen
to the ſea of Rome by the fathers.
So that the pope hath therfore the Superioritie
geuen hym of the Fathers,
bycauſe in tymes paſte, the Citie of
Rome had the Empire. Then he hath
it not as Peters ſucceſſour, neither as
geuen hym of the Apoſtles.
            But for the more apparaunt truthe,
let vs reade the hundreth newe decree
of Iuſtinian to the ende, that it maye
appeare, that the truthe hath wytneſſes
on euery ſyde. We ordeyne, ſayth
he, accordynge to the Decrees of the
Synodes, that the moſte holy Byſhop
of olde Rome, is the chiefe of all prieſtes,
and that the moſte bleſſed byſhop
of Conſtantinople, or newe Rome,
is nexte vnto hym, and aboue all other:
Do you not heare that the Emperoure
ſayeth, That the primacye of
the Pope of Rome, is gyuen hym by
the Decree of holye Councelles? If
that the Pope dooe holde his Supremacye
onely by the Decree of Councelles,
I beſeeche, you howe may it be
trewe, that ſomme menne affyrme,

that he hath it by ſucceſſion of Peter.
But here ſom man may lay,The Pop
                     •
                   Peters ſucceſſour. Ios not the
Pope than wholly the ſucceſſor of Peter?
He is truly. But in that he is a biſhop
onely, & as euery byſhop that was
ordeyned by hym (whiche ſurely were
very many) and as euery byſhop is the
ſucceſſour of the Apoſtle, of whom he
was made, or in whoſe place he techeth
And after this ſort, aſwell Peter as other
tShapoſtles, had many ſucceſſours,
which were byſhops only and nothyng
elles. For Peter was both an apoſtle,
and alſo chiefe of the Apoſtles. But the
Pope is no apoſtle, muche leſſe chiefe
of the apoſtles. for thapoſtles dyd neither
make nor ordeyne Apoſtles, but
onely paſtours and teachers. Moreouer
Peter was a Doctoure of all the
worlde, and ſo were the reſte of the Apoſtles:
for the Lorde ſayde to hym, as
well as to the reſte of the Apoſtles, Go
and preache the Goſpel to all nations.The Pope 
                     〈◊〉
                   not in this pointe bee Peters ſucceſſour.
But the Pope is onely byſhoppe of the
Citie of Rome, and ſo is he called.
            Furthermore Peter made one byſhop
at Antioche, an nother at Alexandria,
and an other in an other place. but the

               
                  〈◊〉
                may doo nothyng like: Beſydes

                  〈◊〉
               , Peter may ordeyne the byſhop of

                  〈◊〉
               , but the Pope can not ſo doo. 
                  〈◊〉
               
conclude,Math. 16. It was ſayde to Peter

                  ••
               thout condicion: What ſoeuer thou

                  •••
               deſt, ſhall be bounde, and what ſo

                  ••
               er thou loſeſt, ſhalbe loſed in heauen:

                  •
               ut when Peter ordeyned the byſhop

                  〈◊〉
                Rome, he commanded hym to bynd

                  〈◊〉
                loſe that, which worthily ought to be

                  ••
               ſed or bound. Beſide al this, whatſoe
               
                  •
               er
Peter taught, either by preachyng

                  •
               rityng, it is knowen vndoubtedly to
be the doctrine of the holy ghoſte: But
of the Pope no ſuche thynge maye be
thought. Wherfore the Pope hath not
all the prerogatiues, giftes, and priuiledges
of Peter by ſucceſſion: but thoſe
onely whiche euery biſhop ordeyned of
Peter hath, that he may bynd and loſe,
baptiſe and preache, and to bee ſhorte,
bryng into the way thoſe that are ſeduced,
and doo other dueties belongyng
to a myniſter.
            Thirdly wheras they ſaye, that it is
not poſſible, that the pope ſhoulde falle
from the truthe, that truely paſſeth all
the gyftes and vertues of Peter hym

ſelfe,Math. 26. Gala. 
                     ••
                  . yea although the Pope muſt n
                  •
               
               des haue had theim all by Succeſſion▪
For he good man full ſore agaynſt h
                  ••
               
wyll, erred more then ones. But he 
                  〈◊〉
               
I woulde fayne knowe, whether th
                  •
               
Pope may, or hath at any tyme falle
                  •
               
into the crimes of lyeng, couetouſnes, vayneglorye, or other lyke vyces, or
whether it be impoſſible, that he ſhulde 
offende at all? Lette theym denye it if
they bee not aſhamed to lye openly. If
then it be manyfeſt, that euen he, may
ſometymes offende and ſynne agaynſt
conſcyence, in as muche as he is a
manne, veryly yt maye happen alſo,
that in matters of Relygion he maye
bee deceaued. The truthe whereof
Saincte Paule wytneſſeth, wrytynge
vnto Timothe on this wyfe:1. Tim. 1. Hauyng
ſaythe and a good conſcience, whyche
ſome men not regardynge, haue made
ſhypwrecke in matters of Faythe.
            Beholde, here we heare, that he whoſe
conſcience is wounded,The Pope may be ſick in  faith. maye be ſycke
in faythe. Therefore, yf the Pope
haue not alwayes his conſcience free
from all offence, and this euyll is ioyned
with errour in faythe, it foloweth

of neceſſitie, that they lye manyfeſtly,
whiche ſay, that the Pope can not fall
from the veritie of Chriſtes relygion.
Yea it is a kynde of defection to defyle
the conſcience with ſynne, as S.
Paule wytneſſeth, ſayeng: They profeſſe
God in woorde, but in theyr deedes
they denye hym. Howe then maye
it bee, that the Pope maye poſſyblye
denye GOD in woorke and deede,
and not in woorde and doctrine.
            Certaynly Honorius the Pope fell
frome the ſyncere doctrine,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the Pope cōdemned for hereſy. and therfore
was condempned by the ſyxt Synode,
as it maye euidentely appeare
in the .xvi. decree of the ſayd Synode,
where it is ſaid: It behoueth that they
whome we haue alreadye pronounced
condemned, and by the cōmon decree
haue put out of ye holy praier bokes, be
alſo openly proclaimed accurſed. Thā
according to the laudable cuſtome, the
princis beyng mentioned, it foloweth
forthwith: Curſed be Theodorus Pharanites
the heretike. Curſed be the heretike
Sergius: Curſed be the heretike
Kyzius: Curſed be Honorius the heretike:
Curſed be the heretike Pirrhus:

accurſed be all that fauoure heretikes.
But for the more euident truthe, lette
vs brynge toorthe an other teſtimonye
out of the oration of the holy Synode
to the Emperour: We remoue, ſayth
the Synode, frome the lymittes of the
churche, and worthyly accurſe all new
and vayne ſermes, with theyr inuenters,
ſuche as are, eſpecially, Theodorus
Pharanites, Sergius, Paule,
Pirrhus, and Peter, who ſometyme
ruled this churche of Conſtantinople,
and alſo Cirus the prieſte of Alexandria,
and Honorius biſhop of Rome. If that
Honorius biſhop of Rome were an heretike,
poſſible it is then,The Pope maye be an heretike. that the pope
may faile in veritie of doctrine: neither
ſhall the wordes of the Lorde be vayne
and falſe, although the Pope erre, whiche
he ſpake of the church, that the gates
of hell ſhulde not preuayle agaynſt
it,Math. 16. for the true doctrine is preſerued in
other byſhops and doctours.
            Here alſo we may playnly ſee, that it
was not ſayde of the ſea of Rome, that
the church of God was theron builded
For that were to hard and not indifferent
from the ſeruilitie and bondage of

the Iewes, to bynde the congregation
of God to Rome. For Chriſt buylded
his churche himſelfe vpon the doctrine
and confeſſion of Peter,The foundatiō of the churche. and all thoſe
that kepe and mayntaine the lyke faith
and profeſſion that Peter dydde. And
where as pope Agathon boaſteth,Pope Agathon. that
his church neuer went from the truth,
it is no meruayle, conſyderynge what
face ſuche men haue. But lette ſuche
honeſt men take it for a warnyng, that
they wreſt not the truthe of the matter,
to their owne talke, but rather let them
tempre their tonges to the truth of the
matter. And percaſe Pope Agathon
was moued ſo to write, either bicauſe
the ſtate of his matter dyd ſo require,
as it hapned ofttymes that he ſo wrote,
orels bycauſe the churche of Rome in
dede hath not often departed from the
truth. Otherwyſe, if that without exception
and condition it were ſymply
true: howe coulde that ſayeng be verified:
All are gone aſtraye, and are become
wycked, there is none that dothe
good, no not one. Beſyde that, we may
well ſaye,Pſalm. 13. that Agathon ſpake of the
tyme paſt, becauſe the church of Rome

hath not erred afore tyme, and not of
the tyme to come, as thoughe it were
vnpoſſible, that it ſhould euer be deceiued.
Certainely Agathon wrote that
before the .vi. Synode, neyther dyd he
yet vnderſtand the thynges wherof the
Synode entreated. Alſo it wer no meruayle yf that holye ſynode, wherein ſo
many holy fathers were gathered togither,
ſhulde eſpye and ſee that, whiche
he beyng but one man, could not ſufficiently
perceaue. And that theſe thynges
are true, it may wel be gathered by
an Epiſtle of Pope Leo, who ſucceded
next after Agathon, and alowed the vi.
ſynode. For ſo ſayth Leo in his epiſtle,
written to the Emperor, conceruynge
the ſaid ſinode. Alſo we holde accurſed
the authors of the new hereſy, thatis to
wite Theodorꝰ biſh. of Pharanite, Cirus
of Alexādria, Sergius, Pirrhus,
Paule & Peter ſucceſſours rather thā
biſhops of the church of ConſtātinopleOne Pope cōdemneth in other.
and alſo Honorius who hath not beautified
this Apoſtolike church, with doctrine
lefte by the apoſtles, but rather
hath aſſayed with prophane treaſon, to
ſubuert the vnſported and pure faithe.
            
               
In the fourth place, where as our aduerſaries
ſay, that the pope is after the
ſame ſort and faſhion ſuperiour to the
Biſhop of Conſtantinople, as the ſaide
Biſhop is to the Byſhop of Ceſaria, or
to any other Byſhop vnder hym: that
truelye as it is manifeſtelye falſe, ſo
maye it in no wiſe be ſuffered: for certaynly
the Biſhop of Rome is therfore called
firſt, becauſe the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
in reſpect to hym is ſecond
in order and worthyneſſe. But the byſſhop
of Conſtantinople, in reſpecte of
the byſſhop of Ceſaria, is not called
fyrſt, neyther the ſayd byſhop, neyther
any other of theſe that are vnder hym,
hath the ſeconde degree or place of dignitie,
as nexte vnto hym. But he is
ſo fyrſt of them that ar vnder hym, that
as though he were alone, he hath none
adioyned to hym, that maye in anye
poynt as ſeconde in degree be compared
with him in worthines. The biſhop
of Ceſarea, is not called ſeconde,Pſalm. 1
                     •
                  . in reſpect
of the biſhop 
                  •
               f Conſtantinople,
But firſt in compariſon of theim, that
with him at ſubiect to the biſhop of Cō
               ſtātinople,
of the which one is ſecōd to

hym, another thirde, an other fourth.
And that the primacye of the biſhop of
Rome is not loſe and free, as though it
were a monarchye, but vnited with others
as the dignities of felowes in office,
are conioyned togyther betweene
them ſelues: yet may be eaſily proued.
For the xxxvi. Canon of the foreſayd
Synode hath theſe wordes: Renuyng
the decrees of the hūdred and fifty holy
fathers, who helde a counſell in this
imperiall Citie preſerued of God: And
of the vi hundred and thirty gathered
togyther at Calcedonia, we doo ordeyn
and conſtitute, that the ſea of Conſtantinople,
haue equall dignitie with the
ſea of olde Rome, & haue as much priiledge
in matters eccleſiaſticall, as
the ſayd ſea, ſeynge that it is nexte vnto
it, and next to Conſtantinople, lette
the biſhop of the great citie Alexandria
haue place, and after him let the biſhop
of Hieruſalem be placed. If ſo be that
the Pope doo therfore chalenge to him
dominion ouer other, bicauſe he is firſt
named, and hath the fyrſt degree in honour,
he muſt lykewiſe grant the ſame
power to the byſſhop of Conſtantinople

(bycauſe he is named ſeconde) ouer
them that in order folowe hym, the byſhop
of Alexandria, and others. And alſo
to the biſhop of Alexandria, who is named
thirde, authoritie ouer the biſhop
of Antioche, and to the byſhop of Antioche,
who is fourthe, power ouer the
byſhop of Ieruſalem, who hath the .v.
place in noumber and order. But this
were neyther iuſte, neyther any thyng
els but a diſturbance of the churche of
God. And hereby maye we perceyue,
that the byſhop of Rome is not ſuperiour
to the byſhop of Conſtantinople,
in lyke ſorte as the ſayd byſhop is to the
byſhop of Ceſarea, for aſmuche as the
biſhoppe of Conſtantinople ordeyneth
bothe the biſh. of Ceſarea, and al other
ſubiecte to hym. But the byſhoppe of
Rome ordeyneth neyther the byſhop of
Cōſtantinople, neyther any other Metropolitan.
But that it may more euidently
apere, that the Pope hath no power
ouer all other byſhops, let vs rede
the .vi. canon of the Nicen coūſell, wher
it is playnly commanded, that the Byſhop
of Alexandria, ſhulde rule ſomme
churches, the byſhop of Rome other,

and other the byſhop of Antioche. Neither
maye any of them medle in others
proince.This Cuſtom the B. of Rome hath brokē
                Lette the olde cuſtome take
place, whiche was, that the byſſhop of
Alexandria ſhulde be chiefe, and haue
the higheſt dignitie in Egypte, Lybia,
and the .v. cities: bycauſe this is a cuſtome
with the byſhop of Rome alſo.
Lykewiſe at Antioche, and in other prouinces,
lette the primacie, hyghneſſe,
dignttie and authoritie of the churches
he maynteyned. Here ye playnely ſee
that the canon of Nice, commaundeth
the olde cuſtome to be kept, and al men
to be content therwith: whiche cuſtom
dothe attribute and preſerue to euery
churche his owne worthineſſe, ſo that
the churche of Alexandria ſhoulde rule
ſome, the churche of Antioche other,
that is to ſay, thoſe, whiche are in bothe
Syrias. The churche of Rome other,
and other the Churche of Ieruſalem,
euen thoſe (as the ſeuenth Cannon of
the Synoda appoynteth, whiche are
Phenicia, Paleſtina, and Arabia, and
to Conſtantinople, by the .xxviii. Canon
of Calcedonia, the churches of
Aſia, Pontus, and Thracia. Therefore

all Metropolitanes, that are contente
with their owne churches, kepe
the decree, the lawe, and ordinance.
            And yf any manne not contente with
his owne, deſyrethe an nothers, he
trewely oughte to bee counted a breaker
of cuſtome, and of the decrees of
holye Fathers, for as muche as the
decree of Nice, doothe ſtraightly forbydde
it, and wylleth the olde vſage
herein to bee folowed. If the Canon
hadde deuyded the worlde, betweene
other Metropolites, and hadde geuen
nothynge vnto the Byſſhoppe of
Rome, but onely haue ſayde, That he
oughte to rule the reſte, then myghte
a manne of lykelyhoode haue geſſed,
that he oughte all togyther to rule all
congregations of the whole worlde,
and that all other, as welle Byſhops
as Metropolitanes are vaſſalles and
ſubiecte vnto hym, euen as to the
Byſſhoppe of Conſtantinople, other
Byſſhoppes of his prouynce, that ar
his inferiours. Nowe ſeeynge that
ſundrye countreyes are appoynted to
the Byſſhoppe of Rome, other to the
Byſſhoppe of Alexandria, and other

to the byſſhop of Conſtantinople: no
more are they ſubiect to hym, then he
is to theym.
            Then our aduersaries ſay, that the
Pope hathe prouocation in matters
eccleſiaſticall, and that therefore he is
chiefe of all other. The ſame prouocatione
hathe the byſhop of Conſtantinople,
and yet therby hath he neyther authoritie,
neither iurisdiction of other
Metropolitans. Therefore neyther the
Pope oughte to let or hynder the iuriſdiction
of other Metropolites. And
that it may appeare, that I haue ſayde
truely, that the byſhop of Conſtantinople
hath prouocation, I wyl alleged
the .ix. canon of the .iiii. Synode or coū
               ſell
of Calcedonia. If one clerke haue
an action againſt an other, let hym not
leaue his owne byſſhop, and runne to
the ſecular iudge, but lette the matter
be fyrſt debated afore his owne biſhop,
or at the leaſt by thaduiſe of their owne
byſhop, let theim take ſuche a iudge as
bothe the parties ſhall bee contented
with. If any doo otherwiſe he ſhall bee
in daunger of the decree. If any clerke
haue an action agaynſte his owne byſhop,

or any other, lette the matter bee
tried afore the Synode of the ſame prouince.
And yf any byſhoppe or clerke
haue a complaynte agaynſt the Metropolitane,
let hym go to the magiſtrate
of the dioceſſe, or elles to the ſea of the
chiefe citie Conſtantinople, and there
lette hym be iudged. So alſo ſayth the
xvii. decree of the ſayd Synode. Moreouer
the .xx. and .xxxvi. canon of the .vi.
Synode, gyueth in all poyntes as muche
dignitie and prerogatiue to the one
as to the other, as muche to the ſea of
Conſtantinople as to the ſea of Rome,
wherby they declare that prouocatiōs
may be made to the byſhop of Conſtā
               tinople.
            Then where as our aduerſaries babble
that the Pope maye iudge all men,The Papiſtes are full of vanitie.
and that no man may iudge hym: that
veryly is full of arrogancy, vanitie, &
vntruthe, and farre diſſonant from the
modeſt and equall decrees of the apoſtles.
For yf that Paule dyd therfore
conferre his doctrine with the reſte of
the apoſtles, that he myghte not ſeeme
to runne in vayne, & Peter bare myldly
and paciently, the ſharpe reprofes

of Paule, by what right, or with what
face, maye the Pope of Rome, cha
               
                  ••
               nge
to hym ſelfe, that be onely lyke
a tyraunt,The Pope 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ſhould geue accompte to no
man of his lyfe and deedes, althoughe
he boaſte hym ſelfe to bee Peters ſucceſſour?
But experience it ſelfe ſhall
eaſyly proue that to bee moſte vntrue.
For Honorius as wee haue ſhewed,
was not onely iudged of the ſyxt Synode,
but alſo condemned for his falſe
doctrine, yea and accurſed to: his deth
and graue nothynge auaylynge agaynſt
that ſeueritie of the counſaile.
And as for other dedes and matters
Ciuile and Politicall, beſydes his doctrine,
in that behalfe alſo he is no leſſe
ſubiecte then any other Byſſhop, for
as muche as he hym ſelfe alſo is termed
a Byſſhoppe. Many ſuche Lawes
and Decrees there are, partely
made by the Apoſtles, and ſome made
by the holy Councelles. Yea I canne
alledge a place, where the Byſſhoppe
of Rome is ſeparately reproned of a
Councell, as the thyrtenthe Cannon
of the ſyxte generall Councell doothe
euidentely ſhewe, where it is ſayd after

this ſorte: For as mu
                  ••
               e as wee
vnderſtande, that in the Churche of
Rome, in the Decree of Orders, it
is appoynted, That who ſo euer taketh
the orders of a prieſte or Deacon,
ſhall fyrſte profeſſe, That they
haue no copulatione with theyr wyues:
Wee folowynge the olde Canon and
conſtitutions of the Apoſtles,Preſtes mariage lauful by the old canon and conſtitutions of the apoſtles. wylle
and decree, that the lawfull matrimonye
of holy menne ſhall be auaylable,
and that theyr copulation with theyr
wyues, ſhall by no meanes be broken,
neyther that one depriue the other of
familiaritie in tyme conuenient. Then
the canon makynge the ſentence more
plain and manifeſt, ſaith moreouer: If
any mā preſume contrary to the rules
of the apoſtles to depriue any prieſte or
deacon, of the contract or felowſhyp of
his laufull wyfe, let hym bee depoſed.
Lykewyſe yf a Prieſt or Deacon forſake
his wyfe, for relygions ſake, let
hym be excōmunicate: and if he ſo continue,
lette hym bee depoſed. The .lv.
Canon of the ſayde Synode wytneſſeth
the ſame. The words ar theſe: For
aſmuch as we vnderſtand, that certain

in the citie of Rome, contrarye to the
receyued cuſtome of the churche, doo
faſt in the Saboths in the tyme of lent:
it ſemeth good to this holye Synode to
bynde the churche of Rome by all meanes
to the canon whiche ſayth: If any
clerke be found to faſt on the ſonday or
ſabboth day, one ſabboth day onely excepted,
let hym be depoſed. If any laie
man be founde ſo doynge, lette hym be
excommunicate.
            Hereby it playnly appereth that the
byſhoppe of Rome may and ought to
be iudged, as well in controuerſies of
doctrine, as in all other his dedes and
matters, if he commytte any thynge agaynſt
ryght and equitie.The Pope as not aboue a byſhop. And that the
pope is not aboue the degree of a Byſhop,
as ſome men peruerſely thynke
hym to be, it may be plainly proued, by
this that we haue ſaid. For how myght
it be, if he were in dignitie aboue a biſhop,
that he ſhoulde be iudged of byſſhops
in the counſell, and be compelled
to render vnto them an accompt of his
dedes. It is manyfeſte that the fathers
when they write vnto hym, call hym a
byſhoppe: truely he is ordeyned of byſhops,

whiche veryly myght not be ſo,
yf his dignitie were more then a byſſhop.
For no manne can gyue that to
an other whiche fyrſt he hath not hymſelfe.Note the pope breaketh order eccleſiaſticall.
And what els I pray you meane
they, that ſo ſaye, but to breake and deſtroy
the order eccleſiaſtical. For Dionyſius
who lyued in the apoſtles tyme,
deuideth the regimente eccleſiaſticall,
into deacons, prieſtes, and byſhoppes,
neyther maye we by ſuſpition gather
out of his writynges, that there is any
dignitie in the churche, aboue a biſhop,
neyther may it be ſayde by any lykelyhode,
that Dionyſius eyther was ignorant,
that there was any ſuch dignitie
in the churche: eyther that he of ſet
purpoſe, dyd diſſemble it, ſeyng that he
profeſſeth, that he hath written fully of
all the Eccleſiaſticall regyment. But
ſuppoſe this to be true (may our aduerſaries
ſay) yet I pray you ſhew vs with
what face ye dare alledge the canons
of the .vi. Synode, ſithe that Synode
hathe made no decree at all, but thoſe
wherin the two natures of our Sauiour
are agreed on agaynſt the Monothelites:
to that I aunſwere, that although

the canons which I haue euen
nowe alledged, were not true, neyther
the very decrees of the .vi. Synode: yee
our purpoſe, that the Pope is not greater
then other byſhoppes, neyther free
from the iudgement of others, may be
manifeſtely proued by other thynges
therof dependynge. For yf there be no
dignitie aboue a byſhops, then is no biſhop
greatter than an other, in aſmuch
as he is a byſhop. For Dionyſius ſaith
that all biſhoppes are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
that is to ſaye, of one order and
dignitie. Therfore ſeyng the Pope is a
byſhop, he ought to bee lyke other byſſhops,
and ſubiecte to all lawes, that
other are bounde vnto. And truely ſo
many ar the byſhoply lawes, or lawes
of byſhoppes, and ſo greate care hadde
the holye Synodes in makynge them,
whoſe authoritie no mā ought to withſtande,
that to reherſe them all, it wold
be very harde. Beſyde that I may well
aunſwere, that that is knowen to all
men, that are but meanely conuerſant
in matters eccleſiaſticall, that the forſayd
Canons be the decrees of the ſixte
Synode, and alſo that they oughte to

bee reputed and taken of firme and ratified
authoritie, as they are in deede.
For when as neyther the .v. Synode
neyther the ſyxte, at the begynnynge
hadde any regarde of theſe conſtitutions,
ſtreyght after, the .vi. Synode beynge
renewed, fynyſſhed that whiche
before was neglected. For as the other
dydde only handle matters of doctrine,
leauyng and omittyng all other
matters, ſo the .vi. Synode beyng begunne
agayne, or renewed, touched
lyghtly matters of doctrine, and made
cōſtitutions only cōcerning the gouernāce
of the churche, and other matters
eccleſiaſticall. And that this is the very
ſame vniuerſal ſinode iterate or begun
again, it appereth firſt by the hiſtory of
Baſilius biſhop of Gortines in Candy
who ſupplied the rome of the Pope in
the ſaid ſinode. Moreouer it is manifeſt
in that the ſinode calleth it ſelfe alwais
vniuerſall. And it had not ben true, ſo
great a company of biſhops wold haue
feared to be taken in a manyfeſte lye.
Beſides that the .vii. holy ſynode ſayth
in the firſt decree therof: We willingly
& gladly imbrace the godly cōſtitutiōs,

and we confirme their ſtedfaſt and vndefyled
authoritie: as thoſe that the
trumpettes of the holy ghoſte hath ordeyned,
that is to ſaye the apoſtles and
holy fathers, that haue bene gathered
togither in dyuers places, for the ſelfe
ſame purpoſe. For they inſpired with
the ſpirite of god decreed thoſe thynges
that they thought profytable. Whome
they accurſed we accurſe alſo: whome
they haue ſuſpēded, we ſuſpend, whom
they haue depoſed we depoſe: And to be
ſhort, when they by any other meanes
dydde punyſhe, we alſo doo taxe in lyke
maner. Sainct Paule who was taken
vp into the thyrd heauen,1. Tim. 6. and to whom
thoſe thynges were reueled, that are
not laufull to bee ſpoken of, cryeth out
that the maners of the holye, ought to
be farre from all couetouſnes, and that
they ſhulde be content with their owne
eſtate and condition. Therfore ſeynge
that neyther the .vi. Synode at the firſt
comyng togyther, neither the ſeuenth
hath meddled with the conſtitutions of
the apoſtles, and the names of the .vi.
vniuerſall ſynodes, but the ſayd ſixthe
ſynode being iterate and renewed hath

ſupplied the defecte therof, it is manyfeſt,
that the .vii. Synode ſpeaketh of
the canons of the ſaid .vi. counſel. More
ouer where as the Synode accurſethe
thoſe that regarde not the authoritie of
the decrees, Is it not a terrible thyng,
yea is it not ynough to moue any ſtony
hart? Beſides that the biſhop of Rome
hym ſelfe ſo long as he agreed with the
churches of the eaſt, dyd ſo muche approue
and allow the decrees of this ſynode
that Adrian the fyrſt, wrytyng to
Taratius,
               Pope Adrian pro
                     ••••
                   for Image. archebiſhop of Conſtantinople,
with great admiration cōmendeth
hym, bycauſe he dyd ſo conſtantely obſerue
theſe decrees, Whiche may appere
by the very wordes of his epiſtle,
whiche forth with I wyll alledge. We
doo perceaue, ſayth he, by the ſynodall
epiſtle, how earneſt your profeſſion is
in the right faith, and how great a zele ye
haue towardes the holy congregations,
and the .vi. holy Synodes, and
towardes the venerable and ſacred Images,
whyche ſurely is wonderfull,
and wrothy great admiration. Wherin
it is playnely to be ſeene, that in the
laudable godly and right canons of the

ſixte ſynode, that worſhipful picture is
allowed in which the lambe ſhewed by
demonſtration, with the finger of the
precurſor, is liuelie expreſſed which beinge
receued of vs, as a figure of grace
doth repreſent vnto vs the true lambe
by the lawe, that is to wete, Chriſt him
ſelfe. Therfore we receauyng the olde
fygures, ſygnes, and ſhadowes, as tokens
of the truthe, and markes geuen
to the churche, dooe acknowledge the
grace and truth, as they that thynke it
to be the fulnes of the law. To the end
therfore, that that image may in liuely
coloures he expreſſed to all mens eyes,
whiche repreſenteth in manhoode the
lambe that taketh away the ſynnes of
the worlde, that is to ſay our God, we
thynke good, that from henſefoorth inſtede
of the olde lambe, there be a newe
erected, in the churches of God, to the
intent that we maye conſyder, the rayſynge
vp of the baſenes of gods word,
and he put in mynde of that common
welthe, wherein he lyued in the fleſſhe,
and alſo be led as it were by the hande,
to the contemplation of his Paſſion,
and moſte wholſome deathe, by whiche

the freedome of the worlde was
purchaſed. That therfore this cannon
was alowed of Pope Adrian, and that
it is the .lxxiii. of the ſynode, now mencioned,
the autenticall bookes do teſtifie.
But no man can ſufficiently meruayle
at the vnſtedfaſtneſſe and lyghtneſſe
of the Popes adherentes, not only
for that they nowe hate and deteſte
the holye generall counſelles, whyche
ſommetyme they allowed, but alſo
that the Popes theym ſelues are at
varyaunce one with an other.The Popes ar togither by the eares. For as
wee reade euen nowe Pope Adrian
meruaylouſely commendethe theſe decrees,
but Innocentius or ſome other
reiecteth theym. If any manne wyll
affirme, that the Pope is not ſubiecte
to the lawes and rules of the Fathers,
he trewelye in no wyſe is to bee ſuffered.
For that were moſte vnwoorthy,
that the Pope ſhoulde not eſteeme the
Fathers, by whome he hathe obteyned
that dygnytie of prehemynence,
whereof we ſpake beefore.
            Moreouer, yf the Pope contempne
decrees, he deſpiſeth his owne authoritie:
for he hymſelfe hathe made many,

and ſo by the teſtimonye of Paule, he
maketh hymſelfe an offender. But we
haue ſhewed and declared, that he is
bounde to gyue accompte bothe of his
doctrine, and alſo of his other gouernance
and regiment eccleſiaſticall: ſo
that he is of neceſſitie ſubiecte to the
conſtitutions of the fathers and counſels.
Certainly it were not right, that
any man ſhuld reuerence the Pope as
a Father,The Pope is not to be eſtemed. ſeyng that he hymſelfe regardeth
nought ſo many holy Fathers.
            Nowe the Popes adherentes ſaye,
that he is not byſhop of any one place,
but that he is ſymply a Byſhop, that is
to ſay, Byſhop of all the world. Wherin
truely they ſpeake againſt the truth.
For fyrſt we haue proued already, that
he is of one degree with other biſhops,
and as a man woulde ſay in one order
with theym. Beſyde that, the ſynodes
when by occaſion they make mention
of hym, as it oftetymes happeneth, alwaies
they call hym Byſhop of Rome.
So that yf he be byſhop of Rome, he is
out of doubt a biſhop of ſome determinate
place,The Pope byſhop of no place. onleſſe perhappes any man
deny Rome to be a certayne place: but

per aduenture ſome man wyll ſay, that
the Pope, when he writeth to other, termeth
not hymſelfe byſſhop of Rome:
but ſymply a byſhop, wherby he declareth
hym ſelfe to bee byſhop of no one
certayne place, but of all the worlde.
To whom we may anſwer, that he attempteth
to proue matters of moſt importaunce
with ouer lyght (I wyll not
ſay triflyng) reaſons. Whiche kynde
of profe, yf we would vſe, we myghte
more eaſily ouerthrowe the Popes dignitie,
then they eſtablyſhe the ſame.
            For where as he nameth hymſelfe by
the vſed name of the common dignitie,The Pope ouercome vvith his owne reaſons.
a byſhop, and not Pope, neyther chiefe
of all prieſtes (with the whiche and other
lyke titles his adherentes flatter
hym) it is a taken that the Pope hymſelfe
acknowledgeth his owne eſtate,
and teſtifieth the ſame foorthewith by
his title. But neyther we mynde to
ſtriue with ſuche ſtronge reaſons in ſo
weighty a matter, agaynſt the Pope,
neither he in vſyng theſe argumentes,
doth any more preuayl,The Pope attempteth to make a rope of ſād then if he ſhuld
attempt to wrethe a rope of ſande. For
if there wer ſo great force in this kynd

of reaſonyng, then Cyrillus alſo ſhuld
haue ſuch highnes in honor, yt he ſhuld
be byſhop of all the worlde, yea that ſo
much the ſooner then the Pope, in that
he is ofttēimes not of himſelf only, but
of other called a byſhop, without mention
of any place. For we reade, Theodoſius
the moſte glorious conqueror,
and always moſte valyant, greteth the
byſhop Cirillus, without any mention
of the place, wherof he was byſſhop.
            But what ſhall we ſay of thoſe whiche
leaue out the title of a Byſhop, and vſe
onely their owne proper names? Shall
we ſaye that they are no byſhoppes, or
that they haue a greatter dignitie then
an vniuerſall byſhoprike? for as muche
as the Pope of Rome wyll be an vniuerſall
byſhop, bycauſe the place is not
named whereof he is biſhoppe. There
may many ſuche inſcriptions and ſubſcriptions
be broughte out of bokes of
authoritie, wherin the name of the biſhop
is plainly omitted.
            Furthermore our aduerſaries affirm
that ye name of apoſtolike agreeth only
to the Pope, whiche ſurely is very vntru.
For it is cōmon to other with him

as it appeareth by the .xi. ſeſſion of the
vi. ſynode, where we rede in this wiſe:
            Conſtantine the moſte holy archdeacon,
of this holye catholike and apoſtolike
churche: and again, in the ſubſcriptions
of the ſame ſynode, we rede, Peter
an elder, and one that ſupplieth the
rome of the apoſtolike ſea Alexandria,
I George the leaſt of the elders, & one
that occupieth the place of Theodorus
Theophilactus, an elder and vicegerēt
to the apoſtolike throne of the holy ſea,
and citie of our god, Hieruſalem, haue
ſubſcribed. And again, loke in the firſt
ſeſſion of the .vij. ſynode, which beginneth
in this maner. In the name of the
lord Ieſus Chriſt our tru god. &c. wherafter the reherſall of them, that wer ſēt
frone Rome, foloweth mention of the
byſhop of Conſtantinople, in this ſort.
            Iohn and Thomas the mooſte holye
elders. Monkes by profeſſion, and ſuppliynge
the place of the apoſtlike ſeas
of the eaſte. This ſhall ye fynde in the
beginnyng of euery acte in the .vii. ſynode.
Alſo in the ſubſcriptions ye ſhall
reade: I Iohn by the grace of God an
Elder, and aſſiſtant to the Patriarke,

ſubſtitute of the .iii. apoſtolike ſeas,
Alexandria, Antioche, and Hieruſalem
folowyng the doctrine of the fathers,
and tradition of the churche, geuynge
finall ſentence haue ſubſcribed. Alſo I
Thomas by the grace of God an elder
and primate of the habitation of the
holy father Arſenius, whiche is in Egypt
beyonde Babylon, ſubſtitute to
the .iii. apoſtolike thrones, Alexandria,
Antioche, and Hieruſalem, folowyng
the doctrine of the fathers, and tradition
of the churche, geuyng finall ſentence
haue ſubſcribed. The lyke ſhall
ye fynde in all their ſubſcriptions.
            Here ye maye playnely ſee,The ſea of Rome only is not called apoſtolique. that not
onely the ſea of Rome, but alſo the ſeas
of other churches ar called apoſtolike.
Wherfore if we weigh the matter according
to reaſon, either we ſhal equally
eſteeme all thoſe ſeas and churches,
whyche as we haue declared, are called
Apoſtolike, orels we ſhal not make
ſo muche of Rome, for this title, ſeyng
that it is not onelye propre vnto that
churche But what ſhal we ſay to that,
where Chryſoſtome writynge to one,
affirmeth that al the prieſts of the new

teſtament ſyt in Chriſtes chayre lyke
as they of the olde teſtament ſat in the
chaire of Moyſes: yea he ſayeth, that
they haue a greater dignitie then thangels
and archangels, ſo that there can
be no excellency, in that he boaſteth the
ſea Apoſtolike, ſeyng that all byſhops
ſytte in the chayre of Chriſte, and haue
a more ample dignitie, then thangels
themſelues.
            Agayne the Popes ſecte holde, that
it perteyneth by ryght to the Pope only,
to call togyther generall councels,
wherin they ſtriue agaynſt a manyfeſt
truthe. It is a wonder to ſee, that the
Pope is not aſhamed to aduance hym
ſelfe, and to lyfte vp his combe in the
churche, for a matter wherof Kynges
myght boaſt them ſelues. I ſpeake not
this, as thoughe I eſteemed not the excellency
of Kynges. For vnto them we
owe bothe honour and obedience. But
bycauſe the eccleſiaſticall dignitie, ſettyng
at naughte all earthly glorye and
rycheſſe, ſhoulde deſyre and ſeeke for a
heauenly preeminence and renoume.
            Therefore I wylle proue, that this
right pertayneth rather to kyngs, then

to biſhops. For ſo hath the Actes of the
fyrſt holy counſell of Nice. To the holy
and greate churche by the grace of
god of Alexandria, and to the learned
brethern whiche are in Egypt, Lybia,
and the fiue cities, the byſhops aſſembled,
and holdyng a great and holy ſynode
at Nice, ſendeth gretyng. For as
much as vnto vs that are gathered togyther
oute of dyuers cities and prouinces
by the grace of God, & our moſt
godly prince Conſtantine. &c. Alſo in
the third or Epheſine councel we rede,
To the moſte holy emperours and beloued
of god, Theodoſius and Valentinian
moſt mighty and victorius conquerours,
the holy Synod by the grace
of god and the authoritie aſſembled, in
the citie Epheſus. Alſo in the ende of
the counſel of Calcedonia, ye ſhal fynd
in the inſcription of the holy Synode.
The holy great and vniuerſal Synode
aſſembled, by the grace of God and the
decree of our moſte holy emperours at
Calcedonia in Bythinia to the moſte
holy and bleſſed archbyſſhop of Rome
Leo. That therfore it appertayneth to
the dignitie of chriſten kynges to calle

generall councelles it may ſufficiently
appere, by the places nowe alledged.
But lette vs brynge foorthe that alſo,
where byſhop Leo wrytyng to the emperour
Theodoſius, humbly deſyreth
as a great benefyte, that he wolde prouyde
a prouinciall Synode, to bee gathered
in Italy. Which truely he wold
not haue craued with ſuche humilitie,
if he had thought before that it was his
owne right. The wordes of his epiſtle
are theſe: All our churches and all our
prieſtes, moſte humbly with teares beſeeche
your clemency, that accordyng
to byſhop Flauians booke, ye voucheſafe
to commande a prouinciall councel
to be aſſembled in Italy. If it moue
any man that Peter ended his lyfe at
Rome, he ought muche more to be moued
with that the Sonne of God ſuffered
at Ieruſalem his paſſion, moſt holſom
to mankynde. But peraduenture
ſomme manne wyll ſaye, that the Fathers
dydde attribute muche vnto the
Churche of Rome,VVhy the fathers did attribute ſo much to the ſea of Rome. I aunſwere they
dydde it not becauſe they thought, that
God gaue any greate prerogatiue to
that ſea: but partelye for the deſyre of

good order (the ſtrengthe and profyte
wherof is great. For by order thynges
bothe in heauen and earthe are preſerued
and maynteyned) and partely as
deſyrous to obſerue goddes commandementes,
preuent one an other in geuing
honor. &c. orels bicauſe they endeuored
to imitate thexample of humilitie,
profeſſed by Chriſt, to his diſciples
in waſhing their fete, and ſuch lyke no
table counſels and holſome examples
lefte vnto vs. S Paule writinge to the
Corinthians, calleth him ſelfe their ſeruaunte
for Chriſtes ſake, yea the Pope
in the beginninge of all his letters, calleth
him ſelfe a ſeruaunt of ſeruauntes.
What meruayle is it thenne, yf the fathers
ſome what debaſed themſelues afore
hym, and graunt hym as we haue
declared, the chiefe degree in honour.
            Laſt of all, our aduerſaries ſay, that
no decree may be made in the Church,
without the Popes conſente, whyche
in dede they may very well lay againſt
vs, but we ſhall repaye oure aduerſaries
with the ſame meaſure. For neyther
the Pope, yf wee beleeue the canons
of the apoſtles, maye conſtitute

any thyng in the Churche, without the
aduiſe of other. For ſo ſayth the .xxxiii.
Canon of the Apoſtles. The byſſhops
of euerye nation muſte knowe who is
chiefe amonge them, and count hym in
manner as theyr heade, neyther maye
they doo any newe thynge without his
conſente, lette euery man handell ſuche
matters by hym ſelfe, as appertayn and
belonge to his Dioceſſe, and the places
vndernethe hym: neyther may he that
is chiefe amonge theim doo any thynge
without the conſent of the reſte. For ſo
ſhall concorde be mayntayned, and god
ſhall be glorified through our Lorde in
the holy ghoſte. If our aduerſaries ſay,
that the Canons of the Apoſtles ar not
theyrs, neither of authoritie ſufficiente,
but Apocriphe: we may lay vnto them
agayne the authoritie of the fathers in
the firſte, thirde, fourthe, ſixthe and ſeuenth
ſynode, whiche defend the authoritie
of the Apoſtles cannons. For the
fyrſte Synode in the fyfth cannon therof,
maketh mention of two of the apoſtles
cannons, the .xii. and the .xxxii.
            Alſo the ſame Synode, in the .xv. canon,
ſpeaketh of the .xv. canon of the apoſtles.

The thirde Synode or Epheſine
councell, writyng to Theodoſius
maketh mencion of the .lxxiii. canon of
the apoſtles, wherwith the ſayd ſynode
was armed agynſte Neſtorius, and
condempned hym, lyke as the fowerth
ſynode with the ſame condemned Dioſcorus.
Moreouer the ſame fourthe
ſynode, in the .v. canon thereof, wryteth
in this wyſe worde for woorde, of
the .xii. xiij .xiiij. and .xv. Canon of the
Apoſtles. As for ſuche byſſhoppes as
wander from one citie to an other, and
often chaunge theyr myniſtery, it ſeemeth
good to this Synode, that they
ſhall be in daunger and punyſſhed, by
the Canons of the Apoſtles. Furthermore
the Decrees of the ſyxte Synode
doo ſhewe the full number of the apoſtles
canons. For ſo hathe the ſeconde
Decree of the ſayde Synode. It ſeemeth
to this holy Synode, that it were
moſt expedient, that the .lxxxv. canons
in the Apoſtles name receaued and allowed
by the holye Fathers, and delyuered
to vs by tradition, ſhoulde alſo
from hencefoorthe remayne fyrme

and ſtedfaſte, that they maye be wholſome
medicines for the ſowle, and remedyes
for dyuers dyſeaſes in the
Churche. The ſeuenthe Synode in
the fyrſte Cannon thereof, reherſynge
the lawes of the Churche, beefore all
other mencioneth the Cannons made
by the Apoſtles, adioynynge oute of
Moiſes,Deut 
                     •
                  4. That nothyng ought to be added
to theym, or taken from theym.
            Shall we therefore condemne as fayned
and vnprofytable thoſe Cannons
that are ſo muche commended and approued
of ſo many holye fathers? No
trewely. But lefte this bee the ſumme
and chiefe of all our talke and diſputation,
that ſo longe as the Pope doth
keepe the coneuniente order in tymes
paſte ordeyned, ſo longe as he holdeth
and maynteyneth the veritie celeſtiall,
and ſo longe as he cleaueth and
ſtycketh faſte to Chriſte,He ſtycketh faſt againſt him the hygh and
trewe Lorde and head of the churche,
I gladly permytte hym to be heade of
the Churche, and chiefe prieſt and ſucceſſoure
to Peter, or yf he lyſte, to all
the Apoſtles, all menne to obeye hym,

and nothynge touchynge his honour to
be diminiſhed. But yf he be fallen from
the truthe, and wyll not retourne vnto
it agayne,
                  
                     •
                  he pope a 
                     ••
                  probate 
                     •••
                  ſon. he oughte but to bee reputed
as a perſonne condempned and reprobate.
            Theſe thynges haue I ſpoken accordynge
to my abilitie of the Popes primacye,
as that whyche I iudge to bee
manyfeſte and trewe. If they be otherwyſe,
I deſyre to be better enfourmed.
For I alſo praye and ſyng vnto the
Lorde,
                  
                     •
                  ſal. 119. that oute of the Pſalme:
Take not from my mouthe
the worde of Truthe.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by
Henry Sutton for Rafe
Newbery. Authoriſed
accordyng to the Quenes
maieſties
Iniūctions.
            In the yere of our Lorde a thouſande
fyue hundred & ſixty.
The .xvi. daye of
Marche.
            And are to be ſolde at his ſhop
in Fleteſtrete, a lyttle
aboue the Cundite.
         
      
   