
      
         
            
            
               
 
               ❧
               A PROGNOSTICATION OF RIGHT GOOD effect, fructfully augmented, contayninge playne, briefe, pleasant, chosen rules, to iudge the wether for euer, by the Sunne, Moone, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbowe, Thunder, Cloudes, with other Extraordinarie tokens, not omitting the Aspectes of Planetes, with a brefe Iudgemente for euer, of Plentie, Lacke, Sickenes, Death, Warres &c. Openinge also many naturall causes, woorthy to be knowē. To these and others, now at the last are adioyned, diuers generall pleasaunte Tables: for euer manyfolde wayes profitable, to al maner men of vnderstanding: therfore agayne publisshed by Leonard Dygges Gentylman, in the yeare of oure Lorde. 1555.
            
               ❧ (*) ❧
            
            
               ❧ Imprynted at London, within the blacke Fryars, by Thomas Gemini. 1555.
         
         
            
            
            THE CONTENTES.
            
               FIrste ye haue many pleasant chosen rules for euer, to iudge alteratiō of wether, by the Sunne, Moone, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbow, Thunder, Cloudes, with many tokens extraordinarie: not omittinge the Cōiunctions, Quadratures, and Oppositiōs of Planetes, among them selfes, and with the Moone also: and their conbustion, in the .12. signes celestiall.
               2 Then ensue naturall causes of suche alteration, accordinge to Aristotele: fyrst of the Raynbowe, then of Rayne, Dewe, Snowe, Hayle, VVinde, Earthquakes, Thunders, and Lightninges.
               
               3 The causes and operations of Cometes, Flames, and other horrible fyrye sightes, apperinge in the ayre.
               4 The naturall causes, and significatiōs of Eclipses, both of Sunne and Moone, with the trew proportion of all the Planetes, and fixed Sterres, vnto the earth.
               5 Causes naturall of many Sunnes and Moones, appearinge at one tyme on the earthe.
               6 Then ensue the Aspectes of the Moone, and her signification, in the 12. celestiall signes, conducing to all maner affayres.
               7 A table, declaring what signe the Moone is in, for euer: conteyninge the aptest tyme to let bloud, to take purgatiōs, and to bathe.
               8 How to know at all tymes, what the Moone differeth frō the Sunne: I meane what signes and degrees of the Zodiac ar betwene them.
               9 Ye haue a cōducible note of all the euel daies in euery moneth: with other necessaries: for letting bloudde also, with the dominiō of the Moone in mans bodye: for pourging, and bathing, more largely then by the Table tofore sayde.
               10 Of inundations or fluddes, with the metest tyme of Timbre falling, Sowing, Planting, Grafting, Hearclipping, Shauing, and Geidlng.
               
               
               11 For farther knowlege in thynges folowyng the Sondaies letter and Leap year, is brefly declared by a Table, at no time to be altered.
               12 A table, as generall for the Prime and Epact.
               
               13 A table to finde the moueable feastes for euer.
               14 Then is opened plainly the age of the Moone at all tymes, the full, and quarter, for euer.
               15 A table shewing cōtinually the true tyme of ebbing and flowinge, in moste coastes of Englande.
               16 Here is also declared for euer, how lōg tyme the Moone shy neth, when she riseth and setteth, with her continuāce on the Horizon, or earth.
               17 A Table for the breake of the day, and twilight, and for thys country the trew houre and very mynute of the Sunne risinge, and goynge doune, with the iuste quantitie or lengthe of euery daye in the yeare, and the length of the night also.
               18 The houre of the nyght is knowen by the Moone, and that dyuersly.
               19 The houre of the daye doeth playnly appeare by right shadow: that is, by any thing directly standing vp, and also by shadow Geometrical, whiche is squyre shadow.
               20 The exact houre of the nighte is pleasauntly searched by Sterres and Tables calculated, with an instrument appoynted for that practise. This instrument is a perfect Dial for the day, of al other the grounde, whose makinge, reringe, placinge, and vse is playnlye opened.
               21 Before the peculiar Kalendar, ye haue a brefe Kalēdar general, contayning thinges comonly desired.
            
            Here endeth the contentes.
         
         
            
            To the right honorable, Sir Edward Fines, of the noble order of the Garter Knight, Lord Clinton and Saye, &c. Leonard Digges wissheth continuance of health, and daily encreace of honor. (,:,)
            SIthe my late trobles (right honorable, and singular good lord) my dutye hath made me careful to procure, that some frute of my studies might declare me thankefully mynded, towarde youre lordshippe, emōge other honorable, to whome I owe my self, with all my endeuore, and fruytes of studye. For the performance wherof, not onely your lordshippes late talke of a Prognostication, semed to make that argument fittest: but also the manifest imperfectiōs, and manifold errors yearly cō
               mitted, did craue the ayde of some that were both willinge, and able to performe the truth in lyke maters. I thought it therfore worthy the labor, truly and brefely to collect many thinges, bothe necessarie, and pleasant, as well for Nobilitie as others: and to adioyne them to my general Prognostication, imprinted the yeare 1553. augmentinge diuerse wayes the same: and more orderly placing such as were before set forth. Your honor shal here receaue, in this litle boke, by infallible rules taught for euer, a truthe of all such thynges as heretofore haue ben put forth of other for one yeares profit onely, compelled thereby of necessitie to make a yearly renewinge of them: wherupon errors many encreased. You shal haue diuerse other conclusions generall, of none before attempted. These (right honorable lord) according vnto my dutie, I do present, and besech you in good worth to receaue: and haue willed them to passe vnder protection of your Lordshippes name: that yf to any, any commoditie ensue thereby, suche as receaue it, may haue cause to further me, in yeldinge thankes to youre honor.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            TO auoyde (Gentle reader) the yearly care, trauailes, and peines of other, with the confusions, repugnāces, and manifold errors, partly by negligence, & ofte through ignorāce, cōmitted: I haue agayn breefly set forth a Prognostication general, for euer to take effect: adioining thereto diuers profitable collectiōs, & many pleasāt cōclusiōs, easy of all willing ingenious to be perceyued Here note (Reder) wher as the eleuate Pole, & Meridian should be considered: in this work it is performed for London: bycause I wiss he this Meridian, Situation, or Clime the exact truthe of thinges. If any yearly practises in lyke maters, agree not with my calculatiōs: be assured, they are false, or at the least for other Eleuatiōs, or Meridians supputated, and therefor litle seruing thy purpose. And that the late rude inuētiōs, and grosse deuises of some (this yeare, and two yeares past, published) might be of them perceued, then filed, and so serue to some profit: I haue purposed euen now to put forth a boke named Panauges, well seruing their turne, and so generally and most exactly all Europe, pleasant, profitable to the learned, and no small delight to all maner mē. An other boke is also redy to come to thy handes, titled Tectonicon, a treasure vnto the Masons, Carpenters, and Landmeaters: correcting their olde errors, wrōgfully rekened of them as infallible groundes: teaching faythfully, sufficiently, and very brefely, the true mēsuration of all maner land, tymbre, stone, bourde, glasse, &c: and at the ende cōteining an Instrumēt Geometrical, appointed to their vse-Take in good worth these labors (Louing reader) and loke shortly for the pleasant frutes Mathematical, euē such as haue ben promysed by my frendes, and partly by me. Neither shall my desire to profit here stay: but entendeth farther to procede, yf these seme accepted As the good wil of Printers not had, hath kept the foresayd from you: so I trust the willing minde and excellēcie of Thomas Gemini, shal bring them shortly vnto you. Certes my hope is, while life remaineth, not to be vnfruteful to this commune wealth, with study, and practise.
         
         
            
            Agaynst the reprouers of Astronomie, and sciences Mathematicall.
            I Am diuersly occasioned, louyng Reader, somwhat to wryte in the commendatiō of the Mathematicals, whiche neded not: but onely to open the folish rasshenes, and rasshe foolishenes of suche, which of late haue in writing dispraised these goodly artes. It is an olde sayd sawe, and trew: Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantē. But to auoyde tediousnes, and chiefly for the more satisfieng, Vituperant, qui simpliciter eas ignorant. I refer all of that sort, which haue tasted any lerning (the rest not regarded) to the first part of famous Guido Bonatus, de vtilitate Astronomiae in communi: where he writeth contra illos, qui dicunt quod Scientia stellarum non potest sciri ab aliquo: contra illos, qui dixerunt quod scientia stellarum non est vtilis, sed potius damnosa &c. contra illos, qui contradicunt iudiciis Astronomiae, & qui reprehendunt eam, nescientes dignitatem eius, eo quod nō est lucratiua. Also for breuitie, I appoint all nyce diuines, or (as Melancthō
                termeth them) Epicurei Theologi, to his hye cōmendatiōs touching Astronomie, vttered in hys epistles to Simō Grineus, to Schonerus, and at the peroration of Cardanus fyue bokes, where he sheweth how far wyde they alledge the scriptures agaynste the Astronomer, whiche make wholy with the Astronomer. Melancthon wryteth and affyrmeth, Arrogantiam esse cum summa stultitia coniunctam, venari choragium aliquod gloriae, ex insectatione artium, quae sunt graui autoritate doctorum &c. prudētium receptae. He calleth it manifestum insaniae genus, declaring quod magis opus habēt Medicis, quā Geometris, aduising the lerned not to geue eare vnto their folye. Sinamus (ait) vna cū Epicuro ineptire. Which counsell lo, I folowe. Now therfor, ye enemies of all good doctrine, either geue an ouerthrowe, and that with your penne, or let famous Guido, or learned Melancthon satisfie. Yf neither: certes I will shortly (God sparyng lyfe) take some payne in publisshyng the wonderfull vnknowen pleasant profites of these dispraysed hyghe knowleges, and by that meanes to enforce silence. Now in few, for thy encouragement in these, thus I saye and trewly, the ingenious learned, and well experienced circūspect student mathematical receyueth dayly in hys witty practises, more pleasant ioye of mynde, then all thy gooddes (how rych so euer thou be) canne at any tyme purchase. Id tantum quod pulchrum est, quod purum est quod

diuinum est, nihil mortale sapiens dulci ardore amplectitur. Vt 
                     •
                  ulta paucis (crede mihi) extingui dulce erit Mathematicarum artium labore. Nowe to ende, that learned Guido, that excellent Guido Bonatus, sheweth what Astrologi or Astronomie is, and ought not sayeth he, by anye meane to be reprehended, in that the most wisest, yea, the holye fathers haue practised that sciēce. He proueth it one of the chief sciences Mathematical, by the autoritie of the best learned, and by Aristotele in hys Posteriorum. Howe commeth it to passe louinge Reader, seynge it is a noble science, et scientia est notitia vera conclusionum, quibus propter demonstrationem firmiter assentimur, that it is counted vayne, and of so smal strengthe. The secret truthes and most pleasant profites therein not desired, yea, vtterly despised, and of some busy byghtinge bodyes reiected as very lyes. Let no man doubt ignorancie, the grete enemie of all pure learning Stulti negligunt et cont
                     •
                  nunt: Q ui contradicit, ambitiosus est, Q ui ma ledicit, fa
                     〈…〉
                   us. hath wrought this. Nam incertam vocat hanc artem vulgus, propter errores nou arti, sed bominum indoctiss
                     ••
                  orum inscitie, et temeri
                     •
                   tati 
                     〈◊〉
                  putandos, qui citra delectum omnia effutiunt. Thus I leaue indigestly farther to trouble: fauour me as I tender the furtheraunce of good learninges, profitable to a common wealth. Fare moste hartely wel, vnfayned good Christian Reader.
         
      
      
         
            
             
               ❧HOVVE TO IVDGE VVEATHER by the Sunne rysing, or goyng downe.
            
               THe Sunne in the Horizon, or rysynge, cleare and De obseruandis 
                     ••
                  eteoris. bright, sheweth a pleasant day: but thinlie ouercast wyth a cloude, betokeneth foule weather. Also at the goyng doune, the body diuerse colored or redde, ād aboute dispersed wyth lyke clou des, the beames redde, and of lengthe, ꝓnounce greate wyndes the nexte day frō that part. Blaknes in the Sunne or Moone betokeneth water: redde, signifieth winde. The element redde in the euenyng, the next daye fayr: but in the mornyng redde, wynde and rayne. Also the Sunne beames spottid, grene, pale, or blacke, gathered to a cloude, signifie 
                  ••
               yne. Further the Sunne at the setting playnlye seene without anye cloude, decla reth a fayre night to ensue. Here note, Ptolome willeth vs diligentlye to obserue the circle, or circles about the Sunne. Yf it be clea
                  〈◊〉
                and the circle of no continuance, beholde fayre weather: yf manye of them, wynde. Wyndes more vehemente are signified, if that the circles be some what redde, here and there broken: but these ob scured, thycke, and blacke, looke for colde, wind, and snowe. What Note. is spoken of the Sunne, touching the circles, the same is meant of the Moone. Note here that greater wyndes chaunce in the daye, than in the nyght.
            
               How weather is declared by the colour of the Moone: and by the nature of the signe wherin she is.
               IF the Moone in the third of her chaūge, yea thre dayes before the full, or in the myddes of the quarter, be founde of pure lyght: no thyng cōpasyng her, the ende direct vp, she ꝓmi
                     •
                  ith fayr weather, but bent to red colour, prouoketh wynde. The Moone pale, or some Luna rube
                        ••
                      ventat, pallor pluit, Alba s
                        ••
                      renat. what inclined to blacke, obscure or thick, threatnith rayne. Also by the nature of the signe, wether may be iudged, thus, according to Staeflerinus, Monte regius, Leupoldus, ād famous Guido Bonatus, with others well trauayled in the mutacions of ayer. Consider the

nature of the signe where the Moone is, at the chaunge, quarter, and full. If she be in hote & drye lignes, as Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, in winter ♈ ♌ ♐ hote, ♉ ♍ ♑ earthy. □ ♎ ♒ wyndy. ♋ ♏ ♓▪ watry. a good token of fayr weather: in somer, a great signification of immoderate heat: if in erthy, colde and drye signes, as Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus, in wynter iudge colde, frost, and snow to ensue: but in somer temperate weather. In aery and wyndy
                     •
                   signes, as Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, muche wynd. If in watrye colde and moyst lignes, as Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces, in winter wett weather: in somer a pleasant temperature.
               Also, the Sunne in Aquarie: the Moone, at the chaunge there, or in Sagittarie, or at the full in Leone: betokeneth rayne. The Sunne, in Pisces, or in Aries: the Moone, in Virgo, Libra, or Sagittarie: signifieth rayne, especially in watry dwellinges. The Moone in Aquari, or Pisces, looke for chaunge of weather: thē chiefly she troubleth the ayer. The Moon: also at the chaunge, or rather at the full, in Aries, Libra, Scorpius, or Pisces, tempestuous weather folowith. The Sunne in Aquari, in Aries, Libra, or Scorpio, but chiefly in Leone: the Moone, then at the full, and that after raine or missinges: looke for lightnyng, thundryng. &c. Also the Sunne, or Moone foūde in Pisces, without all helpe of Mars, it betokeneth aboundance of rayne, lightning, thunder. &c. To cōclude the Moone, in Cancer, Leo, Capricornus, or Aquarius, ayded with any aspect, but chiefly with the opposition or quadrate of Venus, rayne folowyth.
            
            
               The iudgement of weather by sterres.
               BEholde the sterres whose magnitude you knowe best. If they appeare of muche light, in bignes great, more blasing thē they Cum maior
                        •
                      apparent, tum enim Humore medius crassescit 
                        •
                     er. are comonly, it be tokeneth great wynde or moysture in that part where they shewe: in wynter, colde and frost. When sterres seme to runne in the elemēt, it shewyth wynde. Affirme also alteration of weather if they be few in nūbre, cloudie, and of litel light. Further when dimme sterres appeare wyth long firie tayles, iudge wyndes, and great drougthe: the moe in nūbre, the greater effect. When sterres in the nyght (as it is sayd) shote, or seme to fall, it arguith wynde in that part: If in diuers places, inordinate wyndes: yf in all places, then pronounce Wyndes, Thunder, Lightnynges, yea weather most tempestuous.
            
            
               
               The signification of Cometes
               Cometes signifie corruptiō of the ayre. They arsignes of earthquakes, De comctar
                        ••
                      prodigiis, lege Cardanil. lib. 4. fol. 83. of warres, chaunging of kyngdomes, great derth of corne, yea a comon death of man, and beast.
            
            
               How by the cloudes change of weather is perceaued.
               IF thyck clowdes resemblyng flockes, or rather great heapes of woll, be gatherid in many places, they shewe rayne. Also whē grosse, thicke, darke clowdes, ryght ouer the northe part, or somwhat declining to the west, ar close with the earth, immediatly folowyth rayne. If they appeare lyke hylles, somedeale from the earth, a good token of weather ouerpassed. Blacke clowdes, signifie rayne: white clowdes apperyng in wynter, at the Horizon, two or thre dayes together, prognosticate colde, and snowe.
            
            
               Of the raynebowe and his effect, touchyng alteration of ayer..
               IF in the mornyng the raynebow appere, it signifieth moysture, onlesse great drouthe of ayer woorke the contrarie. If in the Arcus niss sole aduerso non fiunt. Non apparet nisi cum Vap
                        •
                      res rarifica
                        •
                     
                     tur, vel inspis santur. euening it shewe it self, fayr weather ensueth: so that aboundaunt moyste ayer take not awaye the effect. Or thus.
               The rayne bowe appering, if it be fayr, it betokeneth fowle weather: if fowle, loke for fair weather. The grener, the moare raine: redder, wynde.
            
            
               Of Thundres: what they signifie.
               THundres in the morning signifie wynd: about Noone, rayn: Signum futurorum bellorum. in the euenyng great tempest. Sōme wryte (theyr grounde I see not) that Sonnedayes thundre shold brynge the deathe of learned men, Iudges, and others: Mundayes thundre, the deathe of women: Tuesdayes thundre, plentie of grayne: Wednesdayes thundre, the deathe of harlottes, and other blodshede: Thursdayes thūdre, plentie of shepe, & c
                     •
                  rne: Frydayes thundre the slaughter

of a great man, and other horrible murders. Saterdayes thundre a generall pestilent plage, and great deathe.
            
            
               How weather is knowne after the chaunge of euery Moone, by the prime dayes.
               SVnday prime, drie weather. Mondaye prime moyst weather. Tuesday prime, colde and wyndie. Wedensday prime, wōder full. Thursday prime fayer and cleare. Fryday prime, myxte weather. Saterday prime, moyst weather.
            
            
               Now ensuyth extraordinarie tokens for the knowledge of weather.
               SOme haue obserued euil weather to folow, whā watry fowles Co
                        〈◊〉
                     ne tokens of weather, me
                        •
                     e for all maner wyttes. leaue the sea, desiring lande: the foules of the lande flyeng hyghe: the cryeng of fowles about waters, makyng a great noyse wyth ther wynges: Also the sees swellyng wyth vncustomed waues: If bestes eate gredyly: if they lycke ther hooues: if they sodaynly moue here and there, makyng a noyse, brethyng vp to the ayer with open nostrels: rayne folowyth. Also the busy heuing of moules, the appering or cōming owte of woormes: hennes resorting to the ꝑche or rest couered wyth dust, declare rayne. The ample woorkyng of the spinnar in the ayer: the ant busied wyth her egges: the bees in fayr weather not far wādring: the cōtinual prating of the crowe, chiefly twise or thrise quicke calling, shewe tempest. Whan the crowe or rauen gapith agaynst the sonne, in somer, heate foloweth. If they busy thēselues in proyning or wasshing, ād that in wynter, looke for rayne. The vncustomed noyse of pultrie, the noyse of swyne, of pecokes, declare the same. The swalowe flyēg and beating the water: the chirpinge of the sparowe in the morning, signifie rayne. Rayne sodaynly dryed vp: woody coueringes strayter then of custome: bells hearde further then comonli: the wallowynge of dogges: the alteration of the cock crowing: all declare rayny weather. I leaue these, wāting the good grounde of the rest. If the lernid be desirefull of the too forsayd, let them reade graue Virgil primo Georgicorum At Bor. &c.
               Ther be a multitude of other not extraordinarie but of the best

knowen causes: many for breuitie here omitted: the moare part not mencioned, because they passe the capacitie of the comon sort, vpon all the whiche the Astronomer dothe well and lernydly conclude. I doubte not ther be also some time vnknowen maters, mitigatinge the aforesayde, or prouokyng tempestes vnloked for, whiche neather experience, ne learning hath stablisshed. How vnkynd (these considered) yea how far from woorthy thankes giuing are they, which in general heddily do blame, checkyng bitterly the Astrologer, with these iudiciarie maters, (the least part emong a nūbre of his most certayn doynges) whan thinges fortune contrarie to expectation? Vnderstande gentle reader: the cō sent of a multitude famously learnid is theyr buclar, euen in these maters iudiciari: who haue wayed a long time prudently, the great strengthe, the vehement force, and maruaylous natures, of all erratical and coelestial cōstellatiōs, with theyr Angles, Radiations, Aspectes, Affections, Stationes, Progressions, Defections, Dispositions, Applications, Preuentions, Ref
                        •
                     enations, Contrarieties, Abscisions, Coniunctions, Quadratures, and Oppositions. &c. Therefore extreme foly, yea mere madnes dothe he vtter, which imbraydeth or bacbiteth these knowleges, not remembring the great, and manifolde benefites, hadd through them, and that wyth most certentie in all other doynges.
               What Meteoroscoper, yea who lernyd in maters astronomical, notith not the great effectes at the rising of the ster called the Canis minoris 
                        •
                     fficatia. 
                  Litell dogge? Trewlie the consent of the best learnid do agree of his force: yea Plinie, in his historie of nature affirmeth the sees thē most fierce, wynes to flowe in cellars, standing waters to moue, Orionis, Ar▪ cturi, Coronae, caprae, succula rum effectus. ♄. ☌. □ & ☍ cum ☉ aut ☽. ♃. ☌. □ & ☍. cum ☿ cum ☉ 
                        •
                      Aut ☌ ♂ cum ♀ vel ☍ ♃ cum ♂. dogges inclined to madnes then most wood. Farther these cōstellations, Orion, Arcturus, Corona, rising prouoke tempestuous weather: the Kydd and Goate, wyndes. Hyades or Succulae rayne. What Meteorologer consentith not to the great alteration and mutation of ayer at the coniunction, opposition, or quadrate aspect of Saturne, wyth eyther two lightes? Who is ignoraunt, yea meanly trauayled in Astronomie, that Iuppiter, wyth Moercurie, or wyth the Sunne, inforceth rage of windes? what is he that perceauith not the fearfull thunders, lightnynges, and raynes, at the meting of Mars, and Venus, or Iuppiter, and Mars? &c. Leaue for shame to impugne these iudicialles strongly authorised. He that any other part carpith may seme moare then madd. All trewthe, all experience, a multitude of infallible

grounded rules are agaynst hym. Certum est omnibus que notum, quod 
                        ••
                     li motus, signor
                        ••
                      ortus, & occasus, planetarum aspectus, & cōiunctiones, luminari
                        •
                      eclypses. &c certiss
                        ••
                     am, determinatam, ac infallibilem babent causam. Quis iam sanae mentis negabit eorum effectus saepe innotescere, vtpote bella, fa
                        •
                     es, grandines, aeris perturbationes, elemento
                        ••
                      commotiones, terrae motus, & similia? Positis ca
                        ••
                      sis naturalibus, & non impeditis, sequitur effectus.
               
               The learned that lysteth ingeniously to ꝓgnosticate of weather, wyll not only discretly waye all before wrytten, but consider also with them the Strēgthe and Aspectes of the Planetes folowing, ād theyr Cōbustiō in the. 12. Signes, with the Cōiūctiōs of fixed Sterris, Māsions of the Moone, the Ascendēt, Climes. &c. Also the times or quarters of the yeare must be notid diligētly, (as insueth) and iudgement accordingly pronounced.
            
            
               Of the yere diuided in foure quaters.
               THe spryng tyme is hott, and moyste: and continueth so long as the Sonne is in Aries, Taurus, and Gemini: which is from the ♈ ♉ ♊ power of the brest. tenthe of Marche vnto the twelfthe of Iune. The somer is hott and drye, compted from the begynnyng of Cancer, to the ende of Virgo, that is, from the twelfthe of Iune, to the fourtenthe of September. 
                  ♋ ♌ ♍ power ouer yelow colors. Haruest is colde and drie: that is from the beginning of Libra, vnto the ende of Sagittarie: compted from the. xiiij. of September to the twelfthe of December. Wynter is colde and moyst: continued from ♎ ♏ ♐. ♑ ♒ ♓ power ouer al flumes. the begynning of Capricornus, to the ende of Pisces: that is from the twelfthe of December, to the tenthe of Marche.
               
               Now folowe the aspectes of the planetes, for the better iudgemēt of weather. Before I declare of planetes, and the signification of aspectes, it behoueth brefly to open what I cal planetes, and what aspectes, and howe they are charactered and figured. Vnderstōde ther be seuē moueable sterres, pleasant to the 
                     •
                  ight, called planetes. The hyghest Saturne. ♄. Thē 
                  Iupiter. ♃. Mars. ♂. Sonne ☉. Venus. ♀. Mercurie ☿. and the Moone 
                  ☽ next to the earth. Now when I desier to expresse Saturne, I wryte this figure ♄: for Iupiter, this ♃: For Mars, this ♂. Thus of the others as theyr characters declare. All radiatiōs or aspectes ar expressed as folowe. A Cōiunction thus figured ☌: and it is, when an other planet is ioyned with the Sonne, or Moone, or others emonge themselfes, wyth in one degre, or

lesse. The Sextile aspecte or radiation is thus expressed ⚹: and it is with in 60. degrees thone frō the other. The Quadrate aspecte thus □: 90 digres distant. The Trine thus △: separated. 120. degres. The Opposition thus ☍: 180. degrees, thone distant from thother. Loe here they folow in order: the characters of the Planetes: and Signes also.
               
                  ☌ Coniunction,
                  ⚹ Sextile,
                  
                     □ Quadrat
                  
                     △ Trine,
                  ☍ Opposition Aspectes.
                  
                  ♄ Saturne,
                  ♃ Iupiter,
                  ♂ Mars,
                  ☉ Sonne
                  ♀ Venus
                  ☿ Mercurie
                  
                     ☽ Moone Planetes.
                  
                  ♈ Aries
                  ♉ Taurus
                  ♊ Gemini
                  ♋ Cancer
                  ♌ Leo
                  ♍ Virgo
                  ♎ Libra
                  ♏ Scorpius
                  ♐ Sagittarius
                  ♑ Capricornus
                  ♒ Aquarius
                  ♓ Pisces Signes.
                  
               
               
                  Yet for more playnesse beholde this figure.
               
            
            
               
               The signification of aspectes of planetes emong them selues: for the iudgement of weather.
               THe coniunction or meting of Saturne wyth Iuppiter, in firie signes, ♄ ☌, cum ♃ inforcith great drouthe: in watry signes, fluddes, continuall rayne, general ouerflowynges. &c. in aery signes, plenty of wyndes. The quadrature, sextile, or oppositiō of Saturne, wyth Iuppiter 
                  ♄ □ ⚹, & ☍, cum ♃ in moyst signes cawsith troubled ayer, by hayle, wynde, rayne, thunder, &c. before and after.
               The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition, of Saturne, with ♄ ☌ □, & ☍, cum ♂ 
                  Mars, in watry signes, declare in somer, rayne, often shoures, wyth hayle, thunder and lightnyng.
               The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne, wyth the ♄ ☌ □, & ☍, cum ☉ 
                  Sunne, chiefly in colde signes, shewe darke weather, hayle, rayne, thunder, and colde dayes.
               The cōiunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne, wyth Venus, 
                  ♄ ☌ □, & ☍, cum, ♀ in wynter, engender colde and rayne, principaly in moyst signes: in summer, mitigation of heat.
               The coniunction, quadrature, and opposition of Saturne, wyth ♄ ☌, □ & ☍, cum ☿ 
                  Mercurie, in watry signes bryng rayne: in hott or drie signes, drouth: in summer, thunder, lightnynges, and tempest.
               The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, wythe ♃ ☌, □ & ☍, cum ♂ 
                  Mars, in moyst signes, declare thunders lyghtninges, and rayne: in wynter, snowe, or clowdie thycke weather.
               The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with the ♃ ☌, □ & ☍, cum ☉ 
                  Sunne, great and most vehement wyndes.
               The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, wythe ♃ ☌, □ & ☍, cum ♀ 
                  Venus, in moyst signes, colde and myssinges: in the rest signes, fayr weather.
               
                  
The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of Iuppiter, wythe ♃ ☌ □ & ☍, cum ☿ 
                  Mercurie, great wyndes.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, wyth the ♂ ☌, □ & ☍, cum ☉ 
                  Sunne, in firie signes, drouth: in watry, thunder, rayne.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, with Venus, 
                  ♂ ☌ □ & ☍, cum ♀ in moyst signes, rayne, and tempest.
               The coniunction, quadrature or oppositiō of Mars, wyth Mercurie 
                  ♂ ☌ □ & ☍, cum ☿. in hot signes, great heate: in drye signes, drouth: in watrie, rayne: sometimes thunders, lightninges, wyth sodayn fierce wyndes.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of Venus, wyth ♀ ☌ □, & ☍, cum ☿ 
                  Mercurie causeth rayne: in somer thy prouoke tempest, the more if they agre in watry signes. Note what is sayde of the coniunctiō, quadrature or oppositiō, thesame is also ment of the Sextile and Trine: but they are oflesse signification, so the lernid noteth.
            
            
               A declaration of weather by aspectes of the Mo
                     •
                  ne wyth planettes.
               THe coniunction quadrature or opposition of the Moone, wyth 
                     ☽ ☌ □, & ☍, cum ♄ 
                  Saturne, in moyst signes, bryngeth a cloudy day, cold ayre, according to the nature of the signe: if she go from Saturne, to the Sunne, by coniunction or other wyse, harder weather ensueth.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moone with 
                     ☽ ☌ □, & ☍, cum ♃ 
                  Iupiter in Aries, or Scorpio sheweth fayre, white dispersed cloudes.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moone with 
                     ☽ ☌, □ & ☍ cum ♂ 
                  Mars in watry signes rayne: in hote signes, diuers coloured red clou des are made, all the element ouer: in summer, often thunder.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moone with 
                     ☽ ☌, □ & ☍ cum ☉ the Sunne in moyst signes, rayny weather: the more if the Moone go from the Sunne to Saturn.
               
               
                  
The coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of the Moone wyth 
                     ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿ 
                  Mercurie, in moyst lignes sheweth rayn and wynde, the more when the Moone passeth from Mercurie to Iuppiter: then great wyndes folowe.
            
            
               How wether is iudged by the Oriental and Occidental station of Planetes, with their combustion in the. 12. signes-celestiall. Fyrst of the planetes in Aries.
               
                  SATVRN in Aries, vnder the beames of the Sunne, that is to ♄ in ♈. Vvhat these termes cōbust Orientall, and Occidental, meane. saye, combust, maketh a cloudy darke troubled ayre: Oriental, I meane in the morning apperyng before the Sunne, fayre wether: Occidental, that is to say, shewyng hym self after the Sunne goyng doune, betokeneth great wyndes.
               
                  Iuppiter in Aries combust, a token of rayn: beyng Occidental, it bringeth ♃ in ♈ cloudes, and dewes: Oriental, fayre, pleasant wether.
               
                  Mars in Aries combust and Occidentall, good wether: contrarie ♂ in ♈ Oriental.
               
                  Venus in Aries combust, Occidental moystnes, great wyndes: Oriental ♀ in ♈ thunders, and raynes.
               
                  Mercurie in Aries combust tempest, Occidental, and Oriental, fayre wyndy wether. ☿ in ♈
               
            
            
               Of the planetes in Tauro.
               
                  SATVRN in Tauro cōbust, and stationarie, bringeth thicke cloudes, thunders, and troblesome wether. ♄ in ♉
                  
                  
                     Iuppiter in Tauro combust, indifferent wether: Occidental, pleasant shoures. ♃ in ♉
                  
                  
                     Mars in Tauro combust, a quiet ayre: but Oriental wyndye. ♂ in ♉
                  
                  
                     Venus in Tauro combust thunders, &c. Occidental fayre. ♀ in ♉
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the planetes in Gemini.
               
                  SATVRN in Gemini combust, and Occidental, drouth. ♄ in ♊
                  
                  
                     Iuppiter in Gemini combust, a good signification. ♃ in ♊
                  
                  
                     Mars in Gemini combust and Occidental, heat. ♂ in ♊
                  
                  
                     Venus in Gemini combust Occidental, wynde. ♀ in ♊
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Gemini combust, wynde. ☿ in ♊
                  
               
            
            
               Of the planetes in Cancer.
               
                  SATVRN in Cancer combust, darke wether, great wyndes ♄ in ♋ and troblesome wethers: Occidental calmer.
                  
                     Iuppiter in Cancer combust bryngeth calme pleasaunt wether. ♃ in ♋
                  
                  
                     Mars in Cancer combust, great heat. ♂ in ♋
                  
                  
                     Venus in Cancer combust, a quyet calme tyme. ♀ in ♋
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Cancer combust, tempestuous wether, chiefly on the sea: ☿ in ♋ Occidental calmer.
               
            
            
               Of the planetes in Leone.
               
                  SATVRN in Leone combust, maketh wyndes and mysslynges. ♄ in ♌
                  
                  
                     Iuppiter in Leone combust, pleasant wyndes. ♃ in ♌
                  
                  
                     Mars in Leone combust, Occidental, drouth. ♂ in ♌
                  
                  
                     Venus in Leone combust, drouth. ♀ in ♌
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Leone combusi, wyndes. ☿ in ♌
                  
               
            
            
               Of the planetes in Virgine.
               
                  SATVRN in Virgine combust, is a significator of infirmities. ♄ in ♍
                  
                  
                     
                     Iupiter in Virgine combust, manifesteth abundaunce of thinges. ♃ in ♍
                  
                  
                     Mars in Virgine combust, like vnto Saturn. 
                     ♂ in ♍
                  
                  
                     Venus in Virgine combust drouth: Oriental contrarie. ♀ in ♍
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Virgine cōbust, drougth, ragyng sees: Occidētal drouth. ☿ in ♍
                  
               
            
            
               Of the Planetes in Libra.
               
                  SATVRNE in Libra combust, sheweth infirmitie of sight: ♄ in ♎ Oriental, colde wyndes.
                  
                     Iupiter in Libra combust, indifferent wether. ♃ in ♎
                  
                  
                     Mars in Libra combust, bryngeth moysture. ♂ in ♎
                  
                  
                     Venus in Libra combust, moyst ayre. ♀ in ♎
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Libra combust, wyndes. ☿ in ♎
                  
               
            
            
               Of the Planetes in Scorpione.
               
                  SATVRN in Scorpio combust, colde ayre: Occidental frost: ♄ in ♏ Oriental colde, Northwyndes.
                  
                     Iupiter in Scorpio combust rayne: Occidental, bitter wether▪ 
                     ♃ in ♏
                  
                  
                     Mars in Scorpio combust, declareth moysture: Oriental, wyndes. ♂ in ♏
                  
                  
                     Venus in Scorpio combust rayne, both Occidental and Oriental. ♀ in ♏
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Scorpio combust, ragyng wether, chiefly Oriental. ☿ in ♏
                  
               
            
            
               Of the Planetes in Sagittario.
               
                  SATVRN in Sagittario combust, colde, rayny ayre: Orientall ♄ in ♐ colde and frost.
                  
                     Iupiter in Sagittario combust, 
                        〈◊〉
                      rayne: Oriental wors wether. ♃ in ♐
                  
                  
                     Mars in Sagittario combust, drouth. ♂ in ♐
                  
                  
                     Venus in Sagittario combust, rayne: Occidental, wynd, and colde. ♀ in ♐
                  
                  
                     Mercuri in Sagittario combust rayne: Occidental, clere ayre. ☿ in ♐
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the Planetes in Capricorne.
               
                  SATVRN in Capricorno cōbust, signifieth darke wether with ♄ in ♑ Southwyndes: Occidental colde: Oriental North wyndes.
                  
                     Iupiter in Capricorn cōbust moist ayr: Occidental, increasing thesame. ♃ in ♑
                  
                  
                     Mars in Capricorn combust, cloudye: Occidental some heat. ♂ in ♑
                  
                  
                     Venus in Capricorn combust, colde ayre. Oriental rayne. ♀ in ♑
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Capricorn combust rayne, both Oriental and Occidētall. ☿ in ♑
                  
               
            
            
               Of the Planetes in Aquario.
               
                  SATVRN in Aquario combust colde ayr: Occidental daungerous ♄ in ♒ sees: Oriental rayn.
                  
                     Iupiter in Aquario combust, Occidental rayn. ♃ in ♒
                  
                  
                     Mars in Aquario combust drouth: Occidental and Oriental plenty ♂ in ♒ of wyndes.
                  
                     Venus in Aquario cumbust, cloudye: Occidental hote: Oriental rayn. ♀ in ♒
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Aquario combust, snow: Occidental more colde: Oriental ☿ in ♒ rayn.
               
            
            
               Of the planetes in Pisces.
               
                  SATVRN in Pisce combust, bringeth cloudes: Occidentall ♄ in ♓ rayne.
                  
                     Iupiter in Pisce combust, Oriental, calme waters. ♃ in ♓
                  
                  
                     Mars in Pisce combust, Occidental, drouth: Oriental lightning, and ♂ in ♓ thunders.
                  
                     Venus in Pisce combust, colde: Occidental disposed to snowe. ♀ in ♓
                  
                  
                     Mercurie in Pisce combust, moyst ayre. ☿ in ♓
                  
               
               Thus much of the iudgement of weather.
            
            
               
                  
SEYNGE that I haue now sufficiently declared howe, by what rules and tokens, weather is iudged: I thinke it conueniēt to adioyne here a brefe collection, how Plentie, Scarsitie, Sicknes, Death, Alterationes, Trobles, warres, &c. are for euer perceaued.
            
            
               A rule to prognosticate the aforesayd, by the fallyng of Newyears daye.
               IT is affirmed of some, when Newyears daye falleth on the Sūdaye, 
                  Sundaye. then a pleasant Wynter dothe ensue: a natural Sommer: fructe sufficient: Heruest indifferent, yet some wynde and rayne: many mariages: plentie of wyne and honye: death of yonge men, and cattel: robberies in most places: newes of prelates, of Kynges: and cruell warres in the ende.
               On Mondaye, a wynter somwhat vncōfortable: Sommer temperate: no plentye of fructe: many fanlies and fables opened: A gues Mondaye. shall reygne: Kynges and many others shal dye: mariages shalbe in most places: and a commen fall of gentle men.
               On Tewesdaye a stormy Wynter: a wete Sommer: a diuers Heruest: Corne, and fructe indifferent: yet herbes in gardens shall not Tewesday. florishe: greate sickenes of men, women and yonge chyldren: Be a
                  
                     ••
                  es shal hunger sterue, and dye of the botch: many shyppes, Galleys, and Hulkes, shalbe lost: and the bloudy flixes shall kyll many men: all thynges dere, saue corne.
               On wednesdaye, Lee a warme Wynter: in the ende, snowe and froste: a cloudye Sōmer: plentye of fructe, of corne, Haye, Wyne, wednesdaye, and Honye greate payne to women with chylde, and death to infantes: good for shepe: newes of Kynges: great warres: battell and slaughter towarde the myddes.
               On Thursdaye, Wynter and Sommer wyndye: a raynye Heruest: Thursdaye. therefore we shall haue ouerflowynges: muche fructe: plē
                  tye of Honye: yet fleshe shalbe dere: Cattell in generall shall dye:

greate troble, warres &c: With a licentiouslyfe of the feminine sexe.
               On Fridaye, Wynter stormy. Sommer scante pleasante: Heruest Fridaye. indifferent: litle store of fructe, of Wyne, and Honye: Corne dere: many bleare eyes: youthe shall dye: Earthquakes are perceaued in many places, plentye of thunders, lyghtnynges, and tempestes: with a soden death of cattell,
               On Saterday, a mean Wynter: Sōmer very hote: a late Heruest, Saterdaie. good cheape garden herbes: muche burninge: plentye of Hempe, Flaxe, and Honye: olde folke shall dye in moste places: Feuers and Tertians shall greue many people: greate mutteringe of warres: murders shalbe sodenly committed in many places, for lyght matters.
            
            
               NOw that I haue opened dyuers wayes, bothe for the learned and vnlearned, howe wether to come at all tymes maye be well iudged and knowen &c: I thoughte it mete, for farther knowledge therein, not to omitte here, the naturall causes of suche and so many alterations of ayre. Loe, therefore orderly they folowe.
            
            
               Naturall causes, conducynge to all the aforesayde, euer to be had in memorie of the wyse: and fyrst of the Raynbowe.
               THe Raynbowe is the shynyng, and rebounding of beamys of light, that tourne to the contrarie vapour agayne, in the cloude. It declareth sometyme rayne, and many tymes fayre wether: when the one, and how the other, is before opened.
            
            
               Of Rayne.
               
                  
RAyn is a colde vapour. an erthy humour: or fumosities, out of waters or earth drawen vp by the vertue of the Sunne, to Quare lapides pl
                        •
                     āt, lege 
                        •
                     li, lib, 2, Ca. 44. the nether part of the middle space of the ayre: there through colde thycked, then dissolued: thus engendred falleth on the earth. Here I leaue to speake of miraculous raynes, as Mylke, Blud, Flesh, Yern Woll, &c. For more satisfieng in these, reade Plinius in the second boke. 58. Chapter.
            
            
               Of Frost and Dew.
               A Colde moyst vapour, a litle waye drawen vp in the day, thorow 
                     
                        ••
                     s est ate, pruina bieme 
                        •
                     it. faynt heat of the Sunne, descendeth in the night, dissolued on the earth, there congelated, or resolued in to water, the one called Frost, the other Dew. The last is a signe of fayr wether, in the spryng or Haruest.
            
            
               Of Snowe.
               IT is a moyst vapour, drawen vp to the middle region of the ayre, then thy
                     •
                  ked, and frosen into the body of a cloude. So Nix humor modice concr
                        •
                      tus. congelated, descendeth.
            
            
               Of Hayle.
               A Cloude resolued into water, in the fall congelated, maketh Hayle. The hyer it commeth from aboue, and the longer it Grando, plu
                        •
                      uia in discēsu congelata. tarryeth in the ayre, the rounde
                     •
                   hayle.
            
            
               Of wyndes.
               VVynde is a multitude of drye exhalations, drawen vp frō the Ventor
                        •
                      ergo materia, calida & 
                        •
                     icca ex
                     
                        •
                     alatio. earth: and aboue the earth, enforced here and there.
            
            
               Of earthquakes, in the most quyet tyme.
               PLentye of wyndes, entred into holes, cones, or caues of the Quemadmodū in n
                        •
                     be tonitruū, sic in terra tr
                        •
                     nor. earth, whiche absent from aboue the earth, causeth quietnes: the violent brustyng oute of them (the earth closed agayne) is the

earthquake: Sign
                        ••
                      est futurorum bellorum.
               
            
            
               Tokens of earthquakes to come.
               AFyry cloude, appering in the element, like a litel pyllar, is a token Signa terrae motus. of earthquakes to come. The obscuritie or darknes of the Sunne, without cloudes, and straungely coloured, blouddy or otherwyse, is a token of earthquakes.
               Also, when Well water and others are troubled, or salt, or infec ted by fauour &c.
               A great quyetnes of ayre, by lande and sea, and chiefly the long absence of wyndes.
               Also, straunge noyses herde, as clamours of men, russhynge of harnes, mourninges, lamentations &c. All these haue bene obserued, to signifie earthquakes at hande.
            
            
               Of Thunders and lightninges.
               THunder is the quenching of fyre, in a cloude. Or thunder is, Fulgetrum prius cerni, quam t
                        •
                     nitrū audiri, cū simul fi
                        •
                     nt, certum est, Pli. lib. 2. Ca. 56. cōtra Aristo. an exhalation hote and drye, myxte with moysture, carryed vp to the middleregiō, there thycked and wrapped into a cloude: of this hore matter, coupled with moystnes, closed in the cloude, groweth a stryfe, the heat beating and breakyng out the sydes of the cloude, with a thundringe noyse: the fyre then dispersed, is the lightnynge. Thus for the lerned: Tonit
                        〈◊〉
                      sonitus est, qui editur quādo 
                        •
                     ube
                        •
                      rumpit halitus. Fulmen flamma vel repētinus est ignis, qui ex collisione nubium, aut ruptura nascitur. Aristotele affirmeth the lightnyng after the thunder: but the fyre doth fyrst appere, in that the sight is before the hering. If this satiisfie not, reade the second of hys Meteoron. Here foloweth a note of lightninges.
            
            
               There be thre kyndes of lightninges, drye, moyst and clere.
               DRye do not burne, but cleaue, depart, or diuide. Moyst burne Note. not, but alter colour. The clere are of maruelous natures. Full barels by it are emptied. It melteth mony in the purs, it breaketh the swerde, the purs and scaberd not perisshed, yea, wex in them vnmolten.
            
            
               
               Of the Cometes, or flames in the night.
               A Comet is a flame, working in a drye, hote, flymye exhalation, drawē vp to the hyest part of the ayre. His mater or substance Ventorū causa after it is brent, dispersed prouoketh wyndes.
            
            
               The natural cause of the Sunne eclypsed.
               NOthing els is the Eclips of the Sunne, but the direct putting the body of the Moone, betwene the Sunne and the earth, or betwene our sight and the Sunne: which chaunceth onely at the change.
            
            
               A Corollarie.
               BY this gather the darkenes at Christes death, not to stande by natur all ecliptical cause: but by supernatural, or miracle. For it was at the ful Moone, the scriptures witnes: which enforced Dio
                        •
                     ysius 
                  Miracle, 
                  Areopagita, at the tyme of his passion, to speake thus: Aut Deus natur
                        •
                      patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur.
               
            
            
               The cause of the Moone eclipsed.
               THe Sunne beyng in the contrarie poynt to the ful Moone, enforceth the shadowe of the earth, then directly put betwene the Vniuersalis est Eclipsis Lu
                        ••
                      Nō semper in nouilunio, sed in ca, et cauda 
                  Sunne and the Moone, towardes the Moone, hyding more or lesse of the Moone, as she differeth from the Ecliptical. Some obserue pestilent plagues, sodayn batayl, great dearth, to ensue these eclypses: which all I desire God to auert from his chosen. Many other thinges by this Eclips are gathered, as Longitudes of countreys: the quantitie of the Sunne, contayning the bignes of the earth 162 times: the compasse 
                  Omniū planetarū ad terrā magnitudo. of the earth 21600. myles: whose thycknes, accordinge to Archimedes rule is, 6872 myles and 8 eleuenthes of a myle. The quantite of the Moone is the 43 part of the earth. The Sunne contayneth Haec incredis bilia vidētur tātū hiis, qui matbematicis demōstrationi bus nō assueue runt, &c. the globe of the Moone 7000 tymes. Saturnus comprehendeth the bignes of the earth 91 tymes. Iupiter 95 tymes. Mars 1 and 10. sixtenthes. Venus one 37 part. Mercurius on 32000 parte of the earth. Note here, that Alfraganus affirmeth the least fixed sterre, perfectly sene, as bygge, as the whole earth.
            
            
               
                  
                  HAec non erunt admirationi, si globi capacit atem ex longitudine diametri quaesieris. Continet enim sol
                     ••
                   dim
                     •
                  tiens terrae dimetientem quinquies Dimetiens ☉ ad terrae dime tientē 11 ad 2. & semissem. Est
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   propertio diametri solis ad terrae dimetientē, quae est numeri vud
                     ••
                  im ad duo, quintupla sesquialtera. Cubus soli
                     •
                   mille ter
                     ••
                  ntū vnā & triginta partes tales continet, cuiusmodi terrae cubus octonas conplectitur. Cubus enim numeri vndecim, est mille tercentū vnū & triginta. Cubus vero bi
                     •
                  arii, qui est terrae, octo. Subducto quoties id fieri potest, minore cubo Cubus ☉ 1331 Terrae. 8. qui est terrae, à maiore qui est solis, cognoscitur cub
                     ••
                  d cubum proportio, & quanto Sol maior, terra sit. Inuenimus ergo octo centics, sexagi
                     ••
                   sexies, in mille tercentum vno & triginta.
               ¶ Terrae Diametros Lunae dimetientē cōplectitur ter, & duas eius diamet
                     •
                  i portiones quintas. Dimetiēs terrae ad diam: ☽. 17, ad 5. Cubus terrae 4. 913. Cubus ☽ 125. Est
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ea proportio, dimetientis terrae ad Lunae diametrum, quae est septen decim ad quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tripla superbipartiens quintas. Cubus numeri septendecim, quater mille nongenta tredecim. Cubus numer
                     •
                   quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , est centum viginti quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . Maiore cubo per minorem distributo, reperimu
                     •
                   numerum cētum vigintiquin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , tricies nouies in quater mille nongēus tredecim: quod paululum à superioribus obseruationibus diflert.
            
            
               How many myles the Moone is from the earth: and euery planet from other.
               
                  AS some haue published, it is from the earth to the Moone. 15750. myles.
                  From the Moone to Mercurie, is 12812. myles.
                  From Mercurie to Venus, as many myles.
                  From Venus to the Sunne, is 23437. myles, and a half.
                  From the Sunne to Mars, is 15725. myles.
                  From Mars to Iupiter, is 78721. myles.
                  From Iupiter to Saturne, as many myles.
                  From Saturne to the firmament 120485 myles.
                  The Whole summe, from the earth to the firmament is, 280734. myles, and a half.
               
            
            
               The natural causes of many Sunnes or Moones.
               THese cometo passe, when a thicker cloude is gathered toward Milichius noteth the kyng of Pole to has ue▪ sene. 6 Sunnes at ones. the side of the Sunne or Moone: in the which the broken beames of the Sūne, do leaue the fashiō and very form of that Sūne. The first is the very Sunne: the second and thirde come of the breaking of the Sunne beam is in the cloude, on the side of the Sunne. Thus as foloweth, sayth Plinius in his second boke, of the historie of nature, and 31. Chapter. No moe Sunnes are perceyued in our tyme then thre: and they are neuer sene, eyther aboue or beneth the Sunne, but on the sydes: neuer in the night, but onely at the Sunne rysinge, or goyngedoune.
            
            
               
               Vvhat is to be chosen or auoyded, vnder euery aspect of, the moone: with her signification, in the. xii. signes, touchyug the same.
               THE coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne wyth ♄ ☌ □ vel ☍ cum ☽
                   the Moone, causeth an euel vnlucky daye, for all maters. Leaue therfore to haue to do any maner waye: nothinge shall prosper, or come well to passe then attempted. Yet the sext le or Trine of Saturne, with the Moone declareth a conuenient tyme to tyll, del
                     •
                  e or ♄ ⚹ & △ cum ☽
                   dygge, to sowe, to laye fundacions, to erect 
                     •
                  r repayre houses yea, a mete tyme to obtaynesutes of fatherly farmours. The Moone in Capricorn or Aquario, bringeth this later effect of the sextile and trine. 
                     ☽ in ♑ vel ♒,
               
               The coniunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Iupiter 
                  ♃ ☌, ⚹ △ 
                     □ vel ☍ cum ☽
                   with the Moone, sheweth a fortunate daye, chiefly to obtayne sutes of Kynges, noble Princes, Prelates &c, of Lawyars, and Religious persons: and a mete tyme to study, to iorney, to take an honest mater in hande. The Moone in Tauro, in Leone, or Sagittario, 
                  
                     ☽ in ♉ ♌ vel ♐. sheweth thesame.
               The coniunction, sextile, trine, quadrature or opposition of Mars with the Moone, warneth thee not to match thy self that daye ♂ ☌, ⚹ △ 
                     □ or ☍ cum ☽. with warryours notwithstandinge very good, and most mete to finisshe all maner fyry workes: naught to iorney: yet most conuenient for valiaunt captaynes, to worke their feat, to leade, encourage, or stomache their souldiars: moste vnmete to treat peace, to take seruauntes, or to seke frendship.
               The coniunction, quadrature or opposition of the Sunne wyth ☉ ☌, □, vel ☍ cum ☽
                   the Moone, declareth a very vnhappy daye, for all maters: therefore attempt nothyng, ne any maner sute: neither plant, buylde, ne iorney. Yet the sextile and trine ar very fortunate, specially to obtain sute of Kynges, Princes, and other Nobles. The Moone in 
                     〈◊〉
                   enfor 
                     ☽ in ♈ ceth the effect of this later part.
               The coniunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Venus with the Moone, causeth a daye most apt to obtayn all sutes of ♀ ☌, ⚹, △ 
                     □ uel ☍ cum ☽.
                  
women: good to woo, to attempte mariage, and to folow all maner pleasures, and plesaunt pastymes: not vnmete to hyre seruauntes, 
                     ☽ in ♎ vel ♓ to let blud &c. The Moone in Libra or Pisces, prouoketh the lyke.
               The coniunction, sextile, trine quadrature, or opposition of ☿ ☌, ⚹, △, □, vel ☍ cum ☽
                   
                  Mercurie with the Moone, promiseth a fortunate happy daye, to bye and sell: very good to enter chyldren in liberal artes: an apt tyme for the ver
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  iar: good to vse marchaundise, to iorney, to send embassage, to geue accomptes, and suche lyke.
               The Moone in Gemini, Cancer or Virgo, en
                     •
                  lyneth euen to the same 
                     ☽ in ♊ ♋ vel ♍. aforesayde.
               The Moone with the Dragons head, sheweth a lucky daye for 
                     ☽ cum ♌ all maters: with the tayle ioyned, contrarie.
            
            
               Now ensueth a Table shewing what signe the Moone is in, and shal be for euer: declaring also the metest tyme to let bludde, to p
                     •
                  urge, and to bathe.
               THIS Table folowing, hath at the head seuen titles. The fyrst monethes: the second dayes: then the prime: the. 1
                     •
                  . signes: the titles to let bludd, to pourge, and to bathe. Here it is to be noted, that those dayes are good for these purposes, which be signed with this letter G: and those euel dayes, that are noted with B. Now ensueth the Table, and the whole vse of it, and fyrst for the signe, where the Moone is.
               
                  
                  
                     ¶ This Table declareth for euer, in vvhat signe the Moone is, or shalbe at any day in the yea
                           ••
                        . It serueth also very vvel to let bludde, to purge, and bathe.
                     
                        
                           Monetbes.
                        
                        
                           D
                                 ••
                              es. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                        
                        
                           Prime
                        
                        
                           The 12. Signes.
                        
                        
                           To let bludd.
                        
                        
                           To purge.
                        
                        
                           To bathe.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Febr. Nouē
                           
                        
                        1
                        3
                        
                           Aries.
                        
                        G
                        B
                        G
                     
                     
                        
                           Marche.
                        
                        2
                         
                        
                           Aries.
                        
                        G
                        B
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        3
                        14
                        
                           Taurus.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        B
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        4
                        6
                        
                           Taurus.
                        
                        B
                        G
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        5
                         
                        
                           Gemini.
                        
                        B
                        G
                         
                     
                     
                        
                           Aprile.
                        
                        6
                        17
                        
                           Gemini.
                        
                        B
                        G
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        7
                        9
                        
                           Cancer.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                        
                           Maie.
                        
                        8
                        1
                        
                           Cancer.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        9
                         
                        
                           Cancer.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        12
                        
                           Leo.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        11
                        4
                        
                           Leo.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        G
                     
                     
                        
                           I
                                 ••
                              e.
                        
                        12
                         
                        
                           Virgo.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        B
                     
                     
                         
                        13
                        15
                        
                           Virgo.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        B
                     
                     
                        
                           Iuly.
                        
                        14
                        7
                        
                           Libra.
                        
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        15
                         
                        
                           Libra.
                        
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        16
                        18
                        
                           Scorp
                                 ••
                              s
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        17
                        1
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           Scorpi
                                 ••
                              
                           
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                        
                           Auguste
                        
                        18
                        2
                        
                           Scorpius
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        19
                         
                        
                           Sagitta.
                        
                        G
                         
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        13
                        
                           Sagitta.
                        
                        G
                         
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        21
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        
                           Capri.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        B
                     
                     
                        
                           Septembre.
                        
                        22
                         
                        
                           Capri.
                        
                        B
                        B
                        B
                     
                     
                         
                        23
                        23
                        
                           Aquari
                        
                         
                         
                        G
                     
                     
                        
                           Ian. Octo.
                        
                        24
                        24
                        
                           Aquari
                        
                         
                         
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        25
                        25
                        
                           Pisces.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        26
                        26
                        
                           Pisces.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                     
                         
                        27
                        27
                        
                           Pisces.
                        
                         
                        G
                        G
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How to fynde by this Table, the signe where the Moone is for euer.
               SEke oute vnder the titles of the monethes, the name of the moneth, whose daye you must looke oute, right agaynste the moneth, vnder the title of dayes: and there begynne to tell doune wardes, one, two, thre, &c. to the ende, if it so requyre. And then from the beginning, if nede be, vntill you haue reconed the numbre of the daye that youseke. Loke what numbre it falleth vpon in this table, vnder the title of dayes: that numbre kepe in mynde. Then seke vnder the title of the prime, the golden numbre for that year: right agaynst that lestward, vnder the title of dayes, begyn to tell dounewardes, one, two, thr
                        •
                     , foure, &c, vntill you haue reconed the numbre, whiche you did kepe in mynde. Agaynste that dounewardes, on your right hande, vnder the title of Signes, is the signe wherein the Moone shalbe that daye. Euē then vnder the other titles, ye shal fynde in righte order, for lettinge bludde, for pourginge, and bathinge, according as they be noted with G. whiche is good, and B. signifieng badde. Ensample. The sixt daye of Marche in the yeare of oure Lorde 1555, I desyre to knowe what celestiall signe the Moone dothe then occupie. I fynde fyrst the name of the Moneth, that is, Marche: and the daye as foloweth, in the next ordre of this table. I begynne here to tell, right agaynste my moneth, at the figure of. 2. sayeng: one, two, thre, &c. so I haue at the ende, and compte of syx dayes this figure 7. which I kepe in mynde. Nowe I must seke oute the golden numbre, for the yeare aforesayde, vnder the title of the prime here, that is 17: agaynst the whiche, on the left syde is 6. There you must begynne agayn to compte, one, two, thre, &c. vntill you come vnto your numbre 7. So on youre right hande, in the rowe, or order, you shall see Virgo, the celestial signe, that the Moon, is in: and after that these thre letters, b, b, b, whiche declare badde or euell to let bludde, to pourge or bathe, agreable to the titles in the head. G, there had signified good.
            
            
               To know what the Moone differeth from the Sunne.
               
                  
MVltiplie the age of the Moone, by 4, and deuide by. 10: the quotient sheweth the signes, that the Moone differeth frome the Sunne: the remayne augmented by. 3, bryngeth degrees to be added.
               Nowe shall folowe, what dayes in euery moneth are vnmete to let bludde, daungerous to suffre woūding, perillous to fall sicke, deathly to iourney, euell to marrye, and naught to take any mater in hande. The whole yeare after this compte folowinge, hath. 33. euell dayes.
            
            
               The yeare hath. xxxiii. euyl dayes, generall for euer.
               IANVARIE hathe eyghte suche dayes, the. i, the. ij, the iiij, the. v, the. x, the. xv, the. xvij, the. xxix. Drynke whyte wyne this moneth.
               
                  Februarie hath thre dayes, the. viij, the. x, the. xvij: these not so euell, the. xxvi, the. xxvij, the. xxviij. Eate no potage of okes, or malowes: they are venemous.
               
                  Marche thre dayes, the. xv, the. xvi, the. xix: this not so euell, the xxviij. daye. This moneth, all swete meates are good.
               
                  April two dayes, the. xvi, the. xxi: these not so euell, the. vij, the viij, the. x, the. xx. Vse hote meates, of light digestion.
               
                  Maie thre dayes, the vij, the. xv, the. xx: these not so euell, the iij, the. vi. Ryse early, and vse breakefast.
               
                  Iune two, the. iiij, the. vij: these not so euel, the. x, the. xv, the. xxij. Sage and lettuse are good to eate. Colde water fastinge hurteth not.
               
                  Iulie two dayes, the, xv, the. xx. Abstayne from carnalitie.
               
                  August two dayes, the. xix, the. xx: these not so euel, the first, the xxix, the. xxx. It hurteth not to abstayne frō potage, and all hote meates, and drinkes of spicerie.
               
                  September two dayes the. vi, the. vij: these not so euell, the. iij, the iiij, the. xxi, the. xxij. Eate good fruyte.
               
                  
                  October one daye, the vi: these not so euel, the. iij, the. xvi, the xxiiij. Good wyne is wholsome this moneth.
               
                  Nouember two dayes, the. xv, the. xix: these not so euell, the. v, the vi, the. xxviij, the. xxix. Blede not.
               
                  Decembre thre dayes, the. vi, the. vij, the. ix: these dayes not so euell, the. xv, the. xvij, the▪ xxij. Blede not ouer muche. Warme not thy legges at the fyre.
            
            
               A conducible note for lettiug bludde.
               LEt bludde at no tyme, without great cause: for it bringeth wekenes, Malū minui, vel purgationibus vti, tem pore caloris, propter defectū humoris. and many infirmities. If ye do, see it be after good dige
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  n and fastinge, in a fayre temperate daye. Beware before of all maner exercise, bathinges, watchinges. and carnal copulacion &c. After, vse fine meates, of light digestion: abstayninge from all the aforesayd, vntill the fourth daye.
               These signes are most daungerous for bludde letting, the Moone 
                  Ill to let blud in ♉, ♊, ♌ ♍, ♑, beyng in them: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, and Capricorne, with the laste half of Libra, and Scorpius. Therest are all good, so the Moone beare no dominion in that member, which ye cut: as foloweth.
               
                  Beholde the figure.
               
            
            
               
               The dominion of the Moone in mans bodye.
               
                  
                     
                        Aries.  The. Head, and face.
                     
                        Taurus.  The. Necke.
                     
                        Gemini  The. Armes, handes, shoulders.
                     
                        Cancer.  The. Brest, stomache, rybbes.
                     
                        Leo.  The. Hart, backe.
                     
                        Virgo.  The. Bowels, belly.
                     
                        Libra.  The. Reynes, nauill, buttockes.
                     
                        Scorpius.  The. Secret membres.
                     
                        Sagittarius.  The. Thyes.
                     
                        Capricornus.  The. Knees.
                     
                        Aquarius.  The. Shynnes, legges.
                     
                        Pisces.  The. Fete.
                  
               
               
                  
                     FRom the chaunge, to the firste quarter, a mete tyme to let yonge men bludde.
                     From the firste quarter, to the ful, good for middle age.
                     From the ful, to the laste quarter, apt for aged folke.
                     From the laste quarter, to the change, best for olde men.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Signes mete for the complexions.
                     for the fleumatike: the head, and thyes excepted.
                     
                        ARIES. Sagittarius.
                     
                     for melancholike: buttockes, and legges excepted
                     
                        Libra. Aquarius: 
                        Haec diligentissime obseruare oportet solertē Medi cū, nisi maiora pericula cogāt
                     
                     for cholerike: brest, membres, and fete excepted.
                     
                        Cancer. Scorpius Pisces.
                     
                     For the sanguine,
                     
                     all be apt that tofore are named good.
                  
               
               In the springe tyme let bludde at the right side.
               In Haruest time at the left syde.
               The learned Phisician will consider, beside all that is sayde, the Coniunctions, Oppositions, and quadrate aspectes of the Planetes: with many other thinges Astronomical, most necessarie, bothe in bludletletting,

purging, bathinge, &c.
            
            
               For to take purgations, and to bathe,
               THe metest time to take purgations &c. is neither in hote, nor colde dayes: that is, from the tenthe of Marche, to the twelfthe of Iune.
               
               Further, by rules Astronomical, it muste be perfourmed when Good to purge ♋, ♏, ♓. the Moone is in cold, moyst, and watry signes, as Cācer, Scorpius and Pisces: conforted by aspectes, and radiations, of planetes fortifienge the vertue of the bodye expulsiue.
               The Moone in Aries, Taurus, and Capricornus, naughte. One cause of Bad to purge. ♈, ♉, ♑. vomiting the purgation, is the Moone hauing aspect to any planet retrograde. 
                  Good to bathe ♈, ♌, ♐, ♋, ♏, ♓.
               
               The Moone in these signes folowinge, very good to bathe: Aries, Leo, Sagittari, Cancer, Scorpius & Pisces.
               
               These ensuyng are euel to bathe: Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorne. 
                  Bad to bathe. ♉, ♍, ♑,
               
            
            
               Of inundations, or fluddes: of tymbre fallinge: sowyng: planting: graffing: hear clipping: shauing: and geldinge.
               THe fludde is biggest at the full: bycause then dispersinge her vertue, she filleth all places with moysture. By commō experience, ioyned with lerning, I knowe, at the full the Moone Iodeth all bodyes with humou
                     •
                  s: and so are emptied, growinge to the The fall of tymber. change. Of this, some gather the fall of tymbre at the change, more to the purpose then other tymes: wantyng then superfiuous moysture, the cause of putrefaction. Omnis putredo ab aqueo humido ortum habet. Schoner willeth from the. xv. daye vnto the. xxij. daye of the Moone, trees to be felled, and that after Midsomer to Ianuarie. So tymbre is strong, sounde, and voyde of wormes. Good to sowe. ♉, ♋, ♍, ♎, ♑.
               
               To sowe, Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, and Capricorne are best, in the increace of the Moone.
               
               To Plant or Graff, best is when the M
                        •
                     one hath her beynge in any To plante or graff ♉, ♒, fixed signe: either in Tauro or Aquario, in thencrease.
               
                  
Heare cutte groweth well, the Moone encreacing, beynge in Tauro, 
                  To cut beare. ♉, ♍, ♎. 
                  Virgine, or Libra.
               
               
                  Cuttinge, shauing, clipping, in the wane, causeth baldnes: what is then cut, groweth litel. Caluitiū prohibet, oleum Tartari.
               
               The best tyme of Gel
                        •
                     ing is in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, in the wane. Good to gelde ♋, ♏, ♓.
               
               
                  Thys rounde Table aboue, and that also, whiche ensueth: conduce to the reste folowinge.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     Here after ensuyth a table for the moueable feastes: whose vse is thus briefly declared.
                  
               
               THis Table folowing, conteyneth in the fyrst title the Prime: in the second, the Dominical letter: in the thirde, Lent: in the fourthe, Easter daie: in the fyfthe, Rogation daie: in the sixte, whitsondaie: in theseuenthe, howe manye wekes and dayes are betwene whitsondaie and Midsomer. Whiche all appeare by their titles.
            
            
               
               The vse is this.
               Ye shall consider by the Table before put forthe, what numbre the prime is that yeare, where of ye requyre to know all these aforesayd: and seke that numbre vnder the firste title of this Table ensuyng. Then s
                     •
                  ke vnder the seconde, the Dominical letter, nexte after the prime for that yeare: which title ensueth the prime. Directly against thesame Dominical letter, towardes youre right hande, in thesame lyne, ye shall fynde vnder the titles, what 
                     
                        •
                     oneth and daie, enery one of these aforesayd shal happen.
            
            
               Ensample.
               I wolde knowe this yeare of oure Lorde 1555. these moueable feastes: the fyrst Lent sondry, Easterdaye, Rogation daies, Vvhitsonday, and how many wekes betwixt Vvhitsonday, and Midsomer daie. Fyrste I fynde the prime this yeare 17. Whiche 17, I loke oute vnder the title of prime in this table. Then I seke in the nexte order, and after the prime, for the Dominical letter that year. Now in right order, according to the titles, I finde the thyrde of Marche to be the fyrste Lent sonday:, the 14. of April Easterday: the 19. of May, Rogation: the. 2. of Iune, Vvhitsondaye: and. 3. wekes, and 1. daye betwixte Vvhitsondaye, and Mydsomerdaie. Thus for euer.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        The prime.
                        The sōdaies letter.
                        The first Lent sondaie.
                        Faster. daie.
                        Rogation
                        Whitsontide.
                        Betwixt whitson. ād midso.
                     
                     
                        16
                        D
                        Februa.
                        March
                        April.
                        Maie.
                        Wek. da
                              •
                           s
                     
                     
                         
                        d
                        8
                        22
                        26
                        10
                        6 3
                     
                     
                         
                        e
                        9
                        23
                        27
                        11
                        6 2
                     
                     
                        13
                        f
                        10
                        24
                        28
                        12
                        6 1
                     
                     
                        2
                        g
                        11
                        25
                        29
                        13
                        6 0
                     
                     
                         
                        A
                        12
                        26
                        30
                        14
                        5 6
                     
                     
                        10
                        b
                        13
                        27
                        May. 1.
                        15
                        5 5
                     
                     
                         
                        c
                        14
                        28
                        2
                        16
                        5 4
                     
                     
                        18
                        d
                        15
                        29
                        3
                        17
                        5 3
                     
                     
                        7
                        e
                        16
                        30
                        4
                        18
                        5 2
                     
                     
                         
                        f
                        17
                        31
                        5
                        19
                        5 1
                     
                     
                        15
                        g
                        18
                        Aprile. 1.
                        6
                        20
                        5 0
                     
                     
                        4
                        A
                        19
                        2
                        7
                        21
                        4 6
                     
                     
                         
                        b
                        20
                        3
                        8
                        22
                        4 5
                     
                     
                        12
                        c
                        21
                        4
                        9
                        23
                        4 4
                     
                     
                        1
                        d
                        22
                        5
                        10
                        24
                        4 3
                     
                     
                         
                        e
                        23
                        6
                        11
                        25
                        4 2
                     
                     
                        9
                        f
                        24
                        7
                        12
                        26
                        4 1
                     
                     
                         
                        g
                        25
                        8
                        13
                        27
                        4 0
                     
                     
                        17
                        A
                        26
                        9
                        14
                        28
                        3 6
                     
                     
                        6
                        b
                        27
                        10
                        15
                        29
                        3 5
                     
                     
                         
                        c
                        28
                        11
                        16
                        30
                        3 4
                     
                     
                        14
                        d
                        Marche. 1.
                        12
                        17
                        31
                        3 3
                     
                     
                        13
                        e
                        2
                        13
                        18
                        Iune 1
                        3 2
                     
                     
                         
                        f
                        3
                        14
                        19
                        2
                        3 1
                     
                     
                        11
                        g
                        4
                        15
                        20
                        3
                        3 0
                     
                     
                         
                        A
                        5
                        16
                        21
                        4
                        2 6
                     
                     
                        19
                        b
                        6
                        17
                        22
                        5
                        2 5
                     
                     
                        8
                        c
                        7
                        18
                        23
                        6
                        2 4
                     
                     
                         
                        d
                        8
                        19
                        24
                        7
                        2 3
                     
                     
                         
                        e
                        9
                        20
                        25
                        8
                        2 2
                     
                     
                         
                        f
                        10
                        21
                        26
                        9
                        2 1
                     
                     
                         
                        g
                        11
                        22
                        27
                        10
                        2 0
                     
                     
                         
                        A
                        12
                        23
                        28
                        11
                        1 6
                     
                     
                         
                        b
                        13
                        24
                        29
                        12
                        1 5
                     
                     
                         
                        c
                        14
                        25
                        3
                              •
                           
                        
                        13
                        1 4
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How to know the age of the Moone: then the change, and quarter, for euer.
               FYrst learne the Epact, as I haue instructed, for that year Ye seke to know the age of the Moone: then recken how many dayes is past of that moneth, which daye ye desire to know the age. Putte that nūbre to the Epact. Then begyn at Marche, and recken for euery moneth from hym orderly one, vntill your sayde daye, includinge both the moneth of Marche, and also the moneth of your sayd day. Adde all these dayes, vnto your former numbre: putting awaye as many thirty dayes, as ye fynde. The rest, is the age of the Moone. But By the Prime the Change is knowen, but uncertainly: therfore here omitted. 
                  Ianuarie and Februarie are counted from Marche bacwarde, as aboue is sayde. The age founde, the change is knowen. If ye adde 7. dayes to the change, ye haue the first quarter: then 7. dayes, and somewhat more, sheweth the ful: and so to it addinge 7. and more, bringeth the last qurater: thus by 7. vnto the newe Moone.
               
            
            
               Now ensue two perfecte Tables, declaringe the trew houre and minute of Ebbing and Flowing, in moste coastes of Englande.
               VVhen you will know the ful sea, seke oute the name of the Of Ebbiage and Flowing. place, where you desire the ful water, in the headde of the Tables folowing: or learne the pointes of the compas there noted: or yf you lyst, know of some mariner, what Moone maketh a full sea there: a South west, or South Moone &c. Then the age of the Moone founde vnder the place or poynte of the cōpasse, sheweth in right order, the houre, and minute of the ful water. The ebbe then is manifest. En
                     •
                  ample. I desire to know the full water at London bridge, the yeare of oure Lord 1555. the 6. daye of Februarie. I fynde by rules before put forthe, the 6. daye of Februarie, the yeare aforesayde, the Moone to be 14. days olde. I see also vnder the title where London is S. W. whiche letters signifie, that a Southwest Moone maketh a ful sea there: and that is at 2. of the clocke, and 12. minutes past. This is well perceyued, yf you runne doune in the Table, to the 14. daye of the age of the Moone, vnder London title. Beholde the Tables.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Quiub Southampton. Portsmoth.
                        Redban Aberdē
                        
                        Graues ende.
                        Dūdee. S. And.
                        Age of the Moon
                        London Tinmot Hertle pole.
                        Berwyke.
                        Frith. Lythe. Dūbar.
                        Falmot
                     
                     
                        South.
                        S b w.
                        S S w
                        S w b S
                         
                        S w
                        S w b w
                        w S w
                        w b S.
                     
                     
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        
                           ☽
                        
                        H. M
                        H. M
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                     
                     
                        12 48
                        1 33
                        2 18
                        3 3
                        1
                        3 48
                        4 33
                        5 18
                        6 3
                     
                     
                        1 36
                        2 21
                        3 6
                        3 51
                        2
                        4 36
                        5 21
                        6 6
                        6 51
                     
                     
                        2 24
                        3 9
                        3 54
                        4 39
                        3
                        5 24
                        6 9
                        6 54
                        7 39
                     
                     
                        3 12
                        3 57
                        4 42
                        5 27
                        4
                        6 12
                        6 57
                        7 42
                        8 27
                     
                     
                        4 0
                        4 45
                        5 30
                        6 15
                        5
                        7 0
                        7 46
                        8 30
                        9 15
                     
                     
                        4 48
                        5 33
                        6 18
                        7 3
                        6
                        7 48
                        8 33
                        9 18
                        10 3
                     
                     
                        5 36
                        6 21
                        7 6
                        7 51
                        7
                        8 36
                        9 21
                        10 6
                        10 51
                     
                     
                        6 24
                        7 9
                        7 54
                        8 39
                        8
                        9 24
                        10 9
                        10 54
                        11 
                              •
                           9
                     
                     
                        7 12
                        7 57
                        8 42
                        9 27
                        9
                        10 12
                        10 57
                        11 42
                        12 27
                     
                     
                        8 0
                        8 45
                        9 30
                        10 15
                        10
                        11 0
                        11 45
                        12 30
                        1 15
                     
                     
                        8 48
                        9 33
                        10 18
                        11 3
                        11
                        11 48
                        12 33
                        1 18
                        2 3
                     
                     
                        9 36
                        10 21
                        11 6
                        11 51
                        12
                        12 36
                        1 21
                        2 6
                        2 51
                     
                     
                        10 24
                        11 9
                        11 54
                        12 39
                        13
                        1 24
                        2 9
                        2 54
                        3 39
                     
                     
                        11 12
                        11 57
                        12 42
                        1 27
                        14
                        2 12
                        2 57
                        3 42
                        4 
                              •
                           7
                     
                     
                        12 0
                        12 45
                        1 30
                        2 15
                        15
                        3 0
                        3 45
                        4 30
                        5 15
                     
                     
                        12 48
                        1 33
                        2 18
                        3 3
                        16
                        3 48
                        4 33
                        5 18
                        6 3
                     
                     
                        1 36
                        2 21
                        3 6
                        3 51
                        17
                        4 36
                        5 21
                        6 6
                        6 51
                     
                     
                        2 24
                        3 9
                        3 54
                        4 39
                        18
                        5 24
                        6 9
                        6 54
                        7 39
                     
                     
                        3 12
                        3 57
                        4 42
                        5 27
                        19
                        6 12
                        6 57
                        7 42
                        8 27
                     
                     
                        4 0
                        4 45
                        5 30
                        6 15
                        20
                        7 0
                        7 45
                        8 30
                        9 15
                     
                     
                        4 48
                        5 33
                        6 18
                        7 3
                        21
                        7 48
                        8 33
                        9 18
                        10 3
                     
                     
                        5 36
                        6 21
                        7 6
                        7 51
                        22
                        8 36
                        9 21
                        10 6
                        10 51
                     
                     
                        6 14
                        7 9
                        7 54
                        8 39
                        23
                        9 24
                        10 9
                        10 54
                        11 39
                     
                     
                        7 12
                        7 57
                        8 42
                        9 27
                        24
                        10 12
                        10 57
                        11 42
                        12 27
                     
                     
                        8 0
                        8 45
                        9 30
                        10 15
                        25
                        11 0
                        11 45
                        12 30
                        1 15
                     
                     
                        8 48
                        9 33
                        10 18
                        11 3
                        26
                        11 48
                        12 33
                        1 18
                        2 3
                     
                     
                        9 36
                        10 21
                        11 6
                        11 51
                        27
                        12 36
                        1 21
                        2 6
                        2 51
                     
                     
                        10 24
                        11 9
                        11 54
                        12 39
                        28
                        1 24
                        2 9
                        2 54
                        3 39
                     
                     
                        11 12
                        11 57
                        12 42
                        1 27
                        29
                        2 12
                        2 57
                        3 42
                        4 27
                     
                     
                        12 0
                        12 45
                        1 30
                        2 15
                        30
                        3 0
                        3 45
                        4 30
                        5 51
                     
                     
                        North.
                        N b E
                        N N E
                        N E b N
                        
                           ☽
                        
                        N E
                        N E b E
                        E N E
                        E b N
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        For Lin Hūber weimot Dertm Plimot
                        Bristo.
                        Milfo Bridg
                              •
                            water
                        Portl. Peter porte
                        Age of the Moon
                        Orkn Pole. Or▪ wel.
                        Di
                              •
                           p. Lux. Lenoys
                        Boloig. Douer. Harwic Yar
                              〈…〉
                           ot
                        Calice.
                     
                     
                        East.
                        EBS.
                        ESE.
                        SEBE
                         
                        SE
                        SEBS
                        SSE
                        SBE
                     
                     
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        H. M
                        H. M
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                     
                     
                        6 48
                        7 33
                        8 18
                        9 3
                        1
                        9 48
                        10 33
                        
                           
                              •
                           1 8
                        12 3
                     
                     
                        7 36
                        8 21
                        9 6
                        9 51
                        2
                        10 36
                        11 21
                        12 9
                        12 51
                     
                     
                        8 24
                        9 9
                        9 54
                        10 39
                        3
                        11 24
                        12 9
                        12 54
                        1 39
                     
                     
                        9 12
                        9 57
                        10 42
                        11 27
                        4
                        12 12
                        12 57
                        1 42
                        2 27
                     
                     
                        10 0
                        10 45
                        11 30
                        12 15
                        5
                        1 0
                        1 42
                        2 30
                        3 15
                     
                     
                        10 48
                        11 33
                        12 18
                        1 3
                        6
                        1 48
                        2 33
                        3 18
                        4 3
                     
                     
                        11 36
                        12 21
                        1 6
                        1 51
                        7
                        2 36
                        3 21
                        4 6
                        4 51
                     
                     
                        12 24
                        1 9
                        1 54
                        2 39
                        8
                        3 24
                        4 9
                        4 54
                        5 39
                     
                     
                        1 12
                        1 57
                        2 42
                        3 27
                        9
                        4 12
                        4 57
                        5 42
                        6 27
                     
                     
                        2 0
                        2 45
                        3 30
                        4 15
                        10
                        5 0
                        5 45
                        6 30
                        7 15
                     
                     
                        2 48
                        3 33
                        4 18
                        5 3
                        11
                        5 48
                        6 33
                        7 18
                        8 3
                     
                     
                        3 36
                        4 21
                        5 6
                        5 51
                        12
                        6 36
                        7 21
                        8 6
                        8 51
                     
                     
                        4 24
                        5 9
                        5 54
                        6 39
                        13
                        7 24
                        8 9
                        8 54
                        9 39
                     
                     
                        5 12
                        5 57
                        6 42
                        7 17
                        14
                        8 12
                        8 57
                        9 42
                        10 27
                     
                     
                        6 0
                        6 45
                        7 30
                        8 15
                        15
                        9 0
                        9 45
                        10 30
                        11 15
                     
                     
                        6 48
                        7 33
                        8 18
                        9 3
                        16
                        9 48
                        10 33
                        11 18
                        12 3
                     
                     
                        7 36
                        8 21
                        9 6
                        9 51
                        17
                        10 36
                        11 21
                        12 6
                        12 51
                     
                     
                        8 24
                        9 9
                        9 54
                        10 39
                        18
                        11 24
                        12 9
                        12 54
                        1 39
                     
                     
                        9 12
                        9 57
                        10 42
                        11 27
                        19
                        12 12
                        12 57
                        1 42
                        2 27
                     
                     
                        10 0
                        10 45
                        11 30
                        12 15
                        20
                        1 0
                        1 45
                        2 30
                        3 15
                     
                     
                        10 48
                        11 33
                        12 18
                        1 3
                        21
                        1 48
                        2 33
                        3 18
                        4 3
                     
                     
                        11 36
                        12 21
                        1 6
                        1 51
                        22
                        2 36
                        3 21
                        4 6
                        4 51
                     
                     
                        12 24
                        1 9
                        1 54
                        2 39
                        23
                        3 24
                        4 9
                        4 54
                        5 39
                     
                     
                        1 12
                        1 57
                        2 42
                        3 27
                        24
                        4 12
                        4 57
                        5 42
                        6 27
                     
                     
                        2 0
                        2 45
                        3 30
                        4 15
                        25
                        5 0
                        5 45
                        6 30
                        7 15
                     
                     
                        2 48
                        3 33
                        4 18
                        5 3
                        26
                        5 48
                        6 33
                        7 18
                        8 3
                     
                     
                        3 36
                        4 21
                        5 6
                        5 51
                        27
                        6 36
                        7 21
                        8 6
                        8 51
                     
                     
                        4 24
                        5 9
                        5 54
                        6 39
                        28
                        7 24
                        8 9
                        8 54
                        9 39
                     
                     
                        5 12
                        5 57
                        6 42
                        7 27
                        29
                        8 12
                        8 57
                        9 42
                        10 27
                     
                     
                        6 0
                        6 45
                        7 30
                        8 15
                        30
                        9 0
                        9 45
                        10 30
                        11 15
                     
                     
                        VVest.
                        wbN
                        wNw
                        Nwbw
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        Nw
                        NwbN
                        NNw
                        Nbw
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               To know how longe the Moone shyneth.
               FOr her shyning in the encreace, multiplie the age of the Moone by 4. In the wane augment therest of the age, which she lacketh of 30. by 4: and diuide by 5. The Quotiēt sheweth the houres. The Remaine, if there be any, multiplied by 12. bringeth minute
                     •
                   to be added.
            
            
               Here foloweth for the goynge doune, and rysinge of the Moone: with her continuance on the earth.
               NOte diligently after the chāge, and before the ful of the Moone, what houre the Sunne goyth doune: and adde to that same so manye houres and minutes, as the Moone shyneth that nighte: for that houre and minute, she goeth doune. Then hath she continued as long tyme on the earth, as the Sunne wolde haue done, beynge in that signe where she is. Therfore, her rysinge is knowen by subduction of that Arke. Note after the full, the Moone ryseth so many houres before the S
                        〈◊〉
                     ne, as she shyneth that night.
            
            
               Now shal folow a Table, at al tymes plainly and briefly declaring, what daye the Sunne is entred the first degre of euery signe. It sheweth the breake of the daye: the houre, and minute of the Sunne rysing: the iust length of the day: the lengthe of the night also; the very minute of the Sunne setting: and the Twylight.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Monethe
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Day
                                 ••
                              .
                        
                        Break of the day.
                        Sunne rysinge.
                        Lengthe of the day
                        Lēgthe of the night
                        Sunne settinge.
                        Twylyghte.
                        
                           Dayes.
                        
                        
                           Monethes.
                        
                        of the daye.
                     
                     
                         
                         
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        b
                              ••
                           .
                        10
                        6 0
                        8 11
                        7 37
                        16 23
                        3 49
                        6 0
                        10
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        5 58
                        8 10
                        7 40
                        16 20
                        3 50
                        6 2
                        1
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           -
                        3
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        1
                        5 54
                        8 0
                        8 0
                        16 0
                        4 0
                        6 6
                        20
                         
                        2
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        5 44
                        7 49
                        8 2
                              •
                           
                        
                        15 39
                        4 11
                        6 16
                        10
                         
                        7
                     
                     
                         
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                        5 35
                        7 34
                        8 52
                        15 8
                        4 26
                        6 25
                        1
                        Nou
                              •
                           .
                        4
                     
                     
                        F
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           .
                        1
                        5 15
                        7 12
                        9 35
                        14 25
                        4 48
                        6 45
                        20
                         
                        3
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        5 0
                        6 55
                        10 9
                        13 51
                        5 5
                        7 0
                        10
                         
                        7
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        4 50
                        6 36
                        10 47
                        13 13
                        5 24
                        7 10
                        1
                        Octo.
                        4
                     
                     
                        Ma
                              •
                           .
                        1
                        4 20
                        6 18
                        11 23
                        12 37
                        5 42
                        7 40
                        20
                         
                        11
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        4 0
                        6 1
                        11 58
                        12 2
                        5 59
                        8 0
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                         
                        16
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        3 40
                        5 41
                        12 37
                        11 23
                        6 
                              •
                           9
                        8 2
                              •
                           
                        
                        1
                        Sept
                              ••
                           .
                        12
                     
                     
                        Apr.
                        1
                        3 8
                        5 18
                        13 24
                        10 36
                        6 42
                        8 52
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        2 40
                        5 1
                        
                           
                              •
                           3 57
                        10 3
                        6 59
                        9 20
                        10
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        2 10
                        4 43
                        14 33
                        9 27
                        7 
                              •
                           7
                        9 50
                        1
                        Aug.
                        1
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        May.
                        1
                        1 30
                        4 25
                        
                           
                              •
                           5 9
                        8 51
                        7 35
                        10 30
                        20
                         
                        12
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                        0 30
                        4 0
                        15 35
                        8 25
                        7 48
                        11 30
                        10
                         
                        12
                     
                     
                         
                        20
                        Cotinu all day.
                        4 0
                        15 59
                        8 1
                        8 0
                        Day co
                              •
                           
                           tinuall.
                        1
                        
                           
                              •
                           ul.
                        7
                     
                     
                        Iu▪
                        
                        1
                         
                        3 51
                        16 17
                        7 43
                        8 9
                         
                        20
                         
                        3
                     
                     
                         
                        10
                         
                        3 48
                        16 23
                        7 37
                        8 12
                         
                        10
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                        Minutes to be added, to the lēgth
                     
                     
                         
                         
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                        H. M.
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  The vse of this table.
               
               
                  Consider the moneth and daye, that ye require any of the to foresaide: and sake in this table that same, vnder the titles: procede in righte ordr
                        •
                     : so ye haue your purpose. If the verye daye be not founde, take the nearest of your table. Or by proportiō the trueth is geuē: which
                        •
                      all by Eusāple folowing shal plainly be declared.
               
            
            
               
               Ensample.
               The first daye of Ianuarie, I desire all the aforesayd: that is, the breake of the day: the very minute of the Sunne rysinge: the lengthe of the daye, and also of the nighte: the Sunne goynge doune: and the 
                     
                        •
                     wilighte. I fynde on the right hand of Ianuarie, these nūbres running doune, 1, 10, 20, which declare the first daye, the tenthe day, and twentith, of that moneth. Nowe to my purpose, I requyre the breake of the daye &c. The first of Ianutrie, in the Table, vnder that title, on the right hād of this figure 1. I see 5. houres, and 54, minutes, that is, 6. of the clocke wanting 6. minutes. The risinge of the Sunne in that order, is iust at 8. as this figure 8. there declareth, vnder that title, in the rowe. The lengthe of the daie, 8. houres: the lengthe of the nighte, 16. houres: the Sunne settinge is at 4: the twilight, at 6. and 6. minutes. Euen thus, for the tenth daye, and also for the twentith of that moneth, in the rowes according to their titles, in the head of my Table.
               
                  The entry of the ☉ is before omitted, to auoide in the Table, confusion, and so muu
                        •
                      the rather, bicause it sufficientlie appeareth, in the generall Kalendar folowinge.
               
            
            
               How to worke by proportion, when the day is not found.
               I Wold know all thaforsaid, the first day of Ianuarie. I take for ensample the brea
                        •
                     e of the daye. Remember the firste day of Ianuarie, I did fynde the breake, to be at 5. of the clocke, and 54, minutes: and the tenthe daye I maye fynde, the breake of the daie to be at 5, and 44. minutes, that is, 10 minutes lesse. I see now 10. dayes do geue me 10. minutes lesse. I saye therfore (by proportion) the fyfthe day must geue 5. minutes lesse then 5. houres 54. minutes: which
                     •
                   is 5. houres, 49. minutes, my request. Thus for all the other titles.
            
            
               To know the houre of the night, by the Moone: and that diuersly.
               THe houre of her rysing knowen, as is opened, and a marke Howe by the Moone, the nighte houre is founde. made for it, in any true fixed, or mouable Sūne Dial, the houres

and minutes from that marke all the night after, are to be added to her rysing. If more then 12. surmount, onely that aboue 12. sheweth the trew houre and minute. If at the rysing she maye not be sene, then by the Sunne rysing, in that very signe (with the helpe of this Almanack) you maye perceyue what houre she wolde note at her rysing. Therfore from that marke counte.
            
            
               Another way.
               VVhen the Moone is at the ful, looke what houre her shadowe sheweth in any Dial, that is the houre of the night. After she be past the full 28. houres, ye must adde one houre: but afore the ful, pull one from that ye fynde in the Dial. If twise 28, two houres &c. So haue ye the houre of the night.
            
            
               Howe the houre of the day, by right shadow, that is by any thyng directly standing vp, is knowen: and by squyre shadow also.
               FIrst it behoueth you to haue a staff, or any other thyng, diuided in twelue equal partes: and eche portion in 6. other: so are those last partes 1
                     •
                  . minutes a pece. When ye list to haue the hour, set vp directly youre diuided staff, on a playne leuell grounde, or bourde &c. Note the iust length of that shadowe, what partes and minutes it cōtaineth. With those, enter your moneth in the peculiar Kalēdar folowynge: beholdinge diligentlye vnder the name of that moneth, the small enclosed Tables: considering well, whiche of those smal Tables are nerest vnto youre day: and that iudge by the signe, or daye there noted. That table serueth youre purpose: where you must loke oute the partes and minutes of the shadowe afore founde, or nere vnto it: vnder or ouer the which the houre is set, before, or after noone. Note that two pryckes there signifie half a part more than is noted: one prick, half a parte lesse. Here it is also to be noted, that euery Table hath within, twoo rowes of figures: the vpper is for the staf: the other for the squyre shadow, And whatsoeuer is before sayd of the one, that same is ment here of the other, sauing of the compositiō. For the squyre must be diuided

from the inward angle, to the ende of one side, in 12. equall partes: 
                     
                   euen so from that angle, the other side into 24. lyke partes, as this figure sheweth. These to the wytty suffise.
            
            
               The composition of an instrument, for the houre of the night: which is also a perfect Dial for the day.
               THe takinge of an Altitude supposed, I coulde exactly in fewe (and that without an instrument) satisfie. And for want of that knowledge, make vpon a playn bourde, or rather fine plate, a circle: the byggar the better: part it into 360. porcions, thus.
               The circle made, diuide it in 6. not mouing the compasse: then euery of them in 6: and eche of those last in 10: so haue you 360. par tes. Then Character it, begynning at the North thus, 10. 20. 30. &c. (as in the figure) towarde the East, ending with 360. Nowe laye a ruler on the centre, euen with some diuisions, drawinge thorowe to the extremes of the circle, a lyne. Then crosse that with an other. These two must diuide your circle in 4. equal partes: which lynes shewe the verye Easte, VVest, Northe, and Southe, when by a Meridian or square Diall, with a nedel rectified, they are placed. Now to ende, set a small streyghte wyre, a foote or more long, plumme vprighte in the centre: and there fasten it. Thus this instrumente is finisshed, to be fixed about your house, equidistāt or leuil with the Horizon: hauinge a nedell, yf ye lift, in it, trewlye to plage it, when and where you will. That it maye be also a Dial, you muste pull streyghte lynes from the centre, to euery fyftēth part: decking them with Characters in the inwarde margent, conueniently as ye see the figure. Thus whan the Sunne shyneth, the shadow of the wyre, sheweth the trew houre &c. beynge trewly plaged, wel placed, and rered, as foloweth.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ A perfecte instrument for the day, and the night.
               
                  
                     The right reryng, and placing, of the Dial tofore mentioned.
                  
               
               LIft vp handesomely, youre instrumente or Diall, towarde the Northe, in some meete place, the side of a squyre lyenge on it, vntill the plummet and lyne, centred in the extreme vpper part of the other side of your squyre lyke long, cut all that squyre side, whiche lyeth on your instrumēt, the fifth part onely except. Then moue your instrumēt, hither ād thyther, this or that way, vntyll the shadow of the wyre fall vpon the houre of the day, kepyng diligētly your heyth before. Your Dial thus fixed declareth, all the yeare longe, the exacte houre and partes thereof. No Dial in truthe excelleth this. Haue in remembrance, that this instrumēt must lye leuel, nothing at al rered, for the houre of the night by sterre.
            
            
               
               To get the exact houre by two sterres of the fyrst light, with an instrument or circle, tofore diuided, first of me inuented, calculated and practised.
               THe instrument, equidistantly set and plaged, as is declared in the cōposition, ye ought to laie the edge of a ruler vnto the The waie to find the houre of the night. wyre, the other nether ende touching the instrument, mouyng here and there, styll touching the wyre, vntyll either Sterre dothe offer it self with that edge, and that by the iudgemēt of the eye. Then put doun discretely your ruler (euer touching the wyre) the hynder ende not moued, obseruing how many partes are cut from the North, to the edge of the ruler. Entre with them the pe culiar Kalendar folowynge: sekynge oute youre moneth, placed in the middes of euery Table: then the daye of that moneth must be there founde.
               Note that, euerye table hath on the sides, the days thus ordered 1. 5. 10. 15. 20. 25. 30. Knowe, that order or rowe of figures, which is ryght agaynst, or nerest your day, serueth the turn. The nūbre or partes before cut by the Ruler, and now found in that row of your table, sheweth the precise hour. If it be to littel, that houre ouer the head or vnder is not yet come: if contrary, it is past.
            
            
               How these two bright sterres, beynge of the fyrst light are found: the one called Aldebaran: the other Alramech.
               THe best waye is thus: The moneth and dae knowen, with By what meanes these sterres are knowen. the 
                     ••
                  ew houre of the nighte, entre youre Table, consideringe that moneth and daye: obserue what partes belonge there to that Sterre and houre. Then resort to your instrument, layeng the edge of your ruler, as many partes from the Northe, Eastward, circūspectlye lifting vp that edge, close by the wyre: so the fayr Sterre shyneth euen with that edge.
            
            
               Or thus grossely.
               
                  ALdebaran is euer a meate rodde, and more to the eye vnder the An other way to finde them 7. Sterres, and some what North of them, in the rysing. Alramech is contrarie to him plaged, accompanied with a litle dimme Sterre, an ell from hym, by the iudgement of the sighte.
            
            
               
               ❀ Nowe foloweth a brefe, pleasant, necessarie, general Kalendar: diuided in two partes. Vvherof the first conteineth six monethes, from Ianuarie to Iune: the seconde table the other six monethes, frome Iulie to December. In this Kalendar are sette forth the Festiual days: the entringe of the Sunne into the Signes celestial: the euel Dayes within euery moneth &c.
               NOte here, that the euell dayes in eche moneth are all marked with a Colon, that is a doble or twopricked pointe: some, that be more meanly euel, are marked with one ful point, set afore them.
               NOte also: that some Termes ensuing moueable Feastes, are mouea ble, and so coulde haue no certaine place in the Kalendar, for their beginning and ending. Know therefore, that Faster Terme alwayes begynneth the
                     •
                  s. daye after Easter, rekening Faster day for one; and endeth the Mondaye next after the Ascension daye.
               
               
                  Trinitie Terme beginneth the Friday next after Corpus Christi daye: and endeth the VVednesdaye fourtennight after.
               
                  Michaelmasse Terme begynneth the 9. or 10. daye of October: and endeth the 28. or 29. of Nouembre.
               
               
                  Hilarie Terme beginneth the 23. or 24. daye of Ianuarie: and endeth the 12. or 13. daye of Februarie.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ❧ The first part of the generall Kalendar: from Ianuarie to Iune.
                     
                     
                        Ianuarie.
                        Februarie
                        March.
                        Dayes
                        April.
                        May.
                        Iune.
                     
                     
                        :A Circ
                              ••
                           .
                        d
                        d
                        1
                        g
                        b Ph. lac.
                        e
                     
                     
                        :b
                        e Purifi.
                        e
                        2
                        A
                        c
                        f
                     
                     
                        c
                        f
                        f
                        3
                        b
                        .d
                        g
                     
                     
                        :d
                        g
                        g
                        4
                        c
                        e
                        :A▪
                        
                     
                     
                        :e
                        A
                        A
                        5
                        d
                        f
                        b
                     
                     
                        f Epiph.
                        b
                        b
                        6
                        e
                        .g
                        c
                     
                     
                        g
                        c
                        c
                        7
                        .f
                        :d
                        :d
                     
                     
                        A
                        :d
                        d
                        8
                        .g
                        b
                        e
                     
                     
                        b
                        e ☉ in ♓
                        e
                        9
                        A
                        c
                        f
                     
                     
                        :c ☉ in ♒
                        :f
                        f
                        10
                        .b
                        d
                        .g
                     
                     
                        d
                        g
                        g ☉ in ♈
                        11
                        c ☉ in ♉
                        e
                        A Barna.
                     
                     
                        e
                        A
                        A
                        12
                        d
                        f ☉ in ♊
                        b ☉ in ♋
                     
                     
                        f Hilar.
                        b
                        b
                        13
                        e
                        g
                        c
                     
                     
                        g
                        c Valent.
                        c
                        14
                        f
                        A
                        d
                     
                     
                        :A
                        d
                        :d
                        15
                        g
                        :b
                        .e
                     
                     
                        b
                        e
                        :e
                        16
                        :d
                        c
                        f
                     
                     
                        :c
                        :f
                        f
                        17
                        b
                        d
                        g
                     
                     
                        d
                        g
                        g
                        18
                        c
                        e
                        A
                     
                     
                        e
                        A
                        :A
                        19
                        d
                        f
                        b
                     
                     
                        f
                        b
                        b
                        20
                        .e
                        :g
                        c
                     
                     
                        g
                        c
                        c
                        21
                        :f
                        A
                        d
                     
                     
                        A
                        d
                        d
                        22
                        g
                        b
                        .e
                     
                     
                        b
                        e
                        e
                        23
                        A Georg.
                        c
                        f
                     
                     
                        c
                        f Mat.
                        f
                        24
                        b
                        d
                        g Ioābap.
                     
                     
                        d Cō. Pau.
                        g
                        g Annun.
                        25
                        c Marc.
                        e
                        A
                     
                     
                        e
                        .A
                        A
                        26
                        d
                        f
                        b
                     
                     
                        f
                        .b
                        b
                        27
                        e
                        g
                        c
                     
                     
                        g
                        .c
                        .c
                        28
                        f
                        A
                        d
                     
                     
                        :A
                         
                        d
                        29
                        g
                        b
                        e P
                              •
                           . Pa.
                     
                     
                        b
                         
                        e
                        30
                        A
                        c
                        f
                     
                     
                        c
                         
                        f
                        31
                         
                        d
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        The seconde parte of the general Kalendar: from Iulie to December.
                     
                     
                        Iulie.
                        August.
                        Septem.
                        Days
                        October.
                        Nouem.
                        Decem.
                     
                     
                        g
                        .c Pet. vin.
                        f
                        1
                        A
                        d Om. sā.
                        f
                     
                     
                        A
                        d
                        g
                        2
                        b
                        e Om. ani.
                        g
                     
                     
                        b
                        e
                        .A
                        3
                        .c
                        f
                        A
                     
                     
                        c
                        f
                        .b
                        4
                        d
                        g
                        b
                     
                     
                        d
                        g
                        c
                        5
                        e
                        .A
                        c
                     
                     
                        e Dog beg.
                        A
                        :d
                        6
                        :f
                        .b
                        :d Nicol.
                     
                     
                        f
                        b
                        :e
                        7
                        g
                        c
                        :e
                     
                     
                        g
                        c
                        f Nat. ina.
                        8
                        A
                        d
                        f Coce▪ ina.
                     
                     
                        A
                        d
                        g
                        9
                        b
                        e
                        :g
                     
                     
                        b
                        e
                        A
                        10
                        c
                        f
                        A
                     
                     
                        c
                        f
                        b
                        11
                        d
                        g
                        b
                     
                     
                        d
                        g
                        c
                        12
                        e
                        A
                        c ☉ in ♑
                     
                     
                        e
                        A
                        d
                        13
                        f
                        b ☉ in ♐
                        d
                     
                     
                        f ☉ in ♌
                        b ☉ in ♍
                        e ☉ in ♎
                        14
                        g ☉ in ♏
                        c
                        e
                     
                     
                        :g
                        c
                        f
                        15
                        A
                        :d
                        .f
                     
                     
                        A
                        d
                        g
                        16
                        .b
                        e
                        g
                     
                     
                        b
                        e Dog end
                        A
                        17
                        c
                        f
                        .A
                     
                     
                        c
                        f
                        b
                        18
                        d Luc.
                        g
                        b
                     
                     
                        d
                        :g
                        c
                        19
                        e
                        :A
                        c
                     
                     
                        :e
                        :A
                        d
                        20
                        f
                        b
                        d
                     
                     
                        f
                        b
                        .e Mathe.
                        21
                        g
                        c
                        e Tho. ap.
                     
                     
                        g Ma. mag
                        c
                        .f
                        22
                        A
                        d
                        .f
                     
                     
                        A
                        d
                        g
                        23
                        b
                        e
                        g
                     
                     
                        b
                        e Barthe.
                        A
                        24
                        .c
                        f
                        A
                     
                     
                        c Iac. apo.
                        f
                        b
                        25
                        d
                        g
                        b Nat. do.
                     
                     
                        d
                        g
                        c
                        26
                        e
                        A
                        c Step
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        e
                        A
                        d
                        27
                        f
                        b
                        d 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                     
                     
                        f
                        b
                        e
                        28
                        g Si. Iud.
                        .c
                        e Inno
                              •
                           en.
                     
                     
                        g
                        .c decol. Io.
                        f Micba.
                        29
                        A
                        .d
                        f P.
                     
                     
                        A
                        .d
                        g
                        30
                        b
                        e Andr.
                        g
                     
                     
                        b
                        e
                         
                        31
                        c
                         
                        A
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  NOw ensueth the nedefull, necessary, peculiar Kalendar tofore mentioned: with Instrumentes belonging thereto. The composition, and appliance of the sayd Tables, with the pleasant vse of them, ar before sufficiently, opened: therefore farther declaration here, might seme superfluous.
               
               
                  ❧
               
            
            
               
               Necessary instrumentes, to finde exactly the houre of the day and night, diuerse wayes, with help of this peculiar Kalendar.
               
                  
                     Diall
                  
                  
                     Squire.
                  
                  
                     Staff.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     The peculiar Kalendar.
                     
                         
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        108
                        123
                        142
                        165
                        190
                        214
                        60
                        71
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        112
                        128
                        148
                        172
                        198
                        220
                        63
                        75
                     
                     
                        10
                        117
                        135
                        157
                        182
                        207
                        228
                        67
                        78
                     
                     
                        15
                        123
                        142
                        165
                        192
                        214
                        234
                        71
                        81
                     
                     
                        20
                        129
                        150
                        175
                        200
                        222
                        240
                        75
                        86
                     
                     
                        25
                        136
                        158
                        183
                        208
                        229
                        244
                        79
                        90
                     
                     
                        30
                        142
                        166
                        192
                        215
                        234
                        249
                        82
                        94
                     
                     
                         
                        Ianuary hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        82
                        94
                        106
                        121
                        142
                        168
                        198
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        86
                        97
                        111
                        127
                        149
                        177
                        206
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        89
                        1
                              •
                           1
                        116
                        134
                        157
                        187
                        214
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        93
                        105
                        122
                        141
                        168
                        198
                        223
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        9
                              •
                           
                        
                        111
                        128
                        150
                        179
                        207
                        231
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        102
                        117
                        135
                        159
                        189
                        216
                        237
                         
                        23
                     
                     
                        106
                        122
                        143
                        169
                        299
                        223
                        243
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        169
                        195
                        218
                        62
                        73
                        83
                        95
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        176
                        201
                        223
                        64
                        75
                        86
                        99
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        185
                        109
                        230
                        69
                        79
                        90
                        103
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        192
                        215
                        235
                        71
                        82
                        94
                        107
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        200
                        222
                        240
                        75
                        86
                        98
                        112
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        207
                        228
                        244
                        78
                        89
                        102
                        117
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        February hath. xxviii. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        10
                              •
                           
                        
                        124
                        146
                        174
                        203
                        226
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        112
                        129
                        152
                        180
                        209
                        231
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        117
                        135
                        161
                        190
                        216
                        238
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        122
                        143
                        168
                        198
                        224
                        243
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        128
                        1
                              •
                           0
                        180
                        207
                        231
                        248
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        134
                        158
                        188
                        214
                        236
                        252
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        59
                        70
                        81
                        93
                        105
                        120
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        62
                        72
                        83
                        95
                        108
                        124
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        65
                        76
                        87
                        99
                        113
                        130
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        69
                        80
                        90
                        103
                        118
                        136
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        72
                        82
                        94
                        107
                        123
                        144
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        75
                        86
                        98
                        112
                        128
                        150
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        79
                        90
                        101
                        117
                        134
                        159
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        Marche hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        139
                        166
                        196
                        220
                        240
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        145
                        173
                        203
                        225
                        244
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        153
                        182
                        210
                        232
                        249
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        162
                        191
                        217
                        238
                        254
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        171
                        200
                        225
                        243
                        258
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        178
                        208
                        231
                        248
                        262
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        188
                        215
                        237
                        253
                        266
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        92
                        104
                        118
                        136
                        162
                         
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        94
                        106
                        122
                        143
                        170
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        98
                        111
                        127
                        150
                        178
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        101
                        116
                        134
                        158
                        188
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        105
                        122
                        141
                        168
                        198
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        111
                        126
                        149
                        177
                        206
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        116
                        133
                        157
                        186
                        214
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        Aprile hath. xxx. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        191
                        218
                        238
                        254
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        199
                        224
                        243
                        257
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        208
                        230
                        247
                        261
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        214
                        236
                        252
                        265
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        223
                        242
                        256
                        269
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        229
                        247
                        261
                        273
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        236
                        251
                        265
                        276
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        117
                        134
                        159
                        189
                        216
                         
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        120
                        140
                        165
                        195
                        220
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        126
                        148
                        176
                        205
                        228
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        133
                        156
                        186
                        213
                        235
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        140
                        166
                        195
                        221
                        240
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        148
                        175
                        205
                        229
                        246
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        157
                        186
                        214
                        235
                        251
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        May hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto daye.
                        237
                        252
                        266
                        278
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        240
                        255
                        268
                        279
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        246
                        260
                        273
                        284
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        251
                        264
                        276
                        287
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        256
                        268
                        280
                        291
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        260
                        272
                        284
                        294
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        264
                        276
                        287
                        298
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        161
                        191
                        217
                        238
                        253
                         
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        169
                        200
                        225
                        243
                        258
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        180
                        209
                        231
                        248
                        262
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        190
                        216
                        237
                        253
                        266
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        200
                        225
                        243
                        258
                        270
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        209
                        232
                        249
                        262
                        274
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        217
                        238
                        253
                        267
                        278
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        Iune hath. xxx. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto daye.
                        267
                        278
                        289
                        300
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        270
                        280
                        292
                        303
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        274
                        285
                        296
                        307
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        278
                        288
                        299
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        281
                        292
                        303
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        285
                        296
                        308
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        289
                        300
                        82
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        218
                        219
                        254
                        267
                        278
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        226
                        243
                        258
                        270
                        281
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        231
                        249
                        262
                        274
                        285
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        238
                        253
                        267
                        278
                        289
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        243
                        258
                        270
                        282
                        292
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        249
                        262
                        274
                        285
                        296
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        253
                        266
                        277
                        288
                        299
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        Iuly hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        290
                        300
                        82
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        292
                        308
                        86
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        296
                        78
                        89
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        300
                        82
                        93
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        303
                        85
                        97
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        307
                        89
                        100
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        81
                        93
                        105
                         
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        255
                        267
                        279
                        290
                        301
                         
                         
                        Fr
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           ening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        259
                        271
                        281
                        292
                        304
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        262
                        274
                        285
                        297
                        78
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        266
                        277
                        288
                        299
                        81
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        269
                        280
                        291
                        303
                        85
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        273
                        284
                        295
                        306
                        8
                              •
                           
                        
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        278
                        287
                        298
                        80
                        92
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        August hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight 
                              •
                           nto day.
                        83
                        94
                        106
                        121
                        138
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        86
                        97
                        111
                        125
                        144
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        89
                        101
                        115
                        131
                        151
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        93
                        105
                        119
                        136
                        158
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        96
                        109
                        124
                        142
                        165
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        99
                        113
                        129
                        148
                        173
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        104
                        11
                              •
                           
                        
                        135
                        156
                        181
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        266
                        278
                        289
                        299
                        82
                        93
                         
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        269
                        280
                        291
                        303
                        84
                        96
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        273
                        284
                        294
                        306
                        88
                        100
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        276
                        286
                        298
                        80
                        92
                        104
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        279
                        290
                        302
                        83
                        94
                        107
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        283
                        294
                        305
                        87
                        99
                        114
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        287
                        297
                        79
                        90
                        102
                        117
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        September hath. xxx. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        105
                        119
                        136
                        159
                        184
                         
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        109
                        123
                        142
                        165
                        191
                         
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        113
                        129
                        149
                        173
                        199
                         
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        117
                        135
                        155
                        180
                        205
                         
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        122
                        140
                        163
                        189
                        212
                         
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        128
                        147
                        171
                        197
                        219
                         
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        133
                        153
                        179
                        204
                        225
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        276
                        287
                        298
                        80
                        91
                        103
                        117
                         
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        279
                        290
                        301
                        82
                        94
                        106
                        121
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        283
                        293
                        304
                        86
                        98
                        111
                        126
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        285
                        67
                        78
                        89
                        102
                        115
                        132
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        289
                        70
                        81
                        93
                        106
                        120
                        138
                         
                     
                     
                        25
                        292
                        74
                        85
                        97
                        111
                        125
                        145
                         
                     
                     
                        30
                        296
                        78
                        88
                        101
                        115
                        131
                        151
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        October hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto daye.
                        133
                        155
                        180
                        205
                        227
                        243
                         
                         
                        1
                     
                     
                        138
                        161
                        186
                        211
                        231
                        247
                         
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        146
                        169
                        195
                        218
                        236
                        251
                         
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        152
                        177
                        202
                        224
                        242
                        256
                         
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        159
                        185
                        210
                        230
                        246
                        260
                         
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        168
                        193
                        216
                        235
                        250
                        263
                         
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        176
                        201
                        223
                        241
                        255
                        267
                         
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        289
                        297
                        80
                        90
                        103
                        117
                        134
                        155
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        290
                        301
                        82
                        94
                        106
                        121
                        138
                        162
                     
                     
                        10
                        293
                        305
                        87
                        98
                        111
                        126
                        146
                        169
                     
                     
                        15
                        297
                        79
                        90
                        102
                        117
                        133
                        154
                        180
                     
                     
                        20
                        301
                        83
                        94
                        107
                        122
                        137
                        163
                        188
                     
                     
                        25
                        305
                        87
                        99
                        113
                        128
                        147
                        173
                        198
                     
                     
                        30
                        80
                        91
                        104
                        118
                        134
                        156
                        180
                        207
                     
                     
                         
                        Nouember hath. xxx. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        180
                        205
                        226
                        243
                        257
                        269
                        280
                        292
                        1
                     
                     
                        186
                        211
                        231
                        247
                        260
                        272
                        284
                        295
                        5
                     
                     
                        196
                        218
                        237
                        252
                        264
                        276
                        287
                        000
                        10
                     
                     
                        204
                        225
                        243
                        256
                        268
                        280
                        291
                        000
                        15
                     
                     
                        212
                        232
                        248
                        261
                        273
                        284
                        295
                        000
                        20
                     
                     
                        220
                        138
                        253
                        266
                        277
                        288
                        127
                        000
                        25
                     
                     
                        228
                        244
                        258
                        269
                        280
                        292
                        132
                        000
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        12
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        81
                        92
                        105
                        119
                        135
                        156
                        183
                        208
                        From euening to midnight.
                     
                     
                        5
                        84
                        96
                        109
                        123
                        143
                        165
                        192
                        215
                     
                     
                        10
                        88
                        100
                        114
                        130
                        150
                        175
                        201
                        223
                     
                     
                        15
                        93
                        105
                        120
                        135
                        159
                        185
                        210
                        230
                     
                     
                        20
                        98
                        111
                        126
                        145
                        168
                        195
                        218
                        236
                     
                     
                        25
                        102
                        116
                        132
                        153
                        177
                        203
                        225
                        242
                     
                     
                        30
                        106
                        121
                        138
                        162
                        186
                        211
                        231
                        247
                     
                     
                         
                        December hath. xxxi. dayes.
                         
                     
                     
                        From midnight vnto day.
                        229
                        245
                        258
                        271
                        282
                        292
                        135
                        ⚹
                        1
                     
                     
                        234
                        249
                        263
                        274
                        286
                        123
                        143
                         
                        5
                     
                     
                        240
                        255
                        267
                        278
                        288
                        129
                        150
                         
                        10
                     
                     
                        246
                        260
                        271
                        283
                        293
                        137
                        162
                         
                        15
                     
                     
                        251
                        264
                        275
                        286
                        124
                        146
                        174
                         
                        20
                     
                     
                        256
                        268
                        279
                        291
                        131
                        153
                        183
                         
                        25
                     
                     
                        261
                        272
                        284
                        295
                        138
                        165
                        195
                         
                        30
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
               
            
         
      
   