
      
         
            
            
            THE
Altar of Damascus
OR
THE PATERN
OF THE ENGLISH HIERARCHIE,
AND CHVRCH-Policie
obtruded upon the Church
of SCOTLAND.
            
               2. KING. 16. 10. 11.
               And King Ahaz went to Damascus to
meet Tiglath Pileser King of Assyria,
and saw an Altar that was at Damascus:
and King Ahaz sent to Vrijah
the Priest the fashion of the altar, and
the patern of it, according to all the
workmanship thereof.
               And Vrijah the Priest built an altar according
to all that King Ahaz had sent
from Damascus, so Vrijah the Priest
made it, against King Ahaz came from
Damascus.
            
            Anno 1621.
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               I Have drawen this paterne of the English
Altar obtruded upon us, out of
their owne Tables of the Hierarchy
and Church policie, Muckets book, their
Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiasticall,
the statutes of the Realme, the admonitions,
petitions, assertions, treatises, answers and
replies of those who sue for reformation,
the confessions of their opposites in their
own defences. I have followed the order of
the Tables translated out of Latine, and
printed with a letter different from the
rest. I intended not a full refutation: for
I thought, to discover it onely, was to refute
it sufficiently, to any man of sound
judgement; saving that sometime there i
                  •
               
a light touch, or poynting at any corruption
where I suspected the simpler sort migh
                  •
               
be miscaried.
         
      
      
         
            
            CHAP. 1. Of the Kings Supremacie.
            IN the Ecclesiasticall policie of England
generally are to be cōsidered,The Table. 1 Persons,
2 possessions, 3 constitutions concerning
both: Persons to bee considered,
are either such as haue some kinde of administration,
or such as have none at all. The
persōs that have some kind of administratiō,
have it, either as supreme, or not so ample.
The supreme, or more absolute administration,
which is called the Kings supremacie,
is to be considered, 1 generally, 2 particularly.
Generally, by which authority the
Prince as supreme governor under God, can
set down in all Ecclesiasticall causes within
his dominions, whatsoever is not repugnant
to the word of God.
            By causes Ecclesiastical are meant, not onely
matrimoniall and testamentary causes, and others
abusively called Ecclesiasticall, but also
these, which are in a proper sence Ecclesiastical,
subject to Ecclesiastical cognition and jurisdiction.
By the title of Supreme Governour, is understood
the same power which before was expressed
by the title of Head of t
                     •
                  e Church of
England in the dayes of K. Henrie the 8. and

               Edward the 6. For howsoever for removing of
offence taken at the metaphorical title of Head,
it was changed in more proper termes of supreme
governour under the reigne of Queene Elizabeth,
yet the sense remaineth still. In the
first yeare of her reigne, it was enacted and ordained,
That such jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities
and preeminences spirituall or Ecclesiasticall, as
by any spirituall or Ecclesiasticall power, or authority,
hath heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised,
or used, for the visitation of the Ecclesiasticall state
and persons, and for reformation, order, and correction
of the same, and of all manner of errors, heresies,
schismes, abuses, offences, contempts and enormities,
shall for ever be united and annexed to the Imperiall
crowne of this Realme. And that the Queens highnes,
her heirs, and successors, shall have full power, &
authority, by vertue of this act, by letters patents under
the great seale of England, to assigne, name, and
authorize, when and as often, as her highnes, her
heirs, and successors, shall think meet and conve
                     •
                  ient,
and for such and so long time, as shall please her
highnesse her heirs, and successors, such persons being
naturall born subjects, as her Majestie, her heirs,
and successors, shall think meet to exercise, use, occupie,
and execute under her highnes, her heirs, and s
                     •
                  ccessors,
all manner of Iurisdictions, priviledges, and
preeminances, in any wise touching, or concerning any
spirituall or Ecclesiacticall iurisdiction, within the
Rea
                     ••
                  es of England or Ireland, or any other her
highnes 
                     ••
                  minions, or countries, and to visit, reforme,
redresse, order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies,
schismes, abuses, offences, contempts and enormities
whatsoever, which by any manner of spirituall
or Ecclesiastical power, authority, or jurisdiction, can,
or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, corrected, restrained,

or amended. And for the better observation
of this act, it was further enacted, that every
Ecclesiasticall person, officer, and minister,
all and every temporall judge, Iustice, Maior,
and other lay or temporal officer, and minister,
and every other person having her highnes fee,
or wages, within the Realm of England, or any
of her highnes dominions, shall make, take, &
receive a corporall oath upon the Evangelist,
before such person, or persons, as shall please
her highnes, her heirs, or successors, under the
great seale of England, to assigne and name, to
accept and take the same, according to the renor
and effect hereafter following, I A. B. doe
utterly testifie and declare in my conscience, that the
Queens highnes is the onely supreme governour of
this Realme, and of all other her highnes dominions
and countries, as well in all spirituall or Ecclesiastical
things, or causes, as temporall, and that no forreigne
Prince, person, prelate, state, or Potentate, hath, or
ought to have any iurisdiction, power, superiority;
preeminence, or authoritie Ecclesiasticall or spirituall
within this Realme: and therefore I doe utterly renounce
& forsake all forraigne iurisdictions, powers,
superiorities, and authorities, and doe promise, that
from henceforth I shall beare faith, and true allegeance
to the Queenes highnes, her heirs, and lawfull
successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend
all iurisdictions, privileges, preeminences, and authorities,
granted or belonging to the Queenes highnes,
her heirs, and successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperiall crown of the Realme. So helpe me God,
and by the contents of this book. The title then
of Supreme Governour in the oath is explained
by the preceeding words of the statute, to
which, and for observation of the which, the

oath is subjoyned, viz. that the Prince hath all
manner of spirituall or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
and all manner of privileges and preeminences
any way touching or belonging to the
same, which was before, or may be lawfully exercised
for visitation of the Ecclesiasticall state,
reformation, order, and correction of the same,
and of all manner of errors, heresies, schismes,
abuses, offences, contempts and enormities, and
that he may commit the exercise of the same
to any of his naturall born subjects, whom it
shall please his highness to constitute commissioners
in causes Ecclesiastical, to judge, discern,
and correct in matters of Idolatry, simonie, errour
and heresie, and all other causes Ecclesiasticall
whatsoever. This oath of supremacie is
different from the oath of fidelity or allegeance
devised of late. That requireth no further thē to
acknowledge the king to be lawful & righteous
king, and to sweare obedience and fidelitie to
him, notwithstanding he be excommunicated
by the Pope, & to acknowledge, that the Pope,
notwithstanding of his excommunications,
cannot depose kings, and dispose of kingdomes
at his pleasure. The Papist is straitned with this
oath of allegeance, but not with the oath of supremacie
for feare of troubling his tender conscience.
The statute of the supremacie was explained
the same year of Qu. Elizabeths raigne,
in an admonition added to the injunctions, as
followeth, That her Maiestie neither doth, nor ever
will, challenge any other authority then was challenged,
and lately vsed by the noble kings of famous memory,
king Henry the 8. and king Edward▪ the 6.
which is, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial
crown of this Realme, that is, under God to have the

soveraignty, and rule over all manner of persons born
within these her realmes, dominions, and countries, of
what estate soever they be, either Ecclesiasticall or
temporall, so as no other forraigne power shall, or
ought to have superiority over them. In this admonition
the subjects are made to understand, that
her Maiestie did not claime power to minister
divine offices in the Church, as to preach the
word, and minister the sacraments. They have
been too simple, who have construed the statute
in such a sense. For no wise man will thinke,
that kings and Queens will take upon them either
the paines, or worldly discredit to preach
the word, minister the sacraments, intimate to
the congregation the sentence of excommunication.
The statute doth make no mention of
divine offices in the Church, but of jurisdiction
Ecclesiasticall, which is, and was in time of papistrie,
exercised at visitations, and in Ecclesiasticall
courts. This explanation therefore of the
admonition annexed to the Injunctions, and
ratified by Parliament in the fift yeare of Qu.
Elizabeth, derogateth nothing from the former
statute, but onely summeth it in more generall
tearmes. To challenge no more then was challenged,
and lately used by the noble kings of famous
memory, K. Henry 8. and Edward 6. is
to challenge to be head of the Church, to have
all jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall flowing from the
possessour of the Crowne, as from the head and
fountaine. Mr. Fox in his Acts & Monuments
relateth, that in the 34. of K. Henry the 8. it was
enacted, That the king, his heirs, and successors,
kings of that Realme, shall bee taken, accepted, and
reputed the onely supreme head on earth of the
Church of England, and shall have and enjoy annexed

and united to the Imperiall crowne, as well the title
and stile thereof, as all honours, dignities, preeminences,
iurisdictions, priviledges, authorities, immunities,
profits and commodities, to the sayd dignitie of
supreme head of the same Church belonging and
appertaining: and that they shall have full power &
authority from time to time, to visit, represse, redresse,
reforme and amend all such errors, abuses, offences,
contempts, and enormities whatsoever they be, which
by any manner of spirituall authority, or iurisdiction
might, or may lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered,
redressed, corrected or amended. In a rescript of
Edward the sixth,Sander, de Schism. Anglic. lib. 
                     •
                  . p. 227. it is thus written to Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterburie. Seeing all manner of
authoritie and iurisdiction, as well Ecclesiasticall as
secular, doth slow from our regall power, as from a
supreme head, &c. we give unto you power by these
presents, which are to endure at our good ple
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  re, to
give and promove to the sacred orders even of the Eldership
(or as they use to speake, Priesthood) any
within your Diocie.
               Rastall, Bishops, 9. Anno 1. Edw. 6. cap. 12.
an act was made, That the Bishop, should bee ma
                     •
                  e
by the Kings letters patents, and not 
                     •
                  y election of
Deane and Chapter, and that they should make their
proces, and writings in the Kings name, and not under
their own names, and that their seales should be
the Kings armes. This act repealed in the 1. of
Queen Mary, was revived in the 1. of K. James.
It was objected to Bishop Farrar in the dayes of
the same yong king Edward,
               F
                     •
                  x. p. 1405 1406. that hee deserved
deprivation, because hee constituted his Chancellor
by his letters of commission, omitting
the kings majesties stile and authority: and that
he had made collations and institutions in his
owne name and authority, without expressing
the kings supremacie. His answer was, that

howbeit there was some default of formalitie in
the commission, yet his highnes stile and authority,
was sufficiently expressed in the sayd
commission: Neither did the sayd Chancellor
offer to visit, but in the Kings name and authority
to the sayd Bishop committed. And as to
the other poynt, that hee made his collations
and institutions in his owne name, not by his
own authority, nor by any others, save the kings
authority, expressing in them the kings supremacie
with the Bishops own name, and seale of
office. Whitgift sometime Bishop of Canterburie,
sayth,Pag. 680. 
               We acknowledge all jurisdiction that any
court in England hath, or doth exercise, be it civill or
Ecclesiasticall, to be executed in her Majesties name
and right, and to come from her as supreme Governour.
And againe in another place,Pag. 381. 
               The Prince
having the supreme government of the Realme in all
causes, and over all persons, as she doth expresse the
one by the Lord Chancellor, so doth she the other by
the Archbishops. Dr. Bancroft, who was afterward
made Bishop of London, and at last Bishop of
Canterbury, in a Sermon made at Pauls Crosse,
anno 1589. maketh her maiesty a petie Pope,
               Pag. 70. and
assigneth unto her, not some of the Popes power,
but all honours, dignities, preeminences, iurisdictions,
privileges authorities, profits and commodities, which
by usurpation did at any time appertaine unto the
Pope, belike relating the words of the act made
in the 34. Henry 8. Our Bancroft, Mr. Spottiswood,
pretended Archbishop of Saintandros, at
the pretended deposition of N. in the high
commission, sayd likewise, I say unto you N. the
king is now Pope, and so shall be. To be supreme
governour in all causes Ecclesiasticall then, is
not onely to be an avenger with the sword, as

               Bilson would make the Iesuits beleeve in his
book of obedience, but also to be judge in matters
of errour and heresie, superstition and idolatry,
and all other causes Ecclesiasticall; and, as
a supreme governour, to communicate this power
to auy naturall borne subject. In the Parliament
holden at Perth anno 1606. where a
number of the Nobility consented to the restitution
of the Bishops to their 3 estate, and old
privileges, that they might get the other prelacies
erected in temporall Lordships, it was declared
in the second act, That the whole estates of
their bounden dutie, with most hartie and faithfull
affection, humbly and truely acknowledge, his Maiestie
to be soveraigne Monarch, absolute Prince,
iudge and governour over all persons, estates, and
causes, both spiritnall and temporall within his sayd
Realme. He is then not onely governour, but
judge also over all causes. But the nature of the
supremacie may be yet better conceived, when
we have taken a view of the particular rights of
the supremacie, and of the power granted to
the high commission.
            The Kings supremacie considered particularly,
consisteth, either of things which are
granted onely by statute, or restored by statute,
as due of right to the Royall Crowne.
Granted first by statute, as to receive the
Annates, or first yeares fruits of every Ecclesiasticall
benesice after the vacancie of it,
and the tenth of all Ecclesiasticall benefices
yearly.
            These first fruits, and tenths, were the Popes
due, in time of Poperie: when the Pope was
cast forth, they were given to the King, and it

was enacted, That the Kings Maiesty, his heirs

                     •
                  nd successors,
               Rastall, 
                     •
                  irst fruits. 6. 
               for the augmentation and maintenance
of the royall estate of his Imperiall Crowne &
dignity of supreme head of the Church of England,
should yearly have, take, enioy, and receive, united &
knit unto his imperiall crown for ever, a yearly rent,
or pension, amounting to the value of the tenth part
of all the revenewes, rents, farmes, tythes, offerings,
emoluments, and of all other profits, as well called
spirituall, as temporall, then appertaining, or belonging
or that afterward from thenceforth should belong
to any Archbishopricke, Bishopricke, Abbacie, Monasterie,
Priorie, Archdeaconrie, Deanrie, Hospitall,
Colledge, house Collegiate, Prebend, Cathedral church,
Collegiate Church, couentuall church, Parsonage,
Vicarage, Chanterie, free chappell, or other benefice
or promotion spirituall, &c. It was further enacted,
That the sayd first fruits and tenths, and all
the reuenewes and profits thereof should be in the order,
survey, and governance of the Court of first
fruits, and tenths, and ministers of the same. This
Court was erected in the Parliament begun
anno 31. Henr. 8. Marke these words, for the
augmentation and maintenance of the royall estate
of his Imperial crowne, and dignity of supreame head
of the Church of England: for in that respect are
the tenths exacted.
            Restored by statute, as of right due to
the Crowne, are either such as have ever
been used by the Prince within his dominions,
or haue not been in use, &c. Ever in use,
as the supreme right of patronage, called
Patronage Paramont, so that by lapse of time,
collation of benefices are transferred to the
Prince, and no further. 2. To reap the tents

of vacant benefices to his owne proper use,
3. to give licence to choose a Bishop. 4. to,
nominate a fit man to the Chapter, whom
they shall choose to the Bishopricke. 5. to
give consent to the person elected. 6. to receive
the oath of homage from the Bishop.
7. to present any Ecclesiasticall persons
whatsoever, before the civil judges, for offences
committed against the peace of the
kingdome, and the Kingsroyall dignity.
            Presentations and collations of benefices,
whether ordinary and original, or extraordinary,
and transferred by devolution to superiours
for the neglect of inferiours,Confess. fidei 
                     •
                  . 35. postponing times
prescribed by law, are the inventions of Sathan,
broched and dressed in his kitchin, sayth Beza.
For when the Patrone presenteth to a benefice,
and the Bishop giveth collation, the libertie
of the Church to choose, and seeke the worthiest
and fittest man one of a thousand, as
Iob speaketh, is taken away, and unworthy
men thrust upon the Churches. When
there is any defect through neglect of time, this
liberty is not restored to the Church, but her
bondage still increaseth, till at last the power
of bestowing a benefice by gradation come to
the Prince. Now to conferre a benefice, is to
set a Pastor over a flocke: for howsoever the
person presented have received Ordours before,
yet he hath not a particular charge, but is a
minister, or as they call him, a Priest, at Random,
till he obtaine some benefice. The Prince
taketh up the rents of vacant Bishoprickes, as
Superiours of vassals, who hold their lands of

their Liege Lord. The Bishops See being vacant,
the Diocesan Church as they call it, hath
not liberty to choose a Bishop, either in a full
convention, or by their commissioners, nor yet
the ministers of the Diocie, but onely the Dean
and Chapter, as was the manner in time of Popery.
Neither may the Deane and Chapter
proceed to the election, till first a licence bee
sent from the Prince, and with the licence is
sent a letter nominating the person whom they
shall choose, and then they proceed to the acceptation,
rather then free election of the person
nominated. Notwithstanding of this imaginary
and feigned processe of election, the kings
assent and ratification is required. Yea without
all this imaginary proceeding of Deane and
Chapter, the Prince may by vertue of the statute
above mentioned, proceed to the ful election
by himselfe, and will do it, when he thinketh
good. The clergy, nobility, gentry, communalty
of the Diocie are not regarded all this time.
They must accept whom Deane & Chapter at
the Princes pleasure shall recommend to them.
Hence it is, that the Church receiveth Pastors &
Bishops from the Princes palace, and he that
can give or promise the greatest gift to the greatest
Courtier, shall win the prise. So the prophane
courtier setteth these great commanders,
Pastors over many Churches. From Popes and
Princes courts, as out of the belly of the Trojan
horse, have been sent forth asses, swine, Beares &
Bulls upon the Lords vineyard. At the last Parliament
1617. election by Deane and Chapter
was established, without the consent, yea against
the acts of our Kirk. And the first man that entred
this way, I mean the Parliament way, that

is, by Deane & Chapter, was the land of Corce,
who made it nice to take on a Bishopricke, till
he had a lawfull calling, and the free approbation
of the Kirk. My Lord elect must make homage
to the Prince, and sweare not onely fidelity,
which every subject owe to their Prince,
but also as a vassall to doe homage to him as
his superiour, and performe that knight service,
which he is obliged to for his temporall lands.
Whereas before they held their lands in pure
almes, they were either compelled by Princes
to hold in knights service, or made filthie pactions
with them, to the end they might get in
many temporall lands, and for that cause rendred
themselves as vassals, selling both their
owne liberties, and the liberty of Ecclesiastical
elections.
            Not in use, till after the Papall usurped
authoritie was utterly driven forth of the
bounds of the English Empire. These concerne,
1 appellations, 2 Canons and lawes,
3 Benefices. As for appellations interposed
at the instance of any party, 1 The last
appellation is made to the Prince, and not
forth of the kingdome. 2 hee delegateth
judges by the Chancellour of England, under
the great seale, who shall determine in
the cause.
            Appellations ascend by degrees from one to
one, not from one to many. No mediate appellation
is heire from one to a Provinciall Synode,
or Nationall, but from the Archdeacon,
or his officiall, to the Bishop: from the Bishop
or his Commissary, to the Archbishop: from

the Archbishops Archdeacon to the Court of
Arches, or the Court of Audience: from these
Courts to the Archbishop himselfe: from the
Archbishop to the Court of Chancery, or to
the Prince, who by the Chancellors seale appointeth
judges, 24. Henr. 8. 25. Henr. 8. 1 Elizab.
So in place of gradation from parish
Sessions and Consistories, to classicall meetings
of the Presbyteries, from Presbyteries to Synodes
of Shires, from Synodes to Nationall
Assemblies, they must step up a Popish ladder,
by Archdeacons, Officials, Bishops, Deane of
Arches, Archbishops, saving that at the top of
the ladder they finde the Prince for the Pope,
to whom they must not appeale, nor yet to any
greater Councels of many reformed or unreformed
Churches, or to an oecumenicall Councell,
whatsoever they talke of Generall Councels.
Now the causes convoyed by these subordinate
appellations, are all Ecclesiasticall causes
agitated in the Ecclesiasticall Courts. Of
which causes wee are to treat in the third
chapter.
            These which belong to Canons, or Ecclesiasticall
lawes, concerne either the making
of them, or the administration and execution
of them, or the relaxation of them. As
for the making of them, 1. in that the Prince
may make new lawes anent ceremonies and
rites, with advice either of his Commissioners
in causes Ecclesiasticall, or of the Metropolitan.
2 Synod, provinciall or nationall,
may not be convocated without the
Princes writ direct to the Metropolitan.

3. Nothing may be treated or determined
in the Synode, till the Prince first be made
privie, and give assent. 4. Nothing shall
have the force of a law, till the Royal assent
of the Prince be given to those things which
the Synod shall think good to decree.
            Beza in his 8. Epistle to Grindal Bishop of
London, confesseth, that he trembleth and shaketh
at the first of these heads. And in very
deed it may turne upside down the whole government
of the Church, and outward forme of
Gods worship, overthrow the one, and deface
the other. Did not the Bishops affirme at the
examination of Barow, that the Queen might establish
what Church government it pleased
her Highnes? Because they dare not affirm that
Princes may change any thing that is unchangeable
by divine law, therefore they make many
unchangeable things both in government and
externall ceremonies in Gods worship, to bee
changeable, that they make a change at their
pleasure, and may bring in all that ever was
hatched by the Antichrist, a Popish Church
government, significant rites, and symbolicall
toyes and ceremonies. For what may a corrupt
Prince, and a corrupt Metropolitan, or some
few corrupt commissioners not challenge for
changeable? Nay, even rites of order and comelines,
and lawes of things indifferent for a religious
use, should be considered by the lawfull
and ordinary assemblies of the Church, how
they agree with the generall rules prescribed
in the word, how they will edifie the Church,
how God shall be glorified, Christian charitie
entertained, order and comelines preserved.

For we must not consider things indifferent
onely in 
                  •
               heir generall kinde, but in their particular
and circumstantiall use; which if we permit
to Princes, they may abuse indifferēt things
to the great hurt of the Church. Synods ought
not to be convocate without the Princes privitie,
or the warrant of the law in generall; but if
the Prince be wilful in denying his assent, and
the Church be in extreame danger, ready to be
overwhelmed or greatly disturbed with heresies,
schismes, divisions, enormities, we may use
the benefit of the law: and if the law of man
be wanting, yet the Church should not cease
from doing her dutie, and exercising that power
which is granted her by Christ, who hath also
promised his presence, when but two or three
are convened in his name. Salus Ecclesiae suprema
lex esto. The power of Christian Princes in the
Church is cumulative, to aid her to execute
her power freely, not privative, to deprive and
spoile her of any power Christ hath granted to
her. And by the same reason, the Church may
entreate, determine, and strengthen her decrees
and constitutions with Ecclesiasticall censures
and punishments, notwithstanding the Prince
will not assent, approve, ratifie the Canons of
the Church, nor confirme them by his lawes,
and fortifie them with temporal punishments.
Prudence I confesse is required in the Church,
to weigh the case of necessity, when to put this

                  •
               er power in practise.
            As for the administration and execution
of lawes, in that the Prince may 1. visit the
Ecclesiasticall state, and their persons, 2. reforme,
redresse, and correct them, and whatsoever

sort of heresies, schismes, errours, abuses,
offences, contempts and enormities
of any whomsoever, 3. to assigne, nominate,
and authorize, when and as often as it is his
pleasure, such persons, being naturall borne
subjects, as he shall think meet, 1. to exercise
and execute all manner of jurisdictions,
privileges, and preeminences in any wise
touching or concerning any spirituall or
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 2 to visit. 3 to reforme,
correct and amend, all such excesses,
or defects whatsoever, which by any maner
of Ecclesiasticall power, authority, or jurisdiction,
might been have been reformed, ordered,
corrected, amended, or restrained.
            The Princes power in visiting, reforming, and
correcting abuses, enormities, errours, heresies,
&c. may be seen, as in a liuely picture, in the
high commission, to be not onely a temporall
power, but also a spirituall to inflict Ecclesiasticall
censures & punishments. For the Prince
could not communicate this power to his Delegate
Commissioners, except he claimed it to
himselfe as Principall. For none can transferre
that to others, which he hath not himselfe. It
must follow therefore that the Princes power
is Ecclesiastical, not onely in respect of the object,
and matter whereupon it worketh, as heresies,
errours, abuses, &c. but also formally in respect
of the manner, to wit, by inflicting Ecclesiasticall
censures and punishments, unlesse we
will affi
                  •
               me that suspension, deposition, excommunication,
are not Ecclesiastical, but civill

punishments and censures, which were absurd.
We shall entreat of the power of the high commission
in the next chapter severally by it
selfe.
            As for the relaxation of the Canons or
lawes in that 1. first for ever, when as they
are altogether abrogated by the Prince. 2.
for a time onely, as when hee granteth remission
of any crime or transgression of the
Canons, for times by gone and to come,
when both infamie is abolished, and the
transgressor is restored to his former state.
4. When the grace of the Canon is granted
for time to come, to any certaine person upon
speciall occasion, the cause being tried,
which (grace) they call dispensation, which
is for the most part done, when the faculties
of this kinde granted by the Archbishop
of Canterbury upon whom this office doth
lye by statute, are confirmed with the great
seale of England; or when, if he without just
cause refuseth, the Chancellour of England,
granteth them primarily, according to the
statute made thereanent.
            If the Prince may abrogate the canons of the
Church without consent of the church, in vain
were the Canons of the Church made. Or that
the Church may not abrogate any canon, when
they finde it proveth inconvenient, is as great
an inconvenience. In vaine likewise are canons
strengthened, and guarded with censures, and
punishments, and the black markes of infamie

set upon heynous crimeswith the legall effects
thereof, if the Prince may abolish the crime, as
simoniacall paction, or any the like, or else infamie
arising upon the crime, and make petent
the ports of Ecclesiastical dignities to infamous
men, against the rule of the Law. Infamibus
portae ne pateant dignitatum. The Prince granteth
also dispensations, either primarily by his
Chancellour, if the Archbishop refuse, or secundarily
confirming the faculties and dispensations
granted by the Archbishop, and so by
dispensations may dissipate, and wound at pleasure
the Canons of the Church. Now the Prince
may dispense by their lawes in all causes, wherin
the Pope of Rome was wont to dispense of
old.
            The third sort of rights restored as due
to the crowne, which were not in use, but
since the Popes authority was driven forth,
concerne Benefices Ecclesiasticall, and Dioceses,
in that the Prince may 1. enjoyne the
Archbishop to confirme the election, as
also to consecrate the elected into the Bishopricke.
2. to unite and consolidate, or
to divide lesser Benefices, or Bishopricks,
which were before united. 3. to grant a
vacant Bishopricke, or lesser Benefice, in
title of trust, which they call a Commendam.
4. to translate Bishops from one
Bishopricke to another. 5. of two, which
are nominated, to choose one to be a Suffragane
Bishop. 6. to enlarge, or contract
the bounds and marches of any Diocie.
            
               
Election, confirmation, and consecration,
of Bishops were performed of old all at one
time, and that in a Synode of Bishops. If the
Prince may unite, and enlarge Diocies, and
Parishes without the consent of those, who
have interest, hee may make parishes Diocies,
and Diocies great Provinces. The competent
flockes for Pastors should bee measured by
the Church who calleth them, and knoweth
best what burthen is most proportionable to
their strength. Bishops should not be translated
at Popes, or Princes pleasures, as it often
commeth to passe in our times. The old
Canons condemne this leaping from See to
See. Ambitious and covetous men cannot
content themselves, till they get either a fatter,
or more glorious Bishopricke. Some are
not content of one Bishopricke, except they
also get the commendam and custody of another.
They must not have two Bishopricks
at once by the Canons, yet heir a tricke, one
they may have in title of a Bishopricke, another
by way of trust and custody till it bee
planted. A man may not have two wives, yet
hee may have two women, one as a wife, another
as a Lemman. Some of them have keeped
another Bishopricke in commendam sixteene
or twentie yeares, as the Bishop of
Glocester was commendatare of Bristow.
Yea they may keepe this Lemman all their
life time, if it please the Prince to bestow a
perpetuall commendam. For commendams
are not onely temporarie, but also perpetuall,
whereas of old they endured onely for sixe
moneths, or some like short space.
            
               
They enrich themselves not onely with Commendams
of other Bishoprickes, but also when
that cannot be had, with the commendams of
fat parsonages, and lesser benefices. The Diocesan
Bishop hath a greater taske then hee can
commodiously expede, or else, because hee is a
loytering Lord, he must have a suffragane Bishop
to exercise some pontifical parts of his office
in some part of the Diocie, and disburthen
him that farre. This Suffragane Bishop is to be
chosen by the Prince out of the Leits of the
two presented by the Diocesan Bishop, according
to the statute made 26. Henr. 8. cap. 14.
Translating of Bishops, erecting and changing
of Bishops Sees, union of Bishoprickes, enlarging
of Diocies, were in time of Poperie, Papall
cases, reserved for the Pope of Rome.
            We say then, that the Prince, as supreme head
and governour of the Church of England, is
supreme judge in matters of heresie, simonie,
idolatry, and all causes whatsoever, hath all
maner of spirituall jurisdiction united to the
crowne, may commit the exercise and execution
of the same to others also, so that they bee
naturall borne subjects, may conferre benefices,
and consequently give Pastors to flockes, may
choose Bishops without Dean and Chapter, receive
appellations, abbrogate canons, abolish
infamie, and restore the infamous to dignities,
grant dispensations in all causes where the Pope
was wont to dispense, give Bishoprickes and
lesser benefices in commendams, enlarge, contract,
unite, divide Diocies. &c. And this hee
may, whether he be a Christian or not, so that
he be righteous possessour of the Crowne: for
all the particulars above rehearsed, are sayd to

be due of right to the crowne, so that true or
false Christian, or infidell, male or female, man
or child, have all alike right. What is due to
the Christian Magistrate, is due indeed to him,
not because he is a Christian, but because he is
a Magistrate. A Christian Prince doth understand
better how to use his righteous power,
then the infidel, but hee can claime no further
authority then the infidell, and his power is
onely cumulative, as I have sayd, not privative.
Now, whether the particulars above rehearsed
belong to any Prince whatsoever, be he true or
false Christian, or infidell, I think him too simple,
that cannot judge.
         
         
            CHAP. 2. Of the High Commission.
            THE High Commission is called commission
of jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical,
it is called the high commission by the favourers
of it, to strike a greater terrour in the
hearts of subjects.
            The commissioners are partly civil, partly Ecclesiasticall
persons, as the Archbishops, certaine
other Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Chancellours, some of the secret counsell, and
of the chief Iudges, Courtiers, Aldermen, sometime
the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Postmaster,
and others making up a great number.
But it is not requisite that all these, whose
names are set down in the kings letters patents,
should be present at every Session, to make up
a full judicature, but power is given to any
three of the number, the Archbishop being

alwayes one. As with us are nominated and
appoynted by the Kings letters patents to the
number of fortie or fiftie persons, Bishops,
Counsellors, Noble men, Barons, Commissaries,
Ministers, yet power is given to any five
of them to make up the full judicature, the
Archbishops of Saintandros, and Glasgow, or any
one of them being of the number of the five
alwayes. And as with us, so there also, graue
Counsellours, and Iudges, and other of honorable
respect, may well be desired to be present
when an incestuous person, or some other ma
               
                  •
               efactor
is brought before them, that their
countenance at one time or other may bring
credit to their great authority. But when a minister,
or any other godly professour is to bee
troubled for nonconformity, or writing against
crossing and kneeling, or having, or spreading
of bookes touching reformation of abuses, and
corruptions in the Church; then are they not
desired, lest being present, they should perceive
the mysteries of their iniquitie, by which they
uphold their pompe, and Lordly Domination.
If there be a courtier, or new upstart that favoureth
them, or dare not controll them, hee may
well be advertised to be present.
            The Archbishop hath power to associate unto
himselfe any two nominated in the Kings
letters parents, whether they bee Ecclesiasticall
or civill persons, as for example, the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and the Postmaster: as with
us the Archbishop may assume any foure of
the number to be his assessours; as for example,
Mr. Thomas Henderson comissarie of Edinburgh,
M. Iohn Weemes commissarie of Saintandros,
M. Iames Hammilton commissarie of Glasgow,

and the Chauntour of Glasgow Mr. David
Sharpe, or any other foure Ecclesiasticall persons,
or civill enrolled in the letters patents.
            These three, as for example, the Archbishop,
Postmaster, and Lieutenant of the Tower, have
power to inquire in all heresies, errours,
schismes, contempts and enormities whatsoever,
which were wont to be reformed by Ecclesiasticall
lawes, and jurisdiction, in all offences
and contempts committed against the
forme of their service, and common prayers,
and other late statutes made anent Ecclesiasticall
matters, as also seditious bookes, private
conventicles, adulteries, fornications, outragious
misbehaviours, disorders in marriages,
and other offences particularly expressed in
the letters patents, and all other grievous offences
punishable by the Ecclesiasticall lawes
of the Realme. So with us the five, as for
example, the five abovenamed, have power
to take triall of all offenders in life, and
doctrine, or religion, or scandalous in any
of these, intercommoners and recepters of
Iesuites, Seminarie and Masse Priests, hearers
of Masse, and excommunicate Papists, (so
like) recusants, or not communicants, (so
like) incestuous or adulterous persous,
obstinate contemners of the discipline of
of the Kirke, and excommunicate for the
same: all ministers, preachers, Doctors, or
masters of Schooles, Colledges and universities,
all exhorting and lecturing Readers,
for preaching, or speaking in publicke, against
the present established order of the
kirk, (truth) or estate, against any of the conclusions
of the bypast generall assemblies of the

Kirk (truth) specially of the acts of generall Assembly
holden at Perth in the moneth of August
1618, (truth) and all disobeyers of the sayd
acts (truth) likewise writers of Pamphlets contrary
to any of the constitutions of the Kirke, or
Printers of the sayd bookes and pamphlets
(truth) or of any other bookes without licence.
            These three commissioners may authorize
their drunken pursevant to breake open mens
studies, chambers, coffers, letternes, and search
if there be any bookes, or writs against their
Hierarchie, and the orders of their Kirke, and
to spoile at their pleasure.
            These three commissioners may convent before
them, any subject of whatsoever degree, or
calling, civill or Ecclesiasticall, in whatsoever
season of the yeare, earing time or harvest, from
whatsoever part of the kingdome, even the remotest,
for whatsoever offence reputed Ecclesiasticall,
even the lightest, to the great detriment
and domage of the subjects. So with us,
may these or any other five in the number, the
Archbishop, or any one of them being alwayes
present, summon and call before them, at the
times and places they shall thinke most convenient,
any person dwelling within the kingdom
of Scotland, and provinces of Saintandros, and
Glasgow.
            These three commissioners have power to
command the Shireffes, Iustices, and other officers,
and subjects to apprehend, or cause to
be apprehended, such persons as they shal think
good, and take such bonds for their appearance,
as they shall prescrive, or to commit them to
prison. So may the five with us direct their warrant

to the Captaine and Lieutenant of the
Kings guard, the Provost and Bailies of the
Burgh, where they shall happen to sit, Shiriffes
and Bailies of Regalities, to search, take, and
apprehend, whom they please, and to present
them before them.
            The three commissioners have power to
force any person convented before them, whom
they suspect, to accuse himselfe upon his own
oath, to answer to their interrogatories, when
there is no accuser, nor article of accusation libelled
against him. He must sweare to answer
to that, which he doth not as yet understand,
not so much as in generall. And to grace this
oath, they call it the oath ex officio. If any person
refuse to take this oath, hee is forthwith
committed to prison. The manner of taking
the oath, is by laying their hand, or three fingers
on the book, to sweare by God, and the
contents of the booke, that they shall answer
truely to such things as shall bee demanded of
them; and when the book is kissed, the oath is
accepted,Pag. 249. as Barow reporteth in his Discovery.
And although the penalties of the statutes bee
never so great, as Premunire, abjuration, forfeiture
of lands and goods, and some of the offences
are limited to bee tried onely in the Kings
Bench, yet the partie suspected shall be forced
by this commission, to accuse himselfe, upon
his owne oath, upon such captious interrogatories,
as the wit of man can devise, when there is
neither accuser, nor libell of accusation, sayth
Nicholas Fuller in his arguments and defence
of his Clients. This oath was set on foot under
King Henry the 4. at the instant sute of the
Prelates, for detecting and suppressing of those,

whom that blind age called Lollards, that is,
for suppressing of the Gospell, which was peeping
out of corners. The Commons repined
against that Statute ex officio, and the godly
wrote against it, as a bloodie Maximinian law:
They were first ordeined to accuse themselves,
and then to be burnt. See Fox in Henry 4. The
same oath doe the Prelates, now make a meanes
to suppresse a due reformation of their Church,
Worthy Vdal, and many more have ended their
daies in the prison, for refusall of this unjust,
and superstitious oath.
            The three Commissioners have power to fine
at their discretions, to commit to prison for non
compearance, or for contumacie in refusing to
obey their decrees, or reputed desert of their
offence, and all the Iayles, Wards, and Prisons
in the land, are at their command to receive
the person committed, and sent by them to prison.
So with us the Captaines and Constables
of the Kings Wardes, and Castles, jaylors & keepers
of prisons, in burgh, or land, are charged
to receive, and deteyne all persons directed to
them, in such forme, as shall be prescribed in
the warrant subscribed by any five of them,
one of the Archbishops being alwayes of the
number. Neither may the imprisoned be set at
libertie, but at their pleasures. And with us also
the Lords of his Ma: privie Councell, are required
upon the sight of any certificate subscribed by any
5. of the sayd Cōmissioners, one of the sayd Archbishops
being alwayes one, either of fine, imposed upō any party,
or upon the refusing to compeir before the sayd
Cōmissioners, to direct a summar charge of horning
upō ten dayes for payment of the fine that shall be
imposed upon them, and to direct others letters for

denouncing persons that shall refuse to compeir before
the sayd Commissioners, of the which letters no
suspension or relaxation shall be granted, without a
testimony under one of the Archbishops hands, of
the parties obedience and satisfaction. Howbeit
with them they bee thus authorized by the
Kings letters patents, to fine, ward, and imprison;
yet are they not so authorised by the statute,
whereupon the Commission is founded,
which I have set down in the beginning of the
first chapter. For it was ancient jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall,
which was restored to the
Crown in that act, and meant to be executed
by the Commissioners, as Nicholas Fuller avowed
in the defence of his Clients. But to fine,
imprison, and force any person to accuse themselves
upon their own enforced othes, their being
no accuser known, nor accusation libelled,
he proved, was not ancient jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall,
but brought in, in the second yeere of

                  •
               . Hen. the 4. In the record of the worthy proceedings
of the House of the Commons, at the
Parliam. holden 1610, we have this greivance.
Secondly, for that whereas by the intention and
words of the sayd statute, Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction
is restored to the Crowne, and your highnessly
that statute inabled to give onely such power Ecclesiasticall
to the sayd Commissioners, yet under
colour of some words in that statute, whereby the
Commissioners are authorized to execute their commission,
according to the tenour and effect of your

                     •
                  ighnesse letters patents, and by letters patents
grounded therupon, the sayd Commissioners do fine
and imprison, and exercise other authority, not belonging
to the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction restored
by that statute, which wee conceive to bee a great

                     ••
                  rong to the subjects.

Aud that these Commissioners might as well by colour
of these words, if they were so authorized by
your Highnesse letters patents, fine without stint,
and imprison without limitation of time, as also according
to will and discretion, without any rules of
law, spirituall or temporall, adiudge and impose utter
confiscation of goods, forfeiture of lands, yea &
the taking away of limme and of life it selfe, and
this for any matter whatsoever pertaining to spirituall
jurisdiction. Which never was, nor could bee
meant by the makers of that law. To fine and imprison
at pleasure, are punishments belonging
to the temporall sword, which Christ hath forbidden
his Apostles, and all Pastors their successors
to use. The weapons of their warfare
are not carnall, but spirituall. Christ committed
unto them keyes, not swords. In very
deed, there is no crueller beast, nor more tyrannous,
then a degenerate Churchman. Hee is
more insolent and outragious with the Dative
sword, then Princes are with the Native. Why
should they not be like their eldest brother,
that bloody beast of Rome. Degenerate Clergimen
will either usurpe the power of the temporall
sword, or take it when it is offered, but

                  •
               ver abuse it.
            The three commissioners may inflict spirituall
censures and punishments, as suspension, deprivation,
deposition, excommunication. They
may call for a Priest, comand him to denounce
and declare in some Cathedrall Church, or other
publick place, the offender to bee excommunicated,
but they enquire, cognosce,
decerne, and pronouuce the sentence of excommunication
in their Court; and the excommunicate
may be denounced long after: and howbeit

the Priest should pronounce the sentence
in judgement, yet he should bee onely like the
dempster, that pronounceth the doome, or like
the hangman, or poore slave directed by the
judge: hee neither inquireth, cognosceth, nor
decerneth. Yet, if ye think the cōmissioners may
excommunicate, because the Archbishop is
present, ye are deceived: for his power in the
high commission is not Episcopall, nor Archiepiscopall,
but delegate onely from the Prince,
which other assessours not Bishops, have as
well as he; and by this delegate power he with
his two associates, as I have sayd, may inflict this
censure upon any subject within England or
Ireland, which hee cannot doe as Bishop or
Archbishop, for their jurisdiction ordinary
is limited within the bounds of their Diocie,
or Province. When Spottiswood, pretended
Archbishop of Saintandros, was but a rurall
minister in Calder; and Law of Glasgow, a rural
minister at Kirkliston, possessing onely the
rents of Bishoprickes, not authorized as yet
with the office of Bishops (for that pretended
Assembly of Glasgow was not yet convocated)
yet were they armed with power to decern excommunication
against any subject within our
Realm, & to command the minister of the offender
to proceed against him: and if he refused,
to suspend, deprive, or ward him. They were
thus armed immediatly before that pretended
assembly, with power of warding, 
                  •
               ining, imprisoning,
suspending, degrading, and decerning
excommunication, without the consent of the
Church, or approbation of the Estates, that
they might wring out of the hands of the Kirke
at that corrupt, and pretended Assembly, EpisEpiscopall

jurisdiction, which many times they
protested never to usurp, before and without
the free consent of the Church obtained thereunto.
O perfidious violence! What we have
said of excommunication, may be likewise said
of suspension, deprivation, and deposition:
The Archbishop doth not suspend or deprive,
as Archbishop, but as the Kings Delegate,
Iudge, and Commissioner, by which power he
may suspend or deprive Ministers out of the
bounds of his ordinarie jurisdiction, which no
Bishops or Archbishops may doe by their ordinarie
power. We had a late example in our
own Archbishops about two yeares since: for
when Mr. Spotiswood was at Court, Mr. Law pretended
Archbishop of Glasgow, suspended Mr.
Blyth, and Mr. Forrester from their ministerie,
which he could not doe as Archbishop, for they
were neither within his Diocie, nor his province.
He did it then as head of the Commission
sitting for the time, that is, by a delegate power
from the King. To let passe, that at that
same vile Assembly, no mention was made of
Archbishops: and paction was onely made
with these men who had the benefices, for
which vulgarly they were called Bishops, that
excommunication, suspension, deprivation, and
deposition, should not be cōcluded without thē,
not that they might suspend, deprive, excommunicate
by themselves, and at their pleasures
in the high Commission, or any where else, but
according to the damnable Canons made by
that wofull, but pretended and null Assembly.
Farther, the Prince may inable one or mo
                  •
               
lay men with this same commission, wihout
mixture of Ecclesiasticall persons. It is then an

extraordinary power, wherewith they are inabled
by the Prince to suspend, depose, and excommunicate.
But the Prince hath not this
power himselfe, and therfore by no right of
Gods law may he communicate this power unto
them, and it is a proud usurpation over the
Church to them to receive it, or exercise it. In
the Parliament holden 1592. some acts, which
were made in that turbulent time of the 1584
yeare, were repealed as followeth. Item, our Soveraigne
Lord, and Estates of Parliament foresayd,
abrogates, cassis, and annulls the act of the same Parliament
holden at Edinburgh the sayd yeare 1584.
granting commission to Bishops, and other iudges
constitute in Ecclesiasticall causes, to receive his
highnesse presentations to benefices, to give collation
thereupon: and to put order in all causes Ecclesiasticall,
which his Maiesty and estates foresayd, declares
to be expired in the selfe, and to be null in time
comming, and of none availe, force, nor effect. Not
withstanding of this repealed commission, our
perfidious Prelats haue resumed the same again
without any law reviving it. But let us proceed,
and heare what is recorded in the worthy proceedings
of the Parliament above mentioned.
The Act is found to be inconvenient,
               P. 27, 28. 
               and of dangerous
extent in divers respects: 4. for that every pettie
offence, pertaining to spirituall jurisdiction, is by
the colour of the said words, and letters patents
grounded therupon, made snbject to excommunications,
and punishment, by that strange and exorhitant
power, and commission, whereby the least offenders,
not committing any thing of any enormous
or high nature, may be drawn from the most remote
places of the kingdome, to London, or yorke; which
is very grievous, and inconvenient,
            
            
               
These three Commissioners being armed with
double vengeance, and power of both swords,
temporall and spirituall, may strike a man at
one strike, in one sentence, for one and the selfe
same fault, both with temporall and Ecclesiasticall
censures, and punishments. They may depose
and imprison a minister at one time for
one offence: they may fine and excommunicate
at one time, &c. Againe, they may punish
the same offence in one person with a fine, in another
with imprisonment, in the third with
excommunication, in the fourth with deprivation.
For their owne pleasures and discretions,
and not the lawes, ar the rules of their censures
and punishments. Let us see what is recorded
in the grievances. Therein (to wit in the Commission
grounded upon the statute) is grievance
apprehended thus.
               
                  
                     •
                  . 28. 
               First, for that therby the same
men have both spirituall and temporall i
                     •
                  risdiction,
and may both force the partie by oath to accuse himselfe
of an offence, and also inquire thereof by a
jurie: and l
                     •
                  stly may inflict for the same offence,
at the same time, and by one and the same sentence,
both spirituall and temporall punishments. 2. wheras
upon sentences of deprivation, or other spirituall
censures given by force of ordinarie jurisdiction,
any appeale lyeth for the party grieved, that is heere
excluded by expresse words of the commission. Also
heere is to be a tryall by Iurie, yet no remedie by
traverse not attaint. Neither can a man have any
writ of errour, though a judgement or sentence, be
given against him, 
                     ••••
                  unting to the taking away of
all his goods, and imprisoning him during life; yea,
to the adjudging him in the case of premumire,
whereby his lan
                     •
                  s are forfeited, and he out of the
protection of the Law.
            
            
               
3. That wheras penall lawes and offences against
the same, cannot be determined in other Courts, or by
other persons, then by those trusted by Parliament
with the execution therof, yet the execution of many
such Statutes (divers whereof were made since
1. Eliz.) are commended and committed to these
Commissioners Ecclesiasticall, who are either to inflict
the punishments contained in the Statutes, being
Premunire, and other high nature; and so to inforce
a man upon his owne oath, to accuse and expose
himselfe to these punishments, or else to inflict
other temporall punishment at their pleasure. And
yet besides, and after that done, the parties shall bee
subiect in Courts mentioned in the acts, to punishment
by the same acts appointed, and inflicted: which
we thinke were unreasonable.
            
            The three Commissioners may not onely
enquire, and try, but also judge in all causes Ecclesiasticall,
in causes of heresie, simonie, idolatry,
&c. It is, I grant, provided in the statute
1. Elizabeth, that they shall not in any wise have authoritie,
or power, to order, determine, or adiudge,
any matter or cause to he heresie, but onely such, as
heretofore have been determined, ordered, or adiuged
to be heresie, by the authoritie of the Canonicall
Scripture; or by the first 4. generall Councels, or any
of them; or by any other generall Councell,
wherein the same was declared heresie,
by the expresse and plaine words of the said Canonicall
Scriptures, or such as heereafter shall be ordered,
iudged, or determined to be heresie by the high
Court of Parliament of this Realme, with
the assent of the Clergie in their Convocation.
This provision is no limitation, unlesse wee
will say, that without the limits of the Canonicall
Scripture there are some heresies determined,

which are not determined within the
bounds of the Canonicall Scripture. Seeing
then they may determine in all he resies determined
in the Scripture, they may determine in
all herefies whatsoever, and may affirme that to
bee determined for heresie in the Scripture
which is orthodoxall. If the commissioners,
the Princes delegates, may be judges in all causes
of herefie, farre more is the Prince himselfe
by their lawes, and that without the provision
foresayd, wherwith the delegate commissioners
are circumscribed.
            These three Commissioners have power to receive
appellations from other inferiour courts
Ecclesiasticall, like as the five with us have power
by the Kings letters patents, to receive,
and disusse, all appellations made to them from any
inferiour Ecclesiasticall Judges, and to inhibite the
said Ecclesiasticall judges to proceed iu any matter,
which they shall hold to be improper for them, wherin
they shall perceiue the said Iudges to have behaved
themselves partially, advocating the said matters is
their own judgment. See the commission renewed
Anno 1618. So they may draw to themselves
any cause whatsoever, agitated in inferiour
courts, not onely at the appellation of any
notorious villaine pretending grievance, but
also by advocation, when they shall construe
the cause to be unproper, or the proceedings of
the infe
                  •
               iour Court to be partiall. In the narrative
of the proclamation it was pretended,
that this high commission is erected to stay advocation
of causes granted by the Lords of
Councell and Session. That forasmuch, as it
hath bene compleaened by the Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Ministers of that his Maiesties Kingdome,

that advocations and suspensions, are frequently
granted by the Lords of Councell and Session
unto such, as bee in processe before them,
and their Ecclesiasticall Courts, for offences committed,
whereby offenders are imboldned continuing
in their wickednesse, and 
                     •
                  ing the said, advocations
and suspensions, or meanes to delay their
tryall and punishment, Therfore &c. Complaint
hath been made sometime by ministers, and
suit to stay advocations, that the ordinarie indicatures
Ecclesiasticall might proceed to their
censures without stop, but not to change advocations.
Are the Archbishops and Bishops
with their associates, honester and more conscientions
men, then the Lord of Councel and
Session? An ambitious and covetous Clergieman,
is of all men the most vile and prophane.
Did the Bishops complaine? why do they then
advocate causes from inferiour Courts Ecclesiasticall,
seeing they have usurped the sway of
proceedings in Courts Ecclesiasticall to themselves.
Doe they accuse themselves of partialitiall
proceeding in inferiour courts, or handling
improper causes, and will these same men bee
lesse partiall, and more conscientious in the
high Commission? If no censure can take effect
without their approbation, and appellations
should ascend from inferiour courts to superiour
courts and Synods, wherefore will they
rather advocate causes to this extraordinary
court of high commission? In England if a
man stand wilfully fourty daies together excommunicate,
               P. 
                     •
                  . 
               and be accordingly certified by the Bishop
into the Chancerie, that then▪ he is to be committed to
prison, by vertue of a Writ directed to the Shriefe:
as it is sayd in the Apologie of certaine proceedings

in courts Ecclesiasticall. And in a wr
                  ••
               
               de excommunicato capiendo, it is sayd: quod potestas
regia sacrosanctae Ecclesiae in querelis suis deess
                     •
                  
non debet. The ordinarie lawfull courts Ecclesiasticall
farre more then should be aided, and
assisted by the secular power, and not molested
or stopped. The truth is, that this high commission
is erected to suppresse the libertie of
the Kirk, to maintain the usurped power, and
tyrannous domination of our perfidious Prelates
over Synods generall & Provinciall, Presbyteries
& sessions, & to effectuate the intended
conformity, which they know they will never
get done in Synods and Presbyteries, unlesse the
terrour of this high commission were standing
above their heads. And therfore when they
urge conformity, they haue their recourse to
this weapon, or in Synods and Presbyteries
men are terrified with the feare of it. This is
their strong castell, out of which they command,
and hold in slavery & bondage the whole
citie. Here the Bonifacian Prelats stoutly draw
the two swords, fine, consine, suspend, deprive,
imprison, &c. But the couragious souldier
fighting the Lords battell, will not bee borne
downe with any such outrages, and terrours.
Now as they receive appellations from inferiour
courts, no appellation can bee made from
these three, or our five, suppose their injustice
and tyranny cry never so loud. I wonder if the
heart of any faithfull Patriot, let be conscientious
professour, can digest this.
            These three Commissioners may appoynt inferiour
Commissioners, from whom also as subdelegates,
they may receive appellation.
            I will add out of the record of the grievances

of the house of Commons these considerations.
First, out of the statute, that the said act
is found to be inconvenient, and of dangerous
extent in divers respects: for that it inableth the
making of such a commission, as well to any one
subiect borne, as to more. Item, for that by the
sayd Statute, the King and his successors may (howsoever
your Maiestie hath beene pleased, out of your
gracious disposition otherwise to order) make and direct
such commission, into all the Countries and Diocesses,
yea, into every parish of England, and
therby all causes may be taken from ordinary jurisdiction
of Bishops, Chancellers, and Arch-deacons,
and Lay-men solely be inabled to excommunicate, and
exercise all other spirituall censures: For that limit
touching causes subiect to this commission being
onely with these words, viz. (such as perteine to spirituall,
or ecclesiasticall jurisdiction) it is very hard
to know, what matters or offences are included in
that number. And the rather because it is unknown
what ancient Canons, or lawes spirituall are in force,
and what not: from whence ariseth great uncertainty,
and occasion of contention. Out of the
commission grounded upon the statute. That
the commisson giveth authoritie to inforce men called
into question, to enter into recognisance, not
onely for appearance from time to time, but also for
performance of whatsoever shall be, by the Commissioners
ordered. And also that it giveth power to
enjoyn parties defendant, or accused to pay such fees to
ministers of the Court, as by the Commissioners shall
be thought fit. As for the execution of the commission,
it is found grievous these wayes among
other. 1. For that lay men are by the commissioners
punished for speaking (otherwise then in iudiciall
places and courtes) of the simonie, and other misdemeanours

of spirituall men, though the thing spoken
be true, and the speech tending to the inducing
of some condigne punishment. 2. In that these commissioners
usually appoynt and allot to women discontented
at, and unwilling to live with their husbands,
such portions & allowances for present maintenance,
as to them shall seem fit: to the great encouragement
of wives to be disobedient, and contemptuous
against their husbands. 3: In that their pursevants,
or other ministers imployed in the apprehension
of suspected offenders in any things spirituall,
and in the searching for any supposed scandalous
bookes, use to breake open mens houses, closets and
deskes, rifling all corners, and secret
                     •
                   custodies, as in
cases of high treason, or suspition therof.
            
            Their commission is grounded upon a statute
and act of Parliament, howbeit it agreeth not
with the statute. Wee have not so much as a
shew of a statute for commission of jurisdiction
in causes Ecclesiasticall, and yet
our usurping Prelates tyrannize over loyall
subjects, faithfull Patriots, conscientious professours,
deserted by these, who will be counted
fathers of the Common wealth, left open
and naked to their violent rage, without any
protection of the law, as if they were but the
vile off scourings of the land. Will not the estate
in Parliament redresse this proud usurpation?
Shall the house of Commons in their
Parliament bee grieved not onely at the exorbitant
power of this high commission, but also
at the statute it selfe, and shall our nobles, and
inferiour estates not be grieved at our usurped
commission? Or will they suffer the like statute,
and make the countrey mourn and groane
for it the next day, as our neighbours have

done? Can Princes or estates give power of
spirituall censures either to lay or spiritual men?
Or may they lawfully put the temporall sword
in the hand of Pastors? Or may spirituall men as
they call them, accept it: If neither can be done,
how can the estates erect, ratifie, or suffer such a
commission? What is this but the Spanish inquisition?
Set me up this throne, Satan shall set up
Papistry, or any other religion whatsoever in
short processe of time. For they sit at the rudder,
and may turn religion as it pleaseth them,
and when they see fit occasions, and themselves
to have able power.
         
         
            CHAP. 3. Of the dignitie and power of Archbishops
in England.
            THis proud name of Archbishop is not to
be found in all the Scripture. It was not
attributed to any common Metropolitans
at the first, but to the renow
                  •
               ed and mightie
Giants the Patriarches of Constantinople, Antioch,
Alexandria, and Rome, who were mounted
farre above Metropolitanes when the time
was neere that the Antichrist should be mounted
on horsebacke. But after that he was mounted,
then Metropolitanes that they might keepe
some proportion with their head, were lifted
up to a degree of power above other Bishops,
& invested into an office that the book of God,
& the Apostolical Church never knew, to consecrate
Bishops, to convocate Synods, to receive
appellations frō the courts of inferior Bishops,
to visit the Diocies of other Bishops within
the Privince. A Diocesan Bishop that is a

Bishop over many flockes, and Pastors of one
Diocie, was unknown to the Apostles, far more
a Bishop of Bishops, a provincial Bishop,
an Archbishop having iurisdiction and power
over the comprovinciall Bishops. The Church
being for the most part within the bounds of
the Roman Empire, the governours framed the
government according to the forme of the Empire,
and made degrees in the Church like to
degrees in the common-wale. They intended
not to set up the Antichrist, but being led, partly
with carnall wisedome, partly with ambition
and vainglory, wittingly and willingly did that,
which brought in the Antichrist, and so the
mysterie of iniquity, which began to work in
the Apostles time, wrought on still, till Antichrist
come to his full strength, and perfect age.
While they were framing degrees according to
the fashion of the Romane Empire, first Bishops,
then Metropolitanes, then Primates, then
the foure great Patriarches, they were but forming
the second beast according to the image
of the first beast, and the Bishop of Rome, one
of the foure Patriarches, became the head. Neither
was the Bishop and Metropolitan so great
in power before the Antichrist come to his
perfect age, as they were after, and have been
ever since, even to this day. They hatched him,
and he hath rewarded them with greater authority
and power. But giving and not granting
the Diocesan Bishops to bee of divine or
Apostolicall institution, we will in this chapter
onely let you see the Archbishops unlawful superiority
over them.
            Persons having lesser ample administration,

having eyther iudiciall administration,
or administration not iudiciall, eyther constitute
by law, or introduced without law,
constitute by law, as the administration of
the ordinarie Iudges. They doe execute it
under the Prince, either in their owne name,
or the name of others. In their owne name
as Bishops, so called, either with addition, as
Archbishops, or simply Bishops. Archbishops,
(being in England two, Canterburie
and York) are considered, eyther in respect
of their peculiar Diocies in all respects, as other
Bishops: or in respect of the whole province,
according to the place, which they
hold, eyther in the ecclesiasticall state, or the
civill. In the ecclesiasticall estate, eyther
according to the place, which they hold cō
               mon
to both the Archbishops, or that which
is peculiar to Canterburie. According to
the place, which is common, they are to be
considered, eyther as in their ordination, or
as after their ordination.
            In the ordination it selfe, it is to be considered,
that if they the Archbishops haue
not been heretofore Bishops, they must be
consecrated by some Bishops. If they haue
been Bishops, then their election onely is cō
               firmed
by some Bishops.
            Metropolitanes were chosen, confirmed, and
consecrated of old, not by some, but by the
whole Synode of the comprovinciall Bishops.

But the English Bishop have no Provinciall
Synods to any such purpose. They have neither
the Discipline prescribed in Gods word,
nor the Discipline of the old Bishops and Metropolitanes,
but the Discipline and policie
which was in use in the time of greatest darknesse
under the Antichrist; Here also wee see a
signe, that they make the Bishop and their
Priest of a different order. For a Priest, when
he is made a Bishop, must receive a new consecration.
But a Bishop when hee is made an
Archibishop, is not consecrated of new, howbeit
hee bee in degree of power and jurisdiction
above other Bishops.
            After ordination they are to be considered,
either as Metropolitanes, or as Archbishops,
or as Primates, or as lesser Patriarches.
            The English Metropolitanes have onely Bishops
under them,De polit. c. 
                     •
                  . yet, sayth Mucket, they enjoy
the titles, and discharge the functions of
Archbishops, and Primates also. Metopolitans
at the first were not called Archbishops, as I
have sayd, but the Patriarches greater and lesser
onely, to whom appellation was made from the
Metropolitane. But when Metropolitanes began
to receive appellations, then this proud stile
descended to them also, as we will see incontinent,
that as Bishops, they received appellations.
They will extoll the wisedome of the ancients
in framing degrees in the Church, and
yet they themselves confound these degrees,
and offices, and make one man to bee a Metropolitan,
an Archbishop, and a Patriarch.

Many degrees were made to the Pope, to
climm up to his throne: that beeing done,
then was there confusion againe. We have this
confusion then out of Babylon.
            As Metropolitanes, 1. in confirming the
elections of the Bishops of his Province.
2. in consecrating these Bishops together
with other two Bishops.
            By the auncient Canons it was ordained,
that all the Bishops of the Province should assemble
to the election, confirmation, and consecration
of the Bishop also, and the Metropolitan
was present with the rest, as one of the
number, and moderator onely of the convention,
and the action was common. The Bishop
of Spalato confesseth, that by divine law one
Bishop hath no greater right to consecrate another
Bishop then another hath.Lib. 3. c. 
                     ••
                   num. 1. By their own
book of orders, it is not needfull, that the
Archbishop consecrate a Bishop, but an inferiour
Bishop may do it for him: yet a Bishop
may not suffer a minister to ordaine or
say handes one a minister for him. How
can they then bee so shamelesse, as to say,
that Archbishops bee of divine institution;
if another may consecrate a bishop as well
as hee, whether it bee with his consent, or
without it? Abbots, who have been but
simple Priests, have of old ordained bishops
without either commission or consent of Archbishops,
as Beda restifieth.Hist. 1. 3. c. 
                     ••
                  . Of the forme and
rites of their consecration, wee shall entreat
in the next Chapter.
            
               
This, that they call consecration of Bishops,
was not known to the purer Church. The
ministers chose one of their number to bee a
perpetuall moderator of the common actions,
and called him Bishop, as at Alexandria, where
he was first hatche
                  •
               , and made at the first, but
onely perpetuall president, and this was all.
            3. In convocating Provinciall Synods,
according to the Kings rescript, 4. in moderating
Synods, and giving the last voyce.
            Their Provincial Synods are not like the provincial
Synods which wee wont to have. For
ours were but Synods of Shires, 4, 5, or 6 classicall
Presbyteries assembling together twice in
the yeare. But their Provinciall Synode is a
Synod of the Bishops of one Province. All the
Diocies of the Archbishop, and of his suffragane,
or comprovinciall Bishops which are under
him, make but one province. And seeing
they have onely two Archbishops, they can
have but onely two Provinciall Synods. The
Metropolitane convocateth the Provincial Synod
upon the Princes letter, which happeneth
very rarely. If the Prince direct his letter to any
Bishop, as sometime hee hath done, what
need is there of a Metropolitan. For they say,
we cannot have Synods, unlesse we have Metropolitanes
to convocate them; and this is a
chiefe part of his function. If so be, why doth
he not exerce his function without a particular
letter of the Prince, as well as the Bishop doth
in convocating his Diocesan Synod. If that be
a part of his ordinary power to him, as this to
the other why doth it depend on the Princes

letter, and how dare a common Bishop take upon
him notwithstanding of the Princes letter,
that which of office apperteineth to the Metropolitan.
Ye may see that this part of his function
also, is not of divine institution, that is so dependant
and changeable at the pleasure of princes,
as they confesse themselves; Neyther is it
requisite of necessity to haue a Metropolitane
to convocate Synodes, for Synodes at the first
assembled without Metropolitanes. And in our
age, both in our owne, and other reformed
Churches, Synods have assembled, where there
is no Metropolitane. Nay rather, Synods would
be more frequently convocated, if they were altogether
removed: it is so farre from the truth,
that either we cannot have Synods, unlesse we
have Metropolitanes, or that God hath ordained
in his word that they should convocate Synodes.
For we haue no Synods Metropoliticall,
but onely Diocesan, since Metropolitans have
beene set over our heads, nor yet national, but
seldome, and dressed before hand for their purpose.
If it be not of divine institution, that the
Metropolitane should convocate Provinciall
Synods, neither is it to moderate. And as for
necessity there is none, as experience of our
owne and other reformed Churches can beare
witnesse: yea in their owne last Synode, Ban
                  
                     •
                  roft
Bishop of London was president. It may
be that it was his Papsticall office, which hee
had of old. For in the Catalogue of the seventy
Archbishops, Canterbury is made the head of all

                     •
                  ur Churches,
               T. C. 2. Reply, p. 644. 
               all Bishops sworn to Canonicall obedi
                  
                     •
                  nce
of that Archbishop, and defence of all privileges
and liberties of that seat. Where the Bishop of London
is his Deane to call Synods, to publish his decrees,

to make returne of the execution, Wincheste
                     •
                  
his Chancellour, Lincolne his Vicechancellour, Salisbury
his Chaunter, Worcester his Chaplaine, Rochester
his Crosse-bearer.
            
            As Archbishops 1. in receiving of, and answering
to appellations interposed, & made
from his Suffragane Bishops. 2. In visiting
the whole Province according to the lawes
and custome.
            As the Bishops haue suffragane Bishops under
them, so the Bishops themselves are Suffraganes
to the Archbishop. They are not his
suffraganes, as he is Metropolitane, but as he is
Archbishop. So that as Archbishop he hath
greater authority then he hath as Metropolitan.
For as Metropolitan he must doe nothing without
a Synode in the Dioces of another Bishop,
neyther by receiving appellation, nor by way
of visitation. But as Archbishop he may receive
appellations, and visite the Dioces of his
Province without a Synode, as being not onely
superiour in honour, and prioritie of order,
but also in power of jurisdiction. And for this
his greatnes, which he attained unto, he beareth
the proud title of Archbishop. The old
Bishops knew no other but a Metropolitane, &
the Provinciall Synode assembling twice in the
yeare, to the which appellations were made. It
is troublesome, say they, to call Synodes so often,
Dioces are so large, and the Synode should
be wearied to stay till all the appellations of inferiour
Courts were decided. Here a notable
tricke. First they say, it is needfull to haue
Synodes, and therefore needfull to haue a Metropolitane.
This againe they crosse and say,

there is no need of Synods, it is difficile and incommodious
to have two provinciall Synods
in the yeare, as of old. The Archbishop may
doe all that the Synode did, receive appellations,
visit and correct the excesses and defects
of other bishops, onely he may not make Canons
and Ecclesiastical lawes without a Synod.
Neither is there any need of new Canons, the
old are sufficient. But I would demand, why
Synods may not be so easily, and so often convocated
as of old? Is it because they have their
Diocies extended over one, two, or three Shires,
and the province extended almost as farr as the
kingdome: as Canterburies province in England,
and Saintandros in Scotland. Their wings
should be clipped, their Diocies and provinces
contracted and multiplied, if that the Discipline
of the old Bishops were to bee preserved, that
Synods may assemble. But before they loose
any part of their extensive power, and large impire,
they will rather reteine the corrupted discipline
brought in under Antichrist. If they
will say on the other side, the Diocies were as
ample of old, then why doe they pretend to
their loytering in their owne, or the Kings palaces,
the distance of their Diocies. And if they
will not convocate Provinciall Synods twice
in the yeare, what is the reason that they will
not convocate once in the yeare, or as was concluded
in the Councell of Basile,Can. 
                     ••
                  
                once in three
yeare? Yee may see, that this corruption is so
grosse, that it was palpable in the time of most
palpable darknesse. Againe, Synods did not assemble
onely to make Canons, but also for to
put order to all causes Ecclesiasticall. Farther,
there is continuall occasion to make new Canons,

and also to reforme or repeale old corrupt
canons. Neither doe Synods need to stay long
upon appellations. if the Church should meddle
onely with causes properly Ecclesiasticall,
and the ancient judicatories inferiour were restored
of presbyteries, and consistories. But to
medle with tythes, testamentarie and matrimoniall
matters, and to set up Archdeacons, Officials,
and Chancellours, and the rest of that

                  •
               able, it may well procure moe appellations,
then a grave and godly Synode should be troubled
with. When all is done, yet Canterburie
doth not, nor will not take the pains as by himselfe
to decide the appellations. Hee hath 
                  •
               
Court, which they call the Court of Arches,
wherein sitteth as Iudge,
               Camd. Brit. p. 181. 
               the Deane of the Arches,
he hath to doe with appeales of all men within the
province of Canterbury. Advocates there be in this
Court 16. or moe, at the pleasure of the Archbishop,
all Doctours of law, two Registers, and ten Proctors.
And another Court, not unlike unto this, which
they call the Court of Audience, which entertaineth
the complaints, causes, and appeales of them
in that province. So yee see, what way the ancient
Synods are gone. Neither to direct by making
Canons, nor to execute them being
made, should bee permitted to the pleasure of
one man. And yet by the way remember, that
the Prince with advice of the Metropolitane▪
may make Canons also. Howbeit the Archbishop
be made up with the spoiles of the provinciall
Synode, his grace may not attend on
the 
                  ••
               scharge of the Synods care and jurisdiction.
And whereas he may visit if he please, the
whole Diocies of his province, doe yee thinke
hee will take the pains himselfe? who then shal
                  •
               
               
attend on Court and Councell? Yea I suppose
that seldome hee sendeth his Chancelour,
or any other for him. By the Canons of
the Councell of Trent, the Archbishop may
no visit the Diocie of another bishop,Sess. 34. c. 3. D. 
                     •
                   reform unlesse
the cause and necessitie be first tried in the provinciall
Synod: so that the fathers of that superstitious
and bloudy councell, were ashamed
of the Archbishops exorbitant power which
the English retaine. And the English say,
that during the time of the Archiepiscopall visitation,
               Down.
def. 
                     •
                  . 2. c. 6 p. 112. 113. 
               whereby the jurisdiction of the ordinary is suspended,
that Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction which hee
practiseth, hee doth exercise from, and under the
Archbishop, as his deputie. The Archbishop may
with the Princes consent without a Synod depose
a bishop, sayth Whitgift.
               Whitgift. p. 440. If bishops bee
such vassals to Archbishops, what slaves thinke
yee poore ministers be?
            As Primates, or lesser Patriarches, 1. of
right, as to admit appellations from inferiour
judgements immediately. 2. of the
prescription of time, to haue the custody of
Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction during the vacancie
of any Episcopall See within his owne
province.
            York is stiled Primate of England, and Canterburie
Primate of all England. There is a fine
composition of an old plea. what they may
not doe as Metropolitanes, they may doe as
Archbishops, and what they may not doe as
Archbishops, yet they may doe as little Patriarches.
As little Patriarches they may receaue
appellations immediatlie. So where one may

not make a leap from the Archdeacon or his
Officiall to the Archbishop, and passe by the
Bishop. Yet he may leap over him to that same
man, as he is Patriarch. And as for custody of
spirituall jurisdiction, during the vacancie of
the Episcopall See, that was the right of Deane
and Chapter.
            According to the place peculiar to the
Archbishop o
                  •
                Canterburie, 1. every Bishop
of his province confirmed by him, must
exhibite to him a Chaplaine, till he provide
him some sufficient benefice. 2. As Primat
of all England, he may grant letters of tuition,
whereby the appellant may prosecu
                  •
               e
his appellation without molestation
offered to him in the meane time.
            The Bishops have their Chaplaines, as Princes
and Noblemen have, more for pompe and
glory then for any necessitie or utility. For they
will bee inferiour in nothing to the great Nobles,
that concerneth pride of life. Noblemen
for pride will not joyne themselves with the
parish, where they are members, to worship
God joyntly with them, as members of one
politicall body, but must have their servile and
flattering Chaplaines at home: yet they spoile
many parishes to entertaine their beneficed and
non-resident Chaplaines. Will the Bishops be
behinde them in this? Nay, they will bee as
noble in this trespasse as the noblest, and the
Archbishop will lead the ring. Take this unclaime
of appellations from him, his letters of
tuition are deere of a doyt.
            
               
According to the place, which they hold
in the civill estate, either as common to
both, or as peculiar to any one of them.
Common to both, either by the common
Municipall law, or by the grant of Princes.
By the common Municipall law, either
in things Ecclesiasticall, or in things civill.
In things Ecclesiasticall, in which they
have this prerogative, to receive and register
the probate of wills, and to grant to
the partie succeeding the administration
of the goods of the person dying intestate,
having at the time of their death, Bo
                  
                     •
                  a
Notabilia in divers Diocies or jurisdictions
of their Province.
            The Archbishop hath a Court which is
called the Prerogative Court,Camd. Br
                     •
                   181. 
               in which the
Commissarie sitteth upon inheritances fallen either
by intestate, or by will and testament. By
the 92. Canon of the Constitutions made
Anno 1603. All Chauncellours, Commissaries,
or Officials; or any other exercising Ecclesiasticall
jurisdiction whatsover, are commanded
to charge with an oath all persons called, or
voluntarily appearing before them, for the probate of

                     •
                  ny will, or the administration of any goods, whether
they know, or moved by any speciall inducement,
do firmly beleeve that the partie deceased, (whose testament
& goods depend now in question) had at the
time of his, or her death, any goods, or good debts, in any
other Diocie or Diocies, or peculiar jurisdiction
within that province, then in that wherein the sayd
partie died, amounting to the value of five pounds.

And if the sayd person shall upon his oath affirme,
That hee knoweth, or firmly beleeveth, that the sayd
partie deceased had goods or good debts in any other
Diocie, or Diocies, or peculiar jurisdiction within
the sayd province to the value aforesayd, and particularly
specifie and declare the same: then shall hee
presently dismisse him, not presuming to intermedle
with the probate of the sayd will, or to grant administration
of the goods of the partie so dying intestat
                     •
                  :
and shall openly and plainly declare and professe,
that the sayd cause belongeth to the prerogative
of the Archbishop of that Province, willing and
admonishing the partie to prove the sayd will, or
require administration of the s
                     •
                  yd go
                     •
                  s in the court
of the sayd prerogative, and to exhibit before him
the sayd iudge, the probat or administration, under
the s
                     ••
                  l of the prerogative within 40 dayes next
following. In the
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Canon the Rate of Bona
Notbilia liable to the prerogative Court, is defi
                  •••
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               amounting to the value of five pound,
at least, 
                     〈◊〉
                   and de
                     •
                  laring, that who so hath
not good in then, to the sayd summe or value,
shall not 
                     〈…〉
                   to have Bona Notabilia.
unlesse in any Diocie by composition or custome,
Bon
                     •
                   Natabilia bee rated at a greater
summe. Here the Archbishop hath a Court
for testamentary matters, which are meere civill,
and belongeth no wayes to a spirituall
Court▪ which may and ought to be heard and
determined in Courts temporall.
            In civill things is 1. to have the title of
Clemencie, which in English we call Grace.
2. to have praecedencie before all the Peeres
of the kingdome.
            This title and stile of Grace is not granted to

any inferiour to a Duke, so that they have a

                  •
               tile aboue Marquises▪ Earles, and Vicounts.
They mock at Christs words Luke 22. 25. when
they say, that Christ forbad his Disciples onely
to be called bountifull or benefactors, but not
to bee called gracious Lords. For Christ forbidding
his Disciples to beare civill rule and
temporall domination, forbad them the stiles,
which were attributed unto, or usurped by civill
Princes, and magistrates, to set forth their
pompe and power, and for example he alledgeth
that stile which was given to some of the kings
of Aegypt, by one stile meaning all other of the
like kinde. For as he forbad them not onely to
be like the Kings of Aegypt, but generally like
the kings of the nations, so the titles of all secular
Princes and Rulers, that rule Nations and
kingdomes, are forbidden. Farther, there is
greater pompe in the stile of Grace, then of benefactor,
and lesse truth: for there are none so
gracelesse, unclement, and cruell scoutges in the
hands either of Popes or Princes to scourge the
Church of Christ. These base fellowes must
also haue place before the greatest Nobles in
the land, and the chiefe seat in publick conventions,
and parliaments. Canterbury must have
place before the chiefest officers of the kingdome,
Yorke before all except the Chauncellour
like the ambitious sonnes of Zebedee seeking
to sit the one at the right, the other at the
left hand of Christ in his kingdom, which they
dreamed should be a glorious worldly Monarchy.
They have also traines of men to attend
upon them, greater then many Noble men, and
some to beare up their taile,Abstract. 237. which no Noble
man hath. Fie. The Doctours of the civill law

attend in their Scarlet robes upon Canterbury
his grace, when he passeth through Pauls. And
as I heare, when any come to his Chamber of
presence, they must hold off their hats, howbeit
his grace be not present himselfe. We shall see
more of their pompe in the next chapter.
            By the grant of Princes, as Immunities,
liberties, &c. in their owne large fieldes or
possessions.
            Their immunities, liberties, priviledges and
jurisdictions in their Baronies and large possessions,
are but temporall, nothing availing to
further and advance Christs kingdom. The particulars
are best known to them, who haue seen
their charters.
            Peculiar to any one of them, to wit, either
to York, as to have the praecedence before all
the officers of the kingdom, except the Lord
Chancellour. Or to Canterburie, as 1. to
take the place before all the officers of the
kingdom: whence it is, that he is called the
first Peere of the Realme. 2. to inaugurate
the king at his coronation. 3. to receive the
rents of the lands, which hold of him in
homage, while the heire is minor, not past
21. years, howbeit the same heir hold other
lands in chiefe of the crowne. 4. to hunt
with his owne hounds in any parke within
his own province.
            Bishops are made Peeres of the Realme, and
Canterbury is the first Peere, therefore he must
have place before all the officers of the kingdom:
wherof we spake before. He must inaugurate
the king at the coronation, which is a duty

not appertaining to him: for the rites of coronation
are not parts of the pastoral charge. And
suppose they were, they belong no more to a bishop
then to a minister, or to one bishop more
then to another. For if there were no more, but
to make an exhortation, to conceive a prayer,
and blesse, a minister may do that as wel as a Bishop,
or a bishop as well as an Archbishop. Bishops
have vassals under them as noble men
have. William the first ordained Bishopricks & Abbies,
which held Baronies in pure and perpetual almes,
and untill that time were free from all secular service,
to be under military or knights service, enrolling
every Bishoprick and Abbay at his will and pleasure,
and appointing how many souldiours he would have
every of them to finde for him, and his successours,
in the time of hostilitie and warr. As they became
vassals to kings & Emperours, so they laboured
to have many vassals under themselves, insomuch
that noblemen became their vassals. The
Earles of Glocester had lands of the Bishop of
Canterburie on this condition, that they should
be his stewards at his installing. And howbeit
the king should have the custody and ward of
the lands of those who hold of him in chief for
knight service, till the perfect age of the heir, yet
the lands which hold of the Archb▪ ar excepted.
Pastors & ministers should be content of their
stipends, not medling with superiority over vassals,
personall or reall wards. Their bishops have
parks & ponds, besides their palaces, for hunting
& fishing. Canterburies grace may hunt in any
park within his own province, that is through al
England except 4. diocies, a pastime cōdemned
by the ancient canons in clergy men. Hierome
saith, he never read of a hunter that was a holy man.
            
            
               
B
                  •
                s
                  •
               atu
                  •
               e, as to grant the Grace of the
Canons, and other Ecclesiasticall lawes,
through all the Dominions of the English
Empire, which (grac
                  •
               s) they call Faculties.
            C
                  •
               nterburie hath among other courts, a court,
which they call the court of Faculties, wherein
there is appoynted a chiefe President,
               
                  
                     •
                  md. Brit. 181. 
               who
heareth and 
                     •
                  onsidereth of their grievances and requests,
that are petitioners for some moderation,
and easement of the Ecclesiasticall law, sometime, as
they pretend, overstrict and rigorous and a Register
beside, who recordeth the dispensa
                     •
                  ions. The
Lawes of God may not be dispensed with. If
Ecclesiasticall constitutions, which are made by
men onely be too strict, their rigour may bee
relaxed, when and where there is a necessitie.
This necessi
                  •
               y ought to bee considered by the
Ecclesiasticall Senate, and not reserved to the
Ar
                  •
               hbishop of Canterburies grace, to be given,
or 
                  〈◊〉
                sold at his pleasure. For in this court
of Fa
                  •
               ulties, dispensations are set to open sale,
as at Rome as the admonition to the Parliament
doth 
                  •
                port▪ If there be a just cause to remit
of the rigour of the Ecclesiastical law then
eas
                  •
               ment shoul
                  •
                be granted to the petitioner
without money.P. 3. If 
                  •
               here be not a relevant
cause, then there should bee no dispensation
granted at all let be for money. So this power
to dispense with Ecclesiasticall lawes, is to dissipate
the Canons of the Church, & to wound
th
                  •
               se which are yet whole and sound.
            I
                  •
                was enacted, 25. Henr. 8. that the Archbishop
of Canterbury for the time being,
                  
                     •
                  stal Rom. and his
successors, shall have power and authoritie

from time to time, by their discretions to give,
grant, and dispense by an instrument under the
seale of the said Archbishop, all manner such
licences, dispensations, compositions, faculties,
grants, delegacies, instruments, and all other
writings, as heretofore have been used, and accustomed
to be had and obtained at the See of
Rome, or any person, or persons by authoritie
of he same. Provided alwayes, that no manner of
dispensitions,
               2. Reply. 
                     •
                  . part, p. 97. 
               licences, faculties, or other res
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                  ts, or
writings hereafter to be granted by the Archbishop,
or his commissary, being of such importance, that
the taxe for the expedition therof at Rome, extended
to the summe of foure pounds, or aboue, shall in any
wise be put in execution, till the same lic
                     •
                  nce, dispensation,
facultie, rescript, or other writing, of what
name or nature soever it be, be first confirmed by his

                     〈◊〉
                  , has heirs, or successors, kings of the Realme,
under the great seale, and enrolled in the Chauncerie
in a Roll by a Clarke to bee appointed for the same.
It was therefore justly written by Mr. Cartwright
that the Archbishop (saving profession
of obedience to the King) was made Pope in
the Bishop of Romes place, and that he exerciseth
untollerable and filthy Marchandise.
            These faculties are to be considered, either
particularly, or generally, 1. particularly,
such as are often granted after summary
examination and triall of the cause, as
1. to appoint publick Notaries, 2. to give
licence to the sickly, women travelling with
child, aged and diseased persons, to eat flesh
on forbidden dayes, for some politicall respects,
3. to solemnize matrimonie, howbeit

thrice open publication of the Banne
                  •
               
hath not preceeded. 4. In cases which belong
to benefices.
            Notaries, which are called Registers, are appoynted
by Bishops, and Archdeacons respectively.
Publike Notaries appointed by Archbishops,
serve, as I suppose; the Diocies of the
whole province. Seeing they haue such manner
of courts and officers under them, depending
wholly on them, it is no wonder, that they have
this prerogative engrossed in their hands also amongst
many moe▪ If he grant licence to eate
flesh onely for politicall reasons, wherefore are
the same fasting dayes, or dayes of abstinence
from flesh observed, which the Papists observe?
wherfore doth the curate in time of divine service
make publick forewarning of these dayes,
as they are to fall in the weeke following?
and why are not politick judges appointed
to grant such licences? It is the old superstition
then, not new policie, which is respected. Doe
none obtain licences but the diseased, aged, &c.
and obtain they licences without money? The
101. canon of their last constitutions, giveth
power to the commissarie for faculties, to grant
licence for marriage without 3▪ proclamations
preceeding, onely to persons of good state and qualitie,
as if persons of mean estate or quality, could
not have as necessary a cause to seek relaxation
of 3 proclamations. But if ther be any quantitie
of money in the purse, the person is of sufficient
qualitie. By these licences, children are sometime
married without consent of their parents,
and sometime the heire is carried away, and
married without further notice. Precontracts
are deluded, persons having interest which

might take exception, not being publickly warned:
a way given to clandestine mariages
                  •
                the
congregation mocked, when two of their members
are ioyned in mariage, they know not
where nor when. As for taking caution & securitie
to make good the conditions required of
of them, yet saith the defender of the last petion
for reformation,Pag. 227. 
               that licences have been abused,
as much as before, and that the strength of the canon
dependeth upon the bonds of the sureties, which may
be knights of the post, and men of no worth.
            
            In causes which concerne benefices, as 1.
to abolish irregularitie, not wilfully contracted.
            Irregularitie is an impediment of the Canon
law, which inableth a man to take on orders, or
to minister into them, and consequently to bee
admitted to benefices, or to enjoy them. All the
Popish irregularities, which are not expresselie
taken away, either by their late canons, or statutes
of the Realme, stand still in force with
them and they may observe them, as they
please. To sit in judgement upon bloud, was irregularitie
of old, yet these Bishops, make no
scruple of it, or any other thing may serve to
advance their greatnes. That which was reckoned
amongst irregularities, but was in very
deed a divine, and not a Canonicall impediment
brought in by man, they made least account of,
to wit, the irregularity of apostasie. For
they allowed Popish massemongers, men for all
seasons, K. Henries Priests, K. Edwards Priests.
Qu. Maries Priests to be preachers of the Gospell
in the daies of Qu. Elizabeth, as the authors
of the admonition to the Parliament do testifie.

When they would cover their Apostasie with
Peters fall Mr. Cartwright maketh this distinction.
Peter denied Christ cast down,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Reply, 2. part. p. 178. 179. 
               or in time of his
humility, they have denyed him risen from the dead,
ascended up into heaven sitting at the right hand of
God in glory: Peter did it to save his skin, they to
save their honour: he for his life, they for their living.
I speake favourably: for otherwise I might
say of some▪ that they did it not onely to save that
which they had, 
                     〈◊〉
                   to get more unto it. Peter did it
privatly, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   corner, they in set and open iudgement:
he onely denied that he knew him, or that hee
was one of his Disciples, but spake no evill of him:
they affirmed, that they knew the Gospell to bee
naught, and so spake evill both of Christ and it: hee
did it suddenly, and at a push▪ they deliberatly, and
with time given to consult: he although he forsooke
his master Christ, yet never served the Scribes and
Pharisees, which were the enemies of Christ; they
did not onely forsake Christ, but served in the courts
of his sworne enemie the Antichrist. And againe,
they at one clap have renounced him with mouth,
               P. 178.
               and subscribed against him with their hand, and
where he forsware him once, they have forsworn him
oft, according to the member of Dioceses, where they
have their livings, and diversitie of times, wherein
such thing
                     •
                   have been required. Peter was called
immediatly by Christ himself, and not by man,
and after his repentance comforted, and confirmed
in his Apostleship. Christ was the Law-maker,
and might dispense with his owne law.
But the Levits which went astray after idols,
shall not come neere unto me to doe the office of a
Priest unto me, nor 
                     •
                  om
                     •
                   neere to any of my holy
things in the most holy place: but they shall beare
their shame, and their abominations, which they have

committed, Ezek. 44. 13. Notwithstanding of
their repentance, they were not restored to the
Priesthood again. If they do unfainedly repent,
they may be received againe into the besome
of the Church: but because of the skar which
remaineth after the deep wound of their fearfull
Apostasie, they ought not to be restored to
their degree of office in the Church. Men proving
inconstant in the faith, are not fit to bee
made captaines in the Lords armies. Bastardy
is no true irregularity, or just impediment to inable
a man to receive orders. If it were not too
tedious to run over and apply all sorts of irregularities,
we should finde an huge number of
irregulars by the Canon law, amongst their
Clergie men.
            2 To abolish likewise simoniacall suing
for promotion to benefices, or orders.
            Their Simonie cannot bee expressed more
vively, nor contrived more succinctly, then it is
already by Mr. Brightman on the Revelation.
But specially their beggarlinesse in suing for livings,
               Cap. 3. v. 1
                     •
                  
               
               is notorious. For let us take a view, and make a generall
muster as it were of the whole Clergie, and if
you will let us begin it the basest underlings. The
Curats, as they call them, are both in very deed, and
in all mens account, a company of beggarly followes.
In whom a man may see that verified which was
threatned against the family of Esi; men bowing
themselves to the ground for a peece of silver, or a
morsell of bread, and craving to bee put into one
of the Priests offices, that hee may have a snap at a
crust of bread, 1. Sam. 3. 36. Now for the rest,
those that by meanes of their more full purses, walke
more lustily, such as wee call sturdy beggars, what

running up and down is there among them, what bribing,
what importunat and impudent begging, what
flattering offers do they make of all their obeysance,
and dutifull complements, that they may come by
these Ecclesiasticall promotions? You may see many
of them, that post up to the Court, or to the house of
the right honorable, the Lord keeper of the great
seale: for these two places are like to the beautifull
gate of Salomons temple, Act. 3. 2 Men come in this
way apace, thich and threefold, and they are in great
hope to carry away some good reliefe. Others there
are that become followers of Noblemen, and P
                     •
                  eres
of the land, whose Chaplaines they become, either
houshold or retainers, as I may call them, that live under
their protection, for what end, trow yee? Even
for this and no other, that as soone as any benefite,
as they call it, shall fall voyd, they might enioy it by
the Lords gift. And doth not this, I pray thee, see
to be an honest way to get a Church living, no such
base and beggarly one as you speak of? But is not
this currying of favour meere beggery? Is it any
whit a lesse filthie thing to come to a rectorie (or
Personage) by favour then by money? If wee will
judge indifferently, it is all one fault to creep in, whether
it be by bribing and simonie, or by fawning and
flatterie. The rest of the rout in the Countrey are diligent
in attending the common sort of Patrones,
whose thresholds they lye watching at, whose wives
they brave and court, as if they were their mistresses,
whose children they cogg with, whose servants they
allure with faire words, and promises, to be their
spokesmen, and in every place and poynt they play the
parts of miserable beggars. Some there are that begg
more craftily, like to those that sit in the high wayes,
or in places where two wayes meet, and there they offer
pilled rods to passengers, to get a peece of money
                     •
                  
                  
therewith as it were a pennieworth for a pennie. So
doe men make way for their suits, by large giving
of money in hand, or else by compacting to give
some of their yerely tithes for a gratification. But
some man will say, all this is not the corruption
of the Lawes, but the corruptions of men. Nay
surely, as long as that manner of conferring Ecclesiasticall
charges taketh place, which hath been in use
among us to this day, there can be no remedie applyed
to cure or prevent this beggarliness. Doe wee
not sufficiently find it to be true in experience? In
the late Parliament, Lawes were enacted severely against
it. But what came of that? nothing truely,
but that it made men deale more closely and cunningly,
to cosen the Law. We must not thinke to doe any
good with our lawes, where Christs lawes are not observed.
But to proceed, whence once the living is by
beggerie obteined from the Patron, what a deale of
begging worke is there to come, for those Sir Iohnlack
latines, that institution might be had from
the Bishops. Heere hee must supplicate, not onely to
the right reverend Bishops, but to Master Examiner,
to my Lords Groom of his Chamber, his Register,
the Yeoman of his Butterie, and Larder, yea,
the meanest, that belongeth unto him. Not that
want of Latine▪ and learning will keep him from
entrance into his benefice; but that he that hath need
of money for dispatch, or speech with my Lord, or
the like, must fee the servants the better, whose gaine
commeth trowling in this way. There is no Castle so
defenced which a Latinelesse asse laden with golden
mettell, may not scale and conquer. Neither is there
only almost so unfit, that hath the repulse, but by
what engines he prevaileth, let them looke to it. The
like is the condition of Praebendaries, Archdeacons,
and Deanes. Nay, are the Bishops themselves cleare

of this base beggarie? What meaneth then, that continuall
haunting of the court, and hanging upon the
Nobles? Why doe they not stay and wait, till they be
sent for? yea why are they not rather pulled away
from their studies against their wills? Nay rather, if
a man should appeale to their consciences, whether a
                     •
                  
not some of those fat demeasnes of their Bishoprickes
let out of their own accord, to such as they seeke, and
sue to, that might farme and hire them, or else are
there not other large bribes covenanted to be given to
such, as shall stand them in stead, for attaining of
those dignities? But are th
                     •
                  y onely thus beggarly in
their ambitious suing for their promotions? Nay truly
some of them are grown so extreamly base this
way, that if they bee to change their See, they pay not
their first fruits, but by racking together in a filt
                     •
                  y
fashion, an almes from the poorest vicars, which yet
must goe under the name of Benevolence, to make a
cleanly cloke withall.
            
            The price of simonie is not onely a gift in the
hand, of money, but also the servile flatterie of
the tongue, prayers and sollicitations, and officious
services of the body. Some Bishops have
made their porters ministers, as the authour of
the petition to the Queene doth witnesse. Simonie
is compared to the leprosie of Gebezi,
but they have a water to cleanse it, the Archbishops
court of faculties, where the Simoniacall
person may be washed, by a gracious, but a costly
dispensation.
            3. To grant a vacant benefice in title of
trust (which they call a Commendam) either
for a time or during life.
            Wee alledged before an example of him that
was Bishop of Glocester, and withall commendatare

of the Bishopricke of Bristow 16. yeares
altogether, by the late Queenes dispensation,P. 59. 597. Pelit. Anno 1603. as
witnesseth Godwin of Landaffe in his commentarie
of the English Bishops. Bishops are not
content with commendams of Bishoprickes,
but to make their Bishoprickss more corpulent
& fat, they take also fat parsonages, vicarages,
and Prebends, in commendams.
            4 That the sonne may succeed immediatly
to his fathers benefice.
            If the sonne claime kindnes, as we call it, to
his fathers benefice, he ought to be repelled, and
no dispensation should further him: for the
ministery doth not now discend by generation,
as in the tribe of Levi. But if he be sought, lawfully
chosen, and called by the Church, he may
very well be admitted to his fathers benefice,
without the dispensation of any Archbishop.
            5 That for a time, and for some weightie
cause, the beneficed person shall not bee
bound to make residence, but may serve by
another that is sufficient.
            Beneficed men are licenced to take up the
rents of the benefice, without making residence
on their cures, and charges. The Chaplaines of
the King, Prince, Noblemen, and Bishops, take
up the benefices of their parishes, and live notwitstanding
at Princes, Noblemen, and Bishops
houses. Mr. Leaver preaching before K.
Edward 6. sayd, Now my Lords both of the Laity
and Clergie, in the name of God I advertise you to
take heed, for when the Lord of all Lords shall see his
flockes scattered, spilt, and lost, if he will follow the

                     •
                  racke of blood, it will lead him straight way unto

                     •
                  his Court, and your houses, whereas those great

theeves, which murther, spoile, and destroy the flock
                     •
                  
of Christ, be received, kept and maintained. Hooper,
preaching before the said King, said, that
his Majestie should beginne at his owne Court,
and compell the Chaplaines to serve th
                  •
               se
soules, that labour for their livings, otherwise
he should put his owne soule in danger. The
Courts then of Princes, Nobles, Bishops, and
others, are the first denns of these soule-murtherers.
The second rank of dennes wherein
they lurke, is the universities of Cambridge,
and Oxford. There the fellowes of their Colledges,
benefice
                  •
                persons do make residence, &
not at the Churches to which their benefice
                  •
               
belong: but, as a Countreyman of their own

                  •
               aith, melting and dying there, like snayle
                  •
               
within their shelts. The third sort of Non-residents,
are Deanes and Prebendaries, lurking
in their Cathedrall Churches, as in dens,
devouring the benefices of Parishes lying farre
                  •
               
off in the meane time. Others are permitted
to take on orders, and to receive a benefice, and
after, as unsufficient to go to the universitie to
learn for the space of 3 years; and all this time
the parish doth perish with the famine of the
word. The beneficed parson who is non-resident,
oftentimes cannot preach, howbeit he
                  •
               
were willing:Can. 46. many other Non-residents there
are, wandring vagabonds, which are not lurking
in any of those dennes. Some have hirelings
to preach monethly or quarterly sermon
                  •
               
for them, to their flocks: But because they ar
                  •
               
hirelings, they carie not true love to the sheep▪
but onely serve for a little hire to the beneficed
parson, and performeth the taske agree
                  •
               
on betwixt them; not thinking to render account

one day to the Sheep-master, but answer
onely to the Sheepheard, the beneficed
person, whose wages he receiveth. Therefore
he dealeth not with the conscience, but perfunctoriously
performeth his prescribed taske for
his hire; for he thinkes the sheep not his charge.
but M. Parsons. They are like the Philistim
Priests, which laid the Arke of God upon a
cart, and hurled it with Oxen, which they
should have carried themselves. Although I
speake herein too favourably of the greatest
number of them, which doe not bestow so
much cost, as a new Cart, and a draft of Oxen
will come too,2 Repl. 1. part. p. 355. saith M. Cartwright. For
they have learned their husbandry of him,
saith he, which teacheth that alwayes it standeth
a man in least, which may be done by a
poore asse.
            6. That a Layman studying to letters may
retaine a Prebend, and yet not be compelled
to take on the Ministerie.
            If the office of the Prebendarie be necessarie,
then the Prebend ought not to bee bestowed
to another use. Then againe, to bestow
it on a Lay-man, and not to prepare him for
the use of the Ministerie, is farre from the intention
of the donatour.
            7. That a man entred in holy orders,
and otherwise qualified according to the
Lawes, may enjoy two Ecclesiasticall
Benefices, if they bee Benefices of Cure

within a certeine distance; if without cure,
without respect of distance.
            Pluralitie of benefices doth include also nonresidence.
For the pluralist cannot make residence
at 2. or 3.
                  
                     •
                  astal. residence. 2. divers parishes at once. By
statute made 21. Henr. 8. it was provided, that
spirituall men being of the kings Councel, may
purchase licence or dispensation, and take, receive,
and keep three Parsonages or Benefices
with cure of soules, Chaplaines to the King,
Queen, Prince or Princes, or any of the Kings
children, brethren, sisters, vncles or Aunts, two
parsonages or benefices with cure of souls. Every
Archbishop, and Duke may have 6. Chaplaines,
whereof every one may have two Parsonages
or Benefices with cure of soules: a Marquise
of Earle five Chaplaines, whereof every
one may have two Parsonages, or benefices with
cure of soules. Every Dutchesse, Marquesse,
Countesse, and Baronesse, being widowes, two
Chaplaines, the Treasurer and Controller of
the Kings houses, the Kings secretarie, and
Dean of his Chappel, the Kings Amner, and the
master of the Rolls, two Chaplaines: the chiefe
Iustice of the Kings bench, and the warden of
the five ports one Claplaine, every one with
two benefices of cure of soules, Lords sonnes,
Lords brethren, knights sonnes, Doctors and
Batchelers of divinity, Doctors of Law, and Batchelers
of the Canon law. Provided also that every
Archbishop, because hee must occupie 8 Chaplains at
cons
                     •
                  cration of Bishops: And every Bishop because 
                     •
                  e
must occupie 7 Chaplains, at giving of orders, & consecration
of Churches, may every one of them have

two Chaplaines over and above the number above limited
unto them, whereof every one may purchase
licence of dispensations, and take, receive, and keepe as
many Parsonages, or benefices with cure of soules. In
the Record of the worthy proceedings, it is sayd,
that by the provisoes of that statute, the Kings
Chaplaines may have as many benefices as they can
get,
               P. 10. 
               without stint, and some others may have 4. benefices
with cure at one time in severall counties, and
some two benefices and yet bee resident upon none of
them, so long as hee attendeth upon his Lord and
master, which is a thing intollerable in a Christian
common wealth.
            
            One person will have a mastership of a Colledge
in one corner of the land,
               1. Reply p▪ 46. 
               a Deanrie in another, a
Prebend in the third, as Mr. Cartwright reporteth.
The author of the petition to the Queen
reporteth, that manie have three or foure benefices
scattered one from another an hundred miles.
               P. 71. In the
41. Canon of the late constitutions, it is licensed
onely to such as have taken the degree of a
Master of Arts,Can. 41. at the least in one of the universities,
and be publick and licenced teachers, to
have moe benefices with cure, then one, providing
the sayd benefices bee not more then 30.
miles distant asunder. But what saith Brightman
to the like Canon made before. What hurt
have masters of Arts done thee, or how have they offended
thee, that thou shouldst owe and doe unto
them this mischiefe, to make them in the first place
guiltie of so great a sinne? Thou confessest that
pluralitie is evil, and a thing to be suppressed, and yet
thou givest them leave in thy indulgence to bee infected
with this pestilent disease. Doubtlesse it is a notable
priviledge of their degree, that they may bee naught

before any others. Pluralitie of benefice
                  •
               
distant 30. mile, doth include non-residence, as
well as of an 100 mile. The Sun is farther distant
from us then the Moon, yet it is not possible
for us to touch the Moon. The last petition
for reformation relateth that double beneficed
men are suffered to hold some 2 or 3. benefices
with cure: and some 2, 3, or 4 dignities besides.
The defender of the said petition doth report,
that their double beneficed men are almost sance
number.
               P. 132. If benefices without cure of soules, require
notwithstanding an office, and attendance
upon that office, he cannot lawfully enioy it together
with a benefice of cure. It is observed
by some, that there is not one almost of their
bishops, but he was first a Non-resident or pluralist,
or else hee could not have had sufficient
meanes to obtaine the bishoprick.
            Generally: whence it is, that the Archbishop
may dispense in all causes not repugnant
to the word, if heretofore they have
been used or accustomed to bee had at the
Sea of Rome, or if not accustomed to bee
obtained at the Sea of Rome, if the Prince
himselfe, or those who are of his secret councell
doe permit.
            We heard of some speciall dispensations before:
now we heare that the Archbishop may
dispense in all causes dispensed heretofore by
the Pope of Rome, and more also. The Pope
was never duly qualified to be a lawfull dispenser,
no more is the Archbishop. Where it is
sayd, if the matter it selfe be not repugnant to

the word of God, it is to no purpose: for the
Pope will not say, that hee dispenseth in any
thing repugnant to the word of God, howbeit
he doth it in effect, and so doth the Archbishop.
For simonie, non-residencie, pluralitie of
benefices, readmission after the irregularitie of
apostasie, observation of superstitious dayes
and times, not eating of flesh in Lent and forbidden
dayes, which are here expressed, are repugnant
to the law of God. Therefore he may
take the like libereie in usurie, perjurie, incest,
mariage within degrees of the Leviticall law,
and the rest of the cases and causes which were
reserved to the Pope of old.
            It is not without reason then that the authours
of the Admonition call this Court a
filthy quagmire, and poysoned plash of all abbominations,
seeing the filth of all these abominations
are washed here, and the guiltie person
commeth forth after the Archbishops dispensation,
as white as snow, leaving his filth behind
in that Court.
            Beside the Prerogative Court, the Court
of Arches, the Court of Audience, the Court
of Faculties, the Archbishop hath yet another
Court, called the Court of Peculiars, which
dealeth in certaine Parishes exempt from the Bishops
iuris
                     •
                  iction in some Diocesse,
               Camd. Brit▪ p. 181. 
               and are peculiarlie
belonging to the Archbishop of Canterburie.
Hee hath also inferiour Courts, such as other
Bishops have. You see then, Canterburie is
a petie Pope, or according to Bancrofts reckoning,
a vice-pope, made up of the old
spoyles of comprovinciall Bishops and Synods,
and also with the new spoyls of the Pope,
beeing armed beside with the Kings delegate

temporall power in the High Commission, and
so greater in his intensive power, then ever he
was in time of Poperie. And when the union
shall be accomplished, shal be greater in his extensive
power also, with his Courts over-ruling
our Nation, and shall be vice-pope of this
little World, O if faithfull Patriots would forsee
and prevent this. The least of their Ceremonies
will prepare a way to this mischiefe.
         
         
            CHAP. 4. Of the Dignitie, and Power of English
Bishops.
            IN the former chap
                  •
               er we did onely give, not
grant superiorite of Bishops over Pastors,
which being supposed, we medled onely
with the vnlawfull power and dignitie of
Archbishops, but the truth is, that the superioritie
of Bishops over Pastors is unlawfull also.
By divine Law, one Pastor is not superiour in
degree above another, no more then one Apostle
or Euangelist above another Apostle or
Euangelist. The name of Bishops was not appropriate
to any eminent rank of Pastors, but
was common to all, as may be seene Act. 20.
Philip. 1. 1. Timoth. 3. Tit. 1. 1. Pet. 5. And
that their office was also common may be sene
in the same places from whence Hierome in
his Epistle to Evagrius doth conclude, that a
Bishop, and Presbyter was all one, And in his
Commentarie on the Epistle to Titus cap. 1.
that communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabātur,
the Churches were governed by the joynt

advice of Presbyters. Our Opposites say, that government
was onely private in the inner court,
the court of Conscience, not publicke in the
externall court, or Consistorie. It was so in the
time of Poperie, when the Priests were excluded
from the externall governement of the
Church, which Bishops did vendicate to themselves,
and their Courts, the poore Priest having
no further power, then to receive privately
auricular confession, ponder the weight of
secret faults, and accordingly to enjoyne pennance.
But Hierome speaketh not of a severall,
but of a common councell, and joynt care of
many assembled together. For this private government
in the inner Court of conscience,
was not onely then, but continueth to this day,
wherby every Pastor may deal with the consciences
of any of his own flock. But Hierome
speaketh of a government, which was altered after
the Apostles times, and different from the
Episcopall government which followed, When
the Churches were thus governed in common,
by joynt advice of Presbyters, they had not a
perpetuall President; or as we use to speake, a
constant Moderator, who had this preeminence
during life set over them, to moderate the common
Meetings, but they choosed their Presidents,
and changed them, as they thought fit.
No Pastor could claime this prioritie of order,
and direction of the common Meetings, as belonging
to him of office. The Apostles did no
where institute this same small difference of
Pastors, that some during life should be moderators
of the rest, let be that majoritie of rule,
and superiority in power, which Bishops doe
claime. The Pastors, who were at Alexandria,

the first we read to have set up a constant Moderator,
to whom also they did appropriate the
name of Bishop. This was the beginning of
that great mischiefe which followed: This was
the Cockatrice egge out of the which Antichrist
himselfe was hatched: For this perpetuall
Presidencie and prioritie of order, did degenerate
in superiority of power, and majoritie
of rule, and the Bishops growing to some
grandeur, they behoved to have an Archbishop,
and at last a Pope. So that if a Bishop
had not beene, a Pope had not been, and if
there had not been a Pope, the great Antichrist
had not been.cap. 2. 
               Boni-gratis, supposed to
be the author of the Treatise de aetatibus Ecclesiae,
wondereth that the Popes Monarchie
should arise from so small a beginning. But
the Apostle telleth us, that that iniquitie was
a Mysterie, and that this Mysterie was working
under ground even in his time. For even the
Apostolicall times wanted not a proud Diotrephes,
loving preeminence. A little seed will
bring forth a great Tree. If the Discipline
had not beene corrupted, as well as doctrine,
the great Antichrist could not have risen. All
the errours and heresies in doctrine and matters
of faith, which have entered in the Church,
could not have brought him in, unlesse errour
and corruption in the government had entred
in also; for unlesse this had been he could pretend
no claime at all to governe and rule.
            I come therefore to our English bishops.
Let a man travell through Italie where the
Pope is, or Spaine where the Spanish Inquisition
is, he shall finde no difference betwixt
the power of an Italian, Spanish, or English

bishop. The English bishop is the same now
for power and greatnesse that hee was an hundred
years since in the time of poperie. There
are foure things chiefly to bee considered in
him: First, the derivation of his power: 2.
the sole exercise of his authority. 3. the deputation
of this his authoritie. 4. his extensive
power. As for the first, they are not bishops,
as we have sayd, iure divino, by divine institution,
or right, nor cannot bee. Neither are they
Bishops by humane law, that is, the constitutions
of the ancient Church, which imprudently
and unhappily set up the first bishops, erring
in taking up right the nature of Church government,
and the qualities of the Antichrist,
who was to be revealed but in the full time.
For they are not of that kinde of Bishops,
which ruled together with the Presbyterie or
Ecclesiasticall Senate, but they are bishops by
the Municipall law of the land onely in the
judgement of the lawes. For all their iurisdiction
& power is united and anexed to the crown,
from whence it is derived, as from a source,
unto them, and by law they are bound, to make
their proces and writings, in the kings name,
and not in their own names, and that their seals
should be graved with the Kings armes, as I
have already declared in the first chapter. It
is true, that they make processes in their owne
name, and use their own seals, but herein they
transgresse the formes prescribed by lawTheir
manner of holding in Capite, in chiefe
of the king, their Episcopall power and jurisdiction
is not changed for all that want of
formalitie, as before I have cleared out of Bishop
Farrars answer.
            
               
Sir Edward Cooke in the 5. booke of his Reports,
doth prove, That the Function, and Iurisdiction
of Bishops and Archbishops in England, is
by and from the Kings of England; and concludeth,
that though the proceedings, and progresse
of the Ecclesiasticall Courts run in the
Bishops name, yet both their courts and lawes,
whereby they proceed, are the Kings, as M.
Sheerwood in his Reply to Downam doth report.
So then all the acts of their Episcopall
jurisdiction are performed by authoritie derived
from the King. If ye will call that authoritie
civill, then actions of a spirituall nature
are performed by a civill authoritie, which is
absurd. But seeing this is impossible, that civill
authoritie can be elevated to so high a nature,
it must follow, that it is truely spirituall power,
which is united to, and derived from the possessor
of the Crown, I meane, in the estimation
of men and judgement of the Law: howbeit
in it selfe, and by Gods Law, it cannot be done.
It followeth therefore that all the Iurisdiction
properly spirituall, which the English Prelates
doe exercise, as Prelates, is unlawfull, how soever
they have the warrant of mens Lawes.
It is but onely to save their own credite, that
they have set Downam. Bilson, and other their
friends on worke, to plead, that Bishops are
above Pastors jure divino, by divine Institution,
which they are not able to prove.
            Next is to be considered their sole authoritie,
which is censured by Sir Francis Bacon, now
Chancellour of England, after this manner,
There be two circumstances in the administration of
Bishops, wherein I confesse I could never be satisfied.
The one, the sole exercise of their authoritie. The other,

the deputation of their authoritie. For the first,
the Bishop giveth orders alone, excommunicateth alone,
judgeth alone. This seemeth to bee a thing almost
without exemple in government, and therefore
not unlikely to have crept in, in the degenerate and
corrupt times. We see that the greatest Kings and
Monarches have their councell. There is no temporal
Court in any land of the higher sort, where the authoritie
doth rest in one person. The Kings bench,
common pleas, and the Exchequer, are benches of a
certain number of judges. The Chauncellour of England

                  •
               ath the assistance of 12 masters of the Chauncerie.
The master of the Words hath 4 Councell of
the court: so hath the Chauncellour of the Dutchy.
In the Exchequer chamber the Lord Treasurer is
ioyned with the Chauncellour and the Barons. The
Masters of Requests are ever more then one. The
justices of Assize are two. The Lord President in
the Marches, and in the North, have Councell of
divers. The Starre Chamber is an Assembly of the
Kings privie Councell, aspersed with Lords spirituall
and temporall. So as, in all the Courts, the principal
person hath ever, either colleagues, or assessours. The
like is to be found in other well governed kingdomes
abroad, where the jurisdiction is yet more distributed,
as in the Courts of Parliament of France, and
in other places. No man will deny, but the acts, that
passe by the Bishops iurisdiction, are of as great importance,
as those that posse by the civill Courts. For
mens soules are more pretious then their bodies, and
so are their good names. Bishope have their infirmities,
and have no exception from that generall malediction
against all men living, Vae soli, nam si ceciderit,
&c. Nay, we see, that the first warrant in
spirituall causes is directed to a number, Dic Ecclesiae,
which is not so in temporall matters. And wee

see that in generall causes of Church government,
there are as well assemblies of all the Clergie in councels,
as of the Estates in Parliament, whence the
                  •
               
should this sole exercise of jurisdiction come? Surely
I doe suppose, and I doe thinke upon good ground,
that ab initio non fuit ita, and that the Deanes and
Chapters were councells, about the Seas and Chaires
of Bishops at the first, and were unto them a Presbyterie,
or Consistorie, and medled not onely with the
disposing of their revenues, and endowments, but
much more in jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall. But that
is probable, that the Dean and Chapter stucke close
to the Bishop in matters of profit, and the worlds, and
would not loose their hold. But in matters of jurisdiction
(which they accounted but trouble and attendance)
they suffred the Bishops to encroch, and
usurpe, and so the one continueth, and the other is
lost. And we see, that the Bishop of Rome (fas est
ab hoste doceri) and no question in that Church
the first institutions were excellent) performeth all
Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, as in Consistorie. And
whereof consisteth this his Consistorie, but of the
parish priests of Rome, which terme themselves Cardinals,
a Cardinibus mundi, because the Bishop
pretendeth to bee universall over the whole world.
And hereof againe we see divers shadowes yet remain,
in as much as the Deane and Chapter, pro forma,
chooseth the Bishop, which is the highest poynt of
iuris
                  •
               iction. And that the Bishop when hee giveth
orders, if there be any ministers casually present, calleth
them to ioyne with him in imposition of hands,
and some other particulars. And therefore that seemeth
to me a thing reasonable, and religious, and according
to the first institution, that Bishops in the
greatest causes, and those which require a spirituall
discerning, namely the ordaining, suspending, or depriving

               Ministers, in excommunication, being restored
to the true and proper use, as shall be afterward
touched, in sentencing the validitie of marriage, and
legitimations, in judging causes criminous, as Simonie,
incest, blasphemie and the like, should not proceed
sole and unassisted: which point as I understand,
is a reformation that may be planted sine
strepitu, without any perturbation at all, and that
is a mater which will give strength to the Bishops,
countenance to the inferiour degrees of Prelates, or
Ministers, and the better issue or proceeding in
those causes, that shall passe. And as I wish thi
                  •
               
strength given to your Bishops in Councell, so that
is not unworthy your Majesties
                  •
                royall consideration,
whether you shall not thinke fit to give strength
to the generall councell of your Clergie the convocation
house, which was then restreyned, when the
state of the Clergie was thought a suspected part of
th
                  •
                Kingdome, in regard of their late homage to the
Bishop of Rome▪ which state now will give place
to none in their loyaltie, and devotion to your Majestie.
Where it is sayd here, that Deane and
Chapters were at the first counsellers to Bishops,
it is to be understood at the first time of
erecting Deane or Chapter, not at the first setting
up a Bishop; far lesse at the first forme of
Church-government planted by the Apostles.
For Presbyters were before Bishops, and when
Bishops were set up at the first, they were set
up by the Presbyterie, and that in the degree
of perpetuall Moderatorship and Presidentship
onely: neither was there a particular
choice made of some Presbyters to sit in judgement
with this President, nor another besides
this President Bishop, to be Deane of the Presbyterie;
for that had beene to make a President

above a president and some Presbyters Cardinall
Presbyters of more esteeme the
                  •
                the rest.Act. 1
                     •
                  .
In the Church of Ierusalem all the Presbyten
governed,Act. 21. not a selected number. D. Field,
               Of the chur. 1. 5. c. 28. p. 142. 143. a defender
of the hierarchie, acknowledgeth this,
That for a long time there was no more respect had
to one Presbyter then to another, but all equal
                     •
                  y interessed
in the government of the Church, were indifferently
called to the election of the Bishops, 
                     •
                  nd his
consultations, it is most cleare and evid
                     ••
                  t A
                  ••
                this
he proveth in speciall of the Church of Rome
by Cyprian. And the first appearance of this
difference, that not all, but Car
                  •
               inall Pres
                  •
               yters
onely were called to the common consultations
in the Church of Rome it selfe, that he
found, is in the time of Gregorius Magnus, that
is, about 600 yeares after Christ; yet he leaveth
this as uncertaine. But certaine it is (sayth
he) that all the Clergi
                     •
                   had interest in the choyce &
election of the Bishop, even in Gregories time. As
if now the whole ministerie and Cleargie of
the citie of Lon
                  •
               on should be admitted to the
election of the Bishop, and not some few Chapiter
men onely.De clericis, cap. 8. Yea Bellarmine him selfe sayth,
Non enim jus divinum definivit▪ ut hi potius, quam
illi ex clericis eligant. For divine 
                     〈◊〉
                   hath not determined,
that such and such of the Clergie more
then others, should choose. But afterwords in processe
of time,
               
                  
                     •
                  . 5. P. 143. (sayth D. Field) the Cardin
                     •
                  lls onely
had interest in the election of their Bishop, and
they and no other were admitted to sit in Co
                     ••
                  cell
with the Bispop, all other Presbyters being excluded.
By which meanes the dignitie of these Cardinals was
greatly encreased. Again, Now these Cardinall presbyters
were not onely in the Chur
                     •
                  h of Rome▪
               
               P. 142. 
               but in
other Churches also, as Duarenus sheweth. So the institution

of this difference was so farre from
being excellent, that it thrust lawfull pastors
from the government of their owne particular
charges, & the joynt government of the church,
and increased the dignitie of Cardinalls. These
Cardinals were but parish priests and Deacons,
resident in their parishes and titles. So are not
our Chapitermen. But that assistance and councel
in proces of time went out of use also. So it is
ever dangerous to depart from the right partern
and shape formes of government to our selves.
Alwayes this polititian alledgeth very pertinently
to the shame of our bishops, and their
sole government, that the Bishop of Rome
performeth all Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction as in
Consistorie, We heard how Archbishops were
made up with the spoyles of the Synodes. So
the Bishops were made up with the spoyles of
the Presbyteries. Would you not thinke it very
absurd, to see the Moderator sit by himselfe, exercise
all manner of Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction
without the Presbyterie. Of the Deane and
Chapter wee will have occasion to entreat aagaine.
            The third thing to be considered in the English
Bishop, is the deputation of his authoritie.
He hath griped greedily, and taken in his own
hands, all the power of the Church, and when
he hath done that, because he is neither able nor
willing to discharge this burthen which he taketh
on himselfe, hee transferreth his charge
unto other officers under him. He hath taken
from the Pastors the pastorall staffe of government,
which belongeth to every shepheard, that
is set to keepe Christs sheep, and left them nothing
but the pastorall pype, to preach and minister

the sacraments, and hath put that pastoral
staffe in the hands of strangers who are not the
true sheepherds, that is in the hands of Chancelours,
Archdeacons, officialls, and Cōmissariet,
vicars generall, and the rest of that Antichristian
                  •
               able
of officers.
            The 4. is their extensiue power. For wheras
the presbyterie choosed, and set up a Bishop,
and no presbyter was excluded from common
consultation and judgement, and their meeting
behoved to be ordinarie, for exercise of ordinarie
jurisdiction in the Church, wher they governed,
the bounds of the Bishops jurisdiction
could be no larger nor the bounds of the presbyteries
jurisdiction, that is wher all the presbyters
might convene to exerce ordinarie jurisdiction.
All the presbyters of a shire, or countie
could not convene ordinarilie and weeklie
together to exerce ordinarie ecclesiasticall jurisdiction.
Neither is any where in the new Testamen
                  •
               ,
a visible Church endowed with power
of ecclesiasticall government taken for a whole
shire, or Countie. We reade of the Church of
Ephesus, Philippi, Ierusalem, Corinth, Thessalonica
&c. But to call the particular congregations
in the countries extended in le
                  •
               gth and
breadth about these cities, the church of thes
                  •
               
cities, is absurd, and no where to be found. H
                  •
               
would be thought to speake ridiculously, wh
                  •
               
would under the name of the church of Saint
andros, comprehend all the congregations i
                  •
               
Mers, Lothian, and 
                  •
               ife: or under the name of
the church of Glasgow, all the congregations i
                  •
               
Teviotdale, Nithsdale, clidsdale, &c. Citi
                  •
               
churches and towne churches the scriptur
                  •
               
knoweth, but not countrie churches. F
                  ••
               
               
when the scripture speaketh of a Province or
Countrey, it speaketh in the plurall number
Churches, not Church, in the singular.
Seing then there was no Diocesan Church, ther
was no Diocesan Presbyterie, nor Diocesan
Bishop. No Church is above another. The
Church of Corinth had no superioritie over
the Church of Cenchrea, which was next adiacent.
And consequently the Presbyterie of
one Church hath not superioritie over another
Church, therefore the Bishop chosen by the
by the Presbyterie of one Church, hath not
power over the Presbyterie of another Church.
Neyther can he possibly exercise ordinarie iurisdiction
in divers Churches, and Presbyteries,
except yee will make him a Pluralist,
and have him gallop from one to another, to
keepe the ordinarie meetings, which galloping
was not kaowen in the Apostles times. But
Bishops have spred their wings over many
cities and townes, whole Countries, and
Shires, that they are not able, suppose they
were willing to execute the power, which they
claime, in their owne persons, but must of
necessity depute others. And whom depute
they, I pray you? Doctours of the civill
lawe, whom they make Chauncelours, Officials,
Commissaries and other officers of the
Canon law. Suppose they should depute
ecclesiasticall persons onely, yet this should
not free them of guiltynes. For it is a personall
duety which the scripture requireth of
the officebearers of the Church.
            At the first Bishops were placed in little
townes, aswell as in great cities, and were not

so thin sowne, as since that avarice and ambition
have made them to dispise obscure places,
and to strive who should have the largest Diocies:
Nay even in England the Diocies of old
were not so large as now. The Bishoprick of
York hath devoured many smaller bishopricks
next adjacent▪ as Camden reporteth in his Brittannia.
The Bishoprick of Lincolne hath likewise
devovred many bishopricks, which were in
the time of the Saxons, and howbeit it hath
been greatly impaired, yet there are 1247. parish
churches in that Diocie at this day, as is related
by Camden. These generalls being premitted,
I will be the briefer in the particulars.
            Bishops considered simply as Bishops, of
which in England there are 24. whose estate
is to be considered, eit
                  •
               er in the common-wealth,
or in the Church. In the
common-wealth, in that they have the title
of Lords in respect of their Baronie annexed
to the Bishoprick. 2. to have precedence
before other Barons in the convention of
th
                  •
               ee thre Estates, or in other meetings.
            They tell us that Elias and Elizeus, 1. King. 18.
2. King▪
                2 were called Lords, and if the prophe
                  •
               s
were of old so stiled, why may not they also?
By this reason all prophets and pastors should
be so honoured. But the tuth is, that the name
of Lord was given by the wife to her husband,
Gen. 18. 12. and to any man of honest account,
howbeit to mean men, as to Philip. Ioh. 12. 21.
to Gardiners, Ioh. 20. 15. and was more common
among the orientalls, then Sir is with us.

               Elias and Elizeus were not Barons, and for their
B
                  •
               ronies stiled Lords aboue the common sort.
But that stile is with us attributed onely to
Lords of dignitie, to Noblemen, and other officers
of State. As for Bishops, you may see,
that they are so stiled in respect that they are
Barons howbeit D. Downam doth aledge,Defens. 1. 3. p. 150. that
they are so stiled in regard of their spirituall office
and jurisdiction. The first respect is forbidden;
Luk. 22. 25. as wee have sayd before.
The second respect is as unlawfull: for there
are no Lords in the Church but one Christ,
who is Lord and King. Their ambitious and
arrogant precedencie in taking place before
great Barons, is another part of their pompe.
Their statelinesse and pompe is set forth also in
their glorious palaces, & sumptuous buildings.
Their chambers doe shine with guilt,
               1. Reply p. 97. 
               their walles are
hanged with cloth of Auris, their cupboards are laden
with plate, their tables and diets are furnished
with multitude and diversitie of dishes, their dayly
dinners are feasts: They have 30. 40. 60. or moe every
one of them of men waiting on them, some before
some behind, whereof three parts of them (set a
part the carying of a dish unto the table) have no honest
or profitable calling to accupie themselves in,
two houres in the day, to the filling of the Church
and common wealth also, with all kinde of disorders,
as Mr. Cartwright an eyewitnesse doth testifie.
Many Churches lye desolate for want of sufficient
provisioes, whose impropriations are appropried
to bishops to maintaine their pompe
and statelines, and bestowed upon keeping great
horses, caroches, and trains of men. I need not
to insist in this poynt, it is so sensible to any
man, who hath but common sence.
            
               
In the Church by reason of their calling,
or of their function. In their externall calling
to the Bishopricke, some things respect
the Prince, some things respect other Bishops.
The Prince before election may 1.
nominate. 2. grant facultie to choose.
After the election finished, 1. yeeldeth his
Royall assent, 2. directeth his mandate to
the Arch-bishop to confirme him and
other two, to consecrate, 3. exacteth the
oath of homage from the new bishop,
4. Restoreth to him the possessions of
the Bishoprick. Such things as respect other
Bishops, respect either the Archbishop, or
him and others: the Archbishop, as him
who is to confirme the election. Him and
two others, as who are to consecrate him according
to the direction of the book of orders.
            When the bishops Sea is destitute, the Deane
and Chapter make intimation to the King of
their want of a Bishop, and humble supplication
for licence to choose another. The King by
letters patents under his great seale, granteth
them licence: and with the letters patents sendeth
a missive, commending the person, who is
to be chosen, some man who hath waited long
on the Court, and promised to some courtier
an annuitie out of his Bishopricke during life,
or some other gift. After this election, which is
made after the Papisticall manner by Deane
and Chapter, and a superficiall manner, or pro
forma, as Sir Francis Bacon, now Lord Chaunlour,

sayd, the Deane and Chapter do intimate
their feigned processe of election to the King:
againe, praying the King to yeeld his Royall
assent to the Lord elected. The King directeth
his letter patents for warant to the Archbishop,
or some other whom hee shall appoynt,
to confirme and consecrate my Lord
elect. The consecration being finished, and the
bishop having done homage, and sworne fealtie,
the Kings writ is directed out of the Chancerie
to the Escheator, to restore to him
the temporalities of the Bishopricke. And
the Bishop may procure another writ out of
the Chauncerie, directed to his tenants,
commanding them to take him for their Lord.
This order of proceeding is thus described by
the authour of the Assertion for true Church
P. 274. 275. policie. Here are many imaginarie formes,
and mockage, rather then sound dealing. The
libertie of election of Pastors, if Diocesan bishops
were true Pastors, is taken from the
Church, and the Church deluded with a
May-game.
            Now as for his consecration, howbeit the
Scripture doth not teach us two distinct forms
of ordination, one called▪ consecration proper to
a Lord Bishop, the other by the generall
name of ordination, peculiar to a minister,
yet wee will let you see the Rites of their consecration,
how all are taken out of the Popes
Pontificall, as may be gathered by conferring
the book of Orders with the said Pontificall.
A table is prepared for the Masse-book, and the
pontifical: so is here a table furnished with the
service book, and the book of orders. There two
bishops are present to assist the Consecrator,

ordained to have on the Rochet, if not the Ro
                  •
               che
                  •
               ,
a surpl
                  •
               ce. Here all the Bishops that be present
at the consicration of Bish
                     •
                  ps, should wear
                     •
                  
coapes and surplices, having pastorall staves in their
hands. They retaine the surplice, seldome the coape,
but they never use their pastorall staves, sayth the
Author of the petition to the Queen And yet
they have a staffe to beat out a painfull minister
out of the Church, if he take not on a surplice.
But in the abridgement of the ministers
of Lincolne, it is sayd, that in the former edition
(of the book of ordination) which seemes by the
36.P. 102. 
               article to be that, wee are required to subscribe
unto, and which; it may be, some of the Bishops doe
still use, there are other corruptions, as that the coape,
albe, surplice, tuni
                     •
                  le, and pistorall staffe, are appointed
to be used in ordination and consecration. There
the elected is presented by two Bishops, to the
consecrator, who is sitting, and the elder of the
two Bishops sayth, Most reverend father in
God, &c. So here he is presented by two bishops
to the Archbishop, or any other bishop having
commission, to whom one of them sayth Most
reverend father in God, we present unto you this godly
and learned man, that he may be consecrate bishop.
There none is consecrate till the commission be
shewed: here likewise the Archbishop is carefull
to have the Kings mandate anent his consecration,
to be produced and read. There the
elected taketh an oath upon his knees to the
Pope, and another of obedience to the Archbishop:
so here they must take one oath concerning
the supremacie, another of canonicall
obedience to the Archbish. There the Archbi.
demandeth some questions, so also here. There
is sayd, or song, Veni Creat
                     •
                  r; so here. There the

Archbishop together with the Bishops then
present, laying on their hands, say, Receive the
holy Ghost: so here also, as if the one could
give, and the other receive the holy spirit from
his finger ends. By the book of ordaining Prists
and Deacons, the Archbishop should lay the
Bible upon the bishops neck, that is to be ordained,
and put a pastorall staffe in his hand, sayth
the authour of the petition to the Queenes Majestie,
but they put the Bible in his hand,P. 6. and
observe not the former direction, or else follow
a later booke of ordinations. After these
things being done, the consecrator and his assistants
communicate with the new consecrated
bishop, so here also. The Gospels, the Collects,
the Epistles, the Letanie, which are here used for
the most part, are borrowed from the same Pontificall,
and the Letanie interrupted here also
as there. There the consecrator sayth nothing
more ordes
                  •
               e, then is set down in the booke, either
when he prayeth, or demandeth, or consecrateth;
so here. There the consecrator putteth
gloves on the hands of the consecrated. Here
the consecrated Bishop dealeth gloves, as I
heare, to his friends: for why, now he is maried,
and the mariage betwixt him and the Church,
which was begun by the election, is consummate,
they say, by consecration. Should not
then the bridegroome deale gloves among his
friends? That day that our Bishops were first
consecrated at London, their bride at home understood
nothing of the matter.
            In respect of his function, either in things
concerning Episcopall order, or concerning
iurisdiction. Concerning Episcopall order,

as 1. to ordaine Deacons and Ministers according
to the prescript of the booke of ordinations,
2. to dedicate Churches and buriall
places, 3. to confirme children.
            The power of order as they call it, that is a
power and authority which is given to men
sanctified and set apart from others, to performe
such acts as belong to the service of God,
and the discharge of the pastorall function, it
acknowledged by D. Field,
               Of the chur. 5. c. 27.
as also by the sounder
sort of the Romanists themselves, to be equall
& the same in all pastors, and that there
is not a greater power of order in the Bishops
then Presbyters. If the power of order, and
authoritie to intermedle in things pertaining
to Gods service, be equall and the same in all
Presbyters, who hath power to abridge this
their power, and limitate the exercise of it? To
reserve the exercise of it to the Bishop, as if he
alone may give orders, or if other ministers
joyne either casually or by Canon, with him,
that it is not for consecration, but for consent
and approbation onely, or that a whole Presbyterie
cannot ordaine, that is, sanctifie, dedicate
or set apart any person to the ministery,
unlesse there be a Bishop present to utter the
words of consecration, is not onely absurd,
because it imports that God hath bestowed on
them a facultie which they cannot put in execution,
but also dangerous for the Church
of God, as experience of the last age hath
manifested. For then all the Ministers in
France, and other reformed Churches, who
received not imposition of hands by bishops,
should not be lawfull Ministers.
            
               
Their shift of the case of necessitie, is no shift
at all. For if they have that power by divine
right as they pretend, the other may in no
case usurpe it. Further, seeing nature giveth
not faculties in vaine, wee must not thinke
that Christ gaue a power or facultie to be idle.
The gifts and faculties he gaue, hee gave them,
to be imployed, not onely in time of necessitie,
but at all convenient times and occasions offered.
Where do they finde in all scripture this
exception of the case of necessitie. Where the
law of God doth not distinguish ought man to
distinguish? The prayer out of the mouth of
a divine bishop, a minister appoynted by the
presbyterie to moderate the action, is it of lesse
efficacie then the prayer out of the mouth either
of an human or Satanicall Bishop. As for
imposition of hands, it is a rite onely, which is
common to all, and not essentiall.
            Seeing then to ordaine ministers belongeth
to the power of order, as to preach the word,
and minister the sacraments doth, and that this
power is common to all pastors, the validity or
invaliditie of ordination, ought not to depend
upon a bishop, set up by mans appointment and
invention; and that it was but an invention of
man, is clear, in that this reservation & restraint
came in but by corrupt canons. In the councell
of Ancyra a canon was made, to forbid the presbyters
of the Citie to ordaine presbyters and
Deacons without the bishops permission, wherby
appeareth, that before that Canon was
made, they had ordained some without the Bishops,
either presence or permission: and
yet their ordinations were not made voyd:
and that after the making of the Canon, they

yea it is confessed that this is reserved unto
them,
                  
                     •
                  ontra Lu
                  
                     •
                  eranos. 
               potius ad honorem sacerdetij, quam ob legis
necessitatem, rather for for the honour of their
Priesthood, then the necessitie of any law, at
Hierome sayth.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Psal. 26. 
               Beda sayth in plainer tearmes,
that for pride aud arrogancie this as many other
things were not permitted to Priests, but reserved
to Bishops. That which the Iesuite Swarez
sayth,
                  
                     •
                  n aqui. tom. 
                     〈◊〉
                   disput. 36. 
                     •
                  ct. 1.
concerning confirmation, Si prestyteri ex
visuae ordinationis haberent sufficientem potestatem
ordinis ad hoc sacramentum ministrandum, sine causa
in universum prohiberentur illud conferre, may
be applied to that which I affirmed of ordination,
that God gave not faculties and powers to
be idle. I have as yet onely supposed this their
confirmation to be lawfull. But let us now see
what it is. The bishop, or such as he shall appoynt,
apposeth the children in some questions
of a short catechisme; for hee taketh not the
paines to doe it alwayes by himselfe. Then are
they brought to the bishop, not by the minister,
but by a godfather and a godmother, for they
must have a godfather and godmother at confirmation,
as at baptisme. The Curate of the
parish needeth not to come, but may send the
childrens names in writing. In the first prayer
the bishop prayeth for the 7. gifts of the spirit,
which the Papists say, they receiue in confirmation.
Then the bishop wil not lift up his hands
and blesse them in common, as the Priests in
the old law did, when they blessed a multitude,
or great number, but they must be brought to
him one by one, that he may lay his hand on every
childe severally. For there is some efficacie,
say they, in that signe. For they say, that
imposition of hands is one of the externall

meanes, by the which the holy Ghost is given?
And howbeit that prayer have the chief force, yet
imposition of hands hath some also. In
baptisme we receive forgivenesse of sinnes but
the principall grace we receiue in confirmation,
is say they, strength and defence against all tentations
to sinne, and the assaults of the world.
The Papists and they make the like destinction
betwixt baptisme and confirmation. The Papists
say, the comforter promised by Christ to
his Church, was bestowed in the sacrament of
confirmation. The same prayer for the comforter
use they. The grace which is begun in
baptisme, they say is per
                  •
               ected in confirmation,
as the Papist sayth: as if, when we were baptized,
we were but halfe Christians. In the prayer
after the laying on of hands, it is 
                  〈◊〉
               , that
the laying on of the bishops hands, is a signe,
whereby the childe is certified of Gods favour,
and gracious goodnesse toward them, a
child of seven or eight yeares of age. If it bee a
certifying signe, is it not a seale of grace; as the
other sacraments are. All that I have sayd▪ may
be seen in Hooker, Hackwell, and their service
book. None must receive the communion till
he be thus bishoped, and yet divers bishops do
not use it. Then by order of law, these who are
bishoped, may refuse to take the communion.
            In hallowing of Churches the Papists use
crosses, taper light burning of lamps, oyle, ashes,
and many ridiculous ceremonies; but let it be
so, that their dedication is more simple, then
the Popish, yet it is superstitious. For to dedicate,
that is to dote and mortifie to such a use,
as to the congregation to covein in, it is already
done by the founders, who were owners of the

ground, and builders of the Churches, and the
use is onely civill to defend the people convened
from winde and weather, or other incommodities
which might impede them in the service
of God. A second dedication, that is, an
hallowing of it, after it is set apart before it can
be employed to divine service, as if divine service
were prophaned, unlesse it were hallowed,
is meere superstition. Our Churches are not
like the Temple of Ierusalem, which had a legall
kinde of holines, and was a type and figure
of Christ, but like the Iewish Synagogues.
There is no more holinesse in our Churches
which containe the congregation, then in the
glebe land, which is dedicate and set a
part to maintaine the minister, but that it
should be kept cleane and comely for the people
which is to convene in it. When the congregation
is there at divine service, which is but
accidental, and may be performed on a hillock,
then God indeed is present in the middest of
them. Out of this hallowing of churches, hath
proceeded superstitious customes and canons of
immunitie of churches. I heare they may not
carry a vessell through one of their cathedrall
Churches, or a bagge under their arms without
reproofe, as if their great Domes were like the
Temple of Ierusalem, Mark. 11. 16. The like
may be sayd of Churchyards, or other burying
places: for all burial places are of a like nature,
whether they be neere the Church, or removed
fare from it.
            Their jurisdiction is either delegate of
ordinarie. Iurisdiction delegate sometime
to the Bishop, not as he is Bishop, but as he

is a citizen or subject, as 1. if he be appointed
a justice of peace, 2. if he be upon the
kings secret counsell. 3. if he be sent Embassadour
to any forraine Prince, 4. if he have
any other civil office of countenance committed
to him.
            Besides that some of them are Iustices of
Peace and Quorum, some Councellours, some
at sometimes Embassadours to forrain Princes,
some of them have been Deputies under the
Presidents of Wales, as Whitgift late Bishop of
Canterburie: some of them sit in the Starre
chamber with the Chauncellour and others of
the Councel, together with other Lords and Barons
upon notable riots, counterfeiting of letters,
taking away of maids within age against
their parents and Gardians will, &c. where the
most usuall punishment is imprisonment, the
p
                     •
                  llory, or a fine. They sit also in the high
Court of Parliament, pretending themselves to
be the
                  •
                estate of the Realm, as if the body and
state of the common-wealth were not an entire
and compleat body and state, without the body
and state of the Prelacie, nor lawes could not
be made without their consent. But the vanity
of this their pretence is taken away by the authour
of the Assertion of Christian Church
Policie, who doth prove that lawes have been
made without their consent, yea and without
their presence, even since, they have been admtited
to sit in Parliament. Their priviledge to
sit in the Starre-chamber, and to be Lords of
the Parliament house▪
               Camd. Bri
                     •
                  . 170. some doe thinke was
granted by King Henry 2. Camd 
                     •
                  
                thinketh that
this honor was bestowed upon them by William
               
the first, and that it is in respect of their Baronies,
which they hold in knight service, that
they sit there. It is no fundamentall law then
of the kingdome, farre lesse doth it agree with
the law of God, to give voyce, and decide in
criminal & civil matters in whatsoever secular
court. Is there any doubt to be resolved out of
the word, they have ever had a convocation of
the Clergie in time of Parliament, with whom
they have advised in matters of religion. Are
the Prelates for their riding in pompe to Westminster,
and sitting in their 
                  •
               obes, more able to
give advice, then the whole Clergie assembled
in a lower house? Or can they be more rice in
their judgement sitting apart from them? Or
is it not enough to give advice unlesse they also
vote, and that in matters no way pertinent
to their calling? Or is the Church respected in
their persons, when they shall have no place but
as Barons? Or shall they vote in the name of
of the Church, not having commission, but like
the Nobles, who have place in respect of their
birth. In the higher house the Iudges of the
Realme, the Master of the Rolles, and the Secretarie
of estate sit in the midst thereof▪ upon
wooll-sackes. But these that sit on the wooll-sacks
have no voyce in the house,
               P. 49. 
               but onely sit there to answer
of their knowledge in the law, when they be asked,
if any doubt arise among the Lords, sayth Sir
Tho. Smith in his common-wealth. This place,
if any, better becommeth them, then to sit high,
each in his ranke, over against the Dukes and
Barons, and to answer only of their knowledge
in the law of God, when they shall be required,
for any matter of Religion. But this, as I sayd,
may be better done in the convocation house.

In time of Poperie, the Spirituall Lords might
not sit in Parliament, whensoever any statute
was to be made touching felonie, or treason, or
the losse of any member, or shedding of bloud.
If they might haue been spared then at such
times, may they not be as well spared in matters
of possessions and unheritances. Our Prelats
entred in parliament notwithstanding the cautions
and conditions condiscended upon were
never insert in the act of their admission, upon
which condition onely▪ the generall assembly
after great opposition made to the Churches
vote in Parliament, was induced for the most
to consent. To bee Lords in Parliament and
Councell to governe countries, to sit in the
Starre-chamber, to bee Iustices of peace and
Quorum, to goe in Embassage to forraine princes,
and to exerce other civill functions in the
common-wealth, as is here sayd, is to exerce offices
incompatible with their spirituall calling,
to beare rule and dominion among the nations,
to intangle themselves with the affaires of
this life, and to neglect that spirituall calling, to
which they were sanctified and set apart from
the rest of the citizens and subjects of the kingdome.
It was said of old that the Psalter should
never bee out of their hands. They take the
charge of a great Diocie, more then they are able
to compasse within the fadome of their
armes, and yet turne it over to their Vicars, officialls,
Chauncellours, Archdeacons Commissaries,
and take upon them offices which they
confesse are not Episcopall, but delegate onely
by the Prince. O what a confusion hath the
pride and ambition of Clergie-men brought into
the Church of God!
            
               
In jurisdiction by ordinarie law attributed
unto them in their owne Diocie, is to be
considered, either the sinewes of exercising
it, or the jurisdiction it selfe. The sinewes of
exercising their jurisdiction, are Ecclesiasticall
censures, which may either be infl
                  •
               cted
upon laymen and Ecclesiasticall persons, or
peculiarly upon Ecclesiasticall persons onely.
Of the first sort are 1. interdiction of divine
service, 2. admonition, 3. suspension,
ei
                  •
               her from entrance into the Church, or
from partaking of the sacraments, 4. excommunication,
5. the great curse Anathema
against a pertinacious heretick. Of the
second sort are 1. sequestration of the fruits
of a church, 2. suspension either from office,
or office and benefice, 3. deprivation, 4. deposition,
& that is either verbal by sentence,
or reall, which is called degradation. Of all
which censures, one, to wit excommunication,
is inflicted for contumacie, either
for not comp
                  •
               iring in judgement, or not
obeying the mandates of the Church. The
rest are inflicted as well for contumacie, as
for other actuall offences.
            By interdiction, sayth Mucket,
               De Polit. p. 318. a communaltie
for some publick offence, is deprived of
divine service, buriall, administration, and receiving
of the sacraments. Interdiction of a
certaine place, as of a citie or whole countrey,
for some publicke and common offences committed
by them, or the superiour Magistrates,

to whom they adhere, whereby Churches are
closed, divine service is substracted, &c. The Bishop
of S
                  •
               alato sa
                  •
               th, it is an impious invention,
not known nor heard of in the Church for
a thousand yeare, and that it bred in Pope Hildebrands
brain: and concludeth after some reasoning,

                  
                     •
                  on ergo legitima est,
               De
                     •
                  ep. eccl. 1. 5. c. 9. nu. 38. 39. 
               sed spuria haec cens
                     •
                  va
ac 
                     〈◊〉
                   abominanda, quam Ecclesia pro sua

                     〈◊〉
                   ignosit.
            
            Excommunication is distinguished by the Canonists,
in the lesser or greater excommunication.
The lesser,
               De polit. p. 316. sayth Mucket, is suspension from
intrance into the Chur
                     •
                  h, or onely from partaking
of the sacrament, which Cyprian calleth Abstentio,
and it is inflicted for contumaci
                     •
                  , and other offences,
but chiefly for contumacie, in not compeiring in
E
                     ••
                  lesiasticall Courts, or not obeying their ordonances.
D. Field saith, that lesser excommunication
excludeth onely from the sacraments, which
when it is pronounced against them that stubbornly
stand out,
               Of the chur. l. 1. c. 
                     •
                  5. 
               and will not yeeld themselves to the
Churches direction or disposition, is properly named
excommunication; but when it is pronounced against
then that yeeld when they have offended, and seeke
the blessed remedies of the evils they have committed,
it is not so properly named excommunication, but it
is an act of the discipline of repentance. This suspension
from entrance in the Church, is against
all reason: for even persons excommunicate
should not be debarred from hearing of the
word: for the word is the meane and powerfull
instrument whereby offenders are recalled.
The greater excommunication, sayth Mucket,
is, whereby the offender is not onely debarred
from receiving the sacrament, or entrie in the
Ch. but also from the fellowship of the faithful.

Doctor Field describeth it thus: The greater putteth
the excommunicate from the Lords body and
bloud, and depriveth them of that comfort and
strength of grace, which from it they might receive,
it denieth unto them the benefite of the Churches
publick prayers, and so leaveth them to themselves,
as forlorn; and miserable wretches, without that assistance,
presen
                     ••
                   and protection which from God she
obtaineth for her obedient children. The tearmes
being thus unfolded, we haue to consider in the
use of this censure, these special poynts; First,
the lawes made under the pain of excommunication
ipso facto. For in time of Poperie, there
were two sorts of excommunication, one inflicted
by the law or Canon, when a man committing
the offence and fact inhibited by the
law; was made subject to excommunication,
without the ministerie and proceeding of a
judge, which was called also excommunicatio latae
sententiae. The sentence was not left to the
judge to pronounce, but was esteemed pronounced
in the very law it selfe. The other excommunication
is inflicted by a judge after citation
and cononicall forewarning, wherin the sentence
condemnatorie is pronounced by the
judge. The former leaveth nothing to the
judge, but the sentence declaratorie, to declare,
that seeing he is gultie of such a crime, hee is
already excommunicated. The Bishop of Spalato,
howbeit their great friend otherwise,
condemneth this kinde of excommunication,
as absurd,5. c. 9. nu. 2. 23. 24. and perceiveth in it, magnum Papatus
arcanū latere, cui et rudes imperiti Canonistae seu potius
Decretistae spiritum & robur addere sunt conanati.
For, sayth hee, Excommunicare etenim est
actu aliquem ligare, non potentia. Non enim ligatur,

qui potest, aut debet ligari, sed qui reipsa ligatur.
How can a man as yet invisible, indemonstrable,
unknowne to him that bindeth, be bound?
This bond cannot bind without a binder, and
the presence or knowledge of him that is
bound. When such a Canon was made, there
was a binder, and a bond, but none present,
or known to bee bound. When the offence is
committed, there is one to be bound; but where
is the binder? And yet in their latest Canons,
made in the first yeare of the Kings entry, they
have made excōmunication ipso facto to be the
sanction of many of their Canons: excōmunicating
ipso facto all such as shall affirme the forme
of their Church service to be corrupt and superstitious,
the rites or ceremonies established by
law to bee wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious
the government of their Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, &c. to
be Antichristian, or repugnant to the word, or
that the forme and maner of making, or consecrating
their Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, is
not lawfull, &c. So that at this day, the better
sort both of the ministerie and professours amongst
them, do stand excommunicate by this
Popish guise.
            The next thing to be considered, is the sole
authoritie of bishops excommunicating by
themselves alone, or their Deputies, Officials,
Chancellours, Archdeacons, the ministers and
professors in whatsoever Church of their large
Diocie. When Christ sayd, Tell the Church,
Math. 18. was this the meaning, Tell my Lord
Bishop, or his Chauncellour, the Archdeacon,
or his officiall. Can this collective name Church
by any shift be drawne to signifie one particular

person, Canterburies grace himselfe, or the
great Pope himselfe? Is the Pope the universal
Church, or the Bishop the diocesan Church,
or his Chauncellour? Christ maketh a gra
                  •
               ation
from one to two, at last to many. The
Apostle reproveth the Corinthians because
they had not already excommunicated the incestuous
person. And do yee not judge them that
are Within, sayth the Apostle, 1. Corinth. 5. 12.
In the second Epistle, chap. 2. v. 10. hee declareth
that they ha
                  •
                power to forgive and reconcile
the same incestuous person. And writing
to the Thessalonians, hee willeth them, to note
the man who obeyed or harkned not to his Epistle;
and to have no companie with him,
that he may be ashamed, 2. Thessal 3. 14. Now
there was no Bishop at all either at Corinth or
Thessalonica, as they themselves will grant, far
                  •
               
lesse an usurping Prelate, drawing all the power
to himselfe. It is one of the weightiest judgements
in the Church, and therefore not to
bee permitted to the pleasure of one man.
It is not onely the Bishop tha
                  •
                hath this power
alone, to excommunicate by himselfe, or his
Deputie, but also the Deane, Prebendaries,
and Canons in welnigh all the cathedrall and
collegiat churches throughout the Realme,Assertion 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  hurch 
                     〈◊〉
                  , p 41 9. 
                     •
                  .
               having certain Parochiall churches exempted from
the Bishop within their exempt and peculiar jurisdidictions,
by meere Pastorall authoritie (for Episcopall
authoritie by the lawes of the Church they haue
none) may exercise all manner of spirituall censures,
and that as wel by their substitutes, as by themselves.
Nay, i
                     •
                   hich is more, in Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorksire,
Richmondshire, and other Northern parts, there bee

many Whole Deanries exempted from the Bishops jurisdiction,
wherein the Deanes and their substitutes,
have not onely the prohate of wills, and granting of
administrations, but also the cognisance of Ecclesiasticall
crimes with power to use the Ecclesiasticall
censures; yea this authority of the execution of Ecclesiatsticall
censares; have those Deanes either long
since by some Papall priviledges obtained, or else by
long use prescribed ag
                     •
                  inst the Bishops. Whereby againe
it is clearly convinced, that Episcopall excommunication
used in the Church of England, is not
of divine institution, but onely by humane tradition:
for were it of divine right, then could the same no
more be prescribed, or by papall immunitie be poss
                     •
                  ss
                     •
                  d,
then could these Deanes prescribe power, or
be infranchised to breach the word, or to administer
the 
                     •
                  acraments. Yee see, Cathedrall Deanes, Canons
and Prebendaries in cathedrall and collegiat
churches, and some rurall Deanes,
may use the Ecclesiasticall censures. But the
Pasto
                  •
               s of the Churches set over their flocks to
govern & rule with power of the keyes, are deprived
of the other half of their pastoral charge,
and the pastorall staffe, as I have sayed, is taken
from th
                  •
               m. Thirdly, they excommunicate for
trifles. The last petition which was made the
first yeare of the Kings entry, reporteth, thae
th
                     •
                  y excomunicate for trifles, and twelvepennie matters.
If a man pay not the fees of their Courts,
he shall be excommunicate. For the Chancellors
& Officials, the Registers, & the rest of that
rable, must not want their unreasonable dues.
            They doe not excommunicate in the congregation
where the offender dwelleth, but in
their Courts in forme of a writ in Latine, proclaimed
in the Bishops or Archbishops name,Discover. 241. as

Barrow reporteth, and so also is their absolution.
The excommunication may perhaps he
intimated a long tyme after in the congregation,
and the people warned to beware of the
man, who was excommunicate in their Court,
perhaps for a trifle. The Admonition to the
Parliament sayth, that whereas the excommunicate
were never received till they had publickly confessed
their offence. Now for paying the fees of the
Court they shall by M
                     •
                   Officiall or Chauncellour easily
be absolved. 5 The manner is that if the apparitor
cannot persanally cite the person to be summoned,
he useth leave word at his house. If he come
not at the day, he is forthwith excommunicate, as
the defender of th
                  •
                last Petition 
                  •
               oeth report.p. 182.
6. They transf
                  •
               rre this power of excommunication
to lay men. their Chauncellours and officialls,
whereof we shall intreate in the owne
place.
            The curse Anathema, some doe not distinguish
from the great excommunication, but
onely in some solemnities, because it is uttered
with some externall signes and ceremonies
to strike a greater terrour. Others do distinguish
it, and Mucket defineth it to be that censure,
whereby a pernicious heretick as Gods publick
enemie, reiected, cursed, execrate, is adjudged
and given over unto eternall judgement and
damnation. This is answerable to that anathema,
which the Apostle calleth Maranatha, or
the Talmudists schamatha. But such a censure
cannot be inflicted, unlesse it be revealed to the
church, that the offender hath sinned against
the Holy ghost. Besides the censures common
to lay men and ecclesiasticall persons
already mētioned, there are these two reckoned

by Mucket, corporall pennance, and deniall
of buriall in sacred places. Corporall pennance
is inflicted upon the outward man. For to the
publick confession of the offence, there is some
bodily pennance adjoyned and enioyned the
offender. As for example to stand upon a Lords
day bareheaded, and barefooted, cloathed with
a white sheet, having a white wand in his hand
at the porch of the Kirck, and when he entreth
into the Kirck to prostrate himself, to kisse the
ground,P. 328. and then to come to the midst of the
church & crave forgivenes. This manner is descrived
by Mack. Lindwood in his Provincial reckoneth
for corporall pennances,l 5. poenis. cap. euenit. thrusting in a
Monasterie, imprisonment, striping, and the
imprinting of a mark upon the person. Many
moe 
                  •
               ere the popish pennances, which turned
into satisfactions. For reme
                  •
               d of corporall pennance,
the offendour may obteine a redemption
for some peeee of money, and this is called
commutation of pennance, and so the sheete
pennance is turned into a purse pennance. If
the corporall pennance be ordeined to a spirituall
end, as they say, to afflict the body or
outward man, for humbling of the soule, how
can it be exchāged in a pecuniarie mulct, which
hath no such operation with it, especially with
the greater sort? or did they ever read of the
like but in the dark dayes of poperie? Buriall
they deny to such, as are strangled for felonie,
usurers, and others excommunicated by their
offi
                  •
               ialls, and Chancellours.
            The censures and punishments peculiar to
ecclesiasticall persons, are not all of one nature.
For some arise upon their medling with causes
civill, howbeit abusiuely called ecclesiasticall; as

the sequestration of the fruits of a benefice, and
giving them for a time to the custodie of another,
for to defend some mans right, or to chastice
the cotumacie of the owner, which sequestration
if any man violate, he is to incurre the
greater excommunication by the old constitutions
of the English Church, sayth Muck
                     •
                  t.
But seeing the originall of it is but temporall, it
belongeth nothing to Ecclesiasticall Consistories.
Deprivation is the removing of a beneficed
man from his benefice. A benefice is a mans
freehold, and therfore seing his livelihood consisteth
it he ought not to be removed from it at
the pleasure or judgement of one man. There is
no difference betwixt deposition and degradation,
but that deposition is verball, inflicted by
the sentence of the judge: degradation is real, as
when the Ecclesiastical person is denuded, or unclothed
of the garments & ensigns of his order,
in presence of the civill Magistrate, to whom he
is relinquished to bee punished for heresie, or
some other great capitall crime. Vntill this be
done, they are exemed from the stroke of the
Magistrates sword, after the old papistical manner:
for to what use else serveth this degradation?
This censure of deposition, as the rest, is in
the hands of one man alone. D. Field affirmeth,
howbeit otherwise one of their owne,Of the Ch. 
                     •
                  5. c. 27. that the
Bishop may doe nothing in matters of greatest
moment, and consequence, without the advice
and presence of presbyters, and in especial, that
he may not deprive, depose, or degrade by hims
                  •
               lfe
alone, and proveth it out of the 3. and 4.
Councell of Carthage.
            That by the late Canons, in pronouncing
the sentence after the proces ended before the

Chauncelour, Commissarie, Officiall, the Bishop
should have the assistance of his Chauncelour,
the Deane and some Prebendaries, or the Archdeacon,
is no point of reformation, as they pretend,
for these are onely their servants, and followers,
which are to them as the shadow to the
body It is sayd in the Canon law, that the consistorie
of the Bishop and the Chauncelour, or
principall official is all one, & therefore a man
may not appeale from the Officiall principall
to the Bishop, and the Archdeacon is called oculus

                     〈◊〉
                  
               
the Bishops eye. Further they
observe the Canon, but as it pleaseth them, for
there is no sanction added unto it.
            These are the censures & punishments which
are the sinewes of their ordinarie jurisaiction,
by as they are 
                  〈◊〉
                commissioners, or haue civill
callings committed to them by the Prince,
they have their pr
                     •
                  sons, as Clinke, Gatchouses, Colehouses,
towres, and Castles, both for laymen, and
eccl
                  •
               siasticall persons.
            The jurisdiction it self, is eyther voluntary
or contentious.
            Voluntary jurisdiction is, when the person,
with whom the Bishop dealeth, doth not stand
against it. Contentious is, when such causes are
handled against which some partie standeth, or
else dealt with therby against his will. For it is
to be thought, that the party defendant, will
not willingly compeir, and unlesse he be compelled,
and therefore is presumed to come against
his will.
            Voluntary jurisdiction is established, eyther
by statute, or by the Municipall lawe,
or by the Municipal law, & confirmed by the
ecc
                  ••
               siasticall, or by the ecclesiasticall, & confirmed

by the Municipall.
            1. By the statute as 1. to grant licence for
a time to eate flesh upon forbidden dayes,
2. that any being approved, 
                  •
               ay exercise
Ph
                  •
               sicke, or Chirurgetie, or instruct children
in that Diocie. 3. to unite and consolida
                  •
               e
lesser Kirkes according to a statute
made thereanent. 4. to assist civill Iudges
in executing certaine statutes, which concerne
Ecclesiasticall causes, 5. to collect
tenthes and subsidies duc by Ecclesi
                  •
               sticall
persons, and that either by taking a stresse,
or by Ecclasiasticall censures.
            The 1. is superstitious, the 2. is impertinent,
except that part which concerneth Schoolemaisters,
but that should not be at his sole disposition.
P. 61 The petition to the Queen relateth,
that li
                  •
               ences are granted to Scholmasters for
money to teach. The 3. likwise is not to be ordered
at his will, and may very wel be ordered
without him. So may the 4. if it were needful.
The 5. is not an office competent to his calling,
neither is the maner of exacting to be allowed.
            By the Municipall law, as 1. to certifie at
the kings rescript, the civill Iudges of Bastardie
and unlawfull Births, of lawfull and
unlawful marriages. 2. to require the kings
rescript for burning a pertinacious heretick
already condemned. 3. to require the kings
rescript for cōmitting to prison the person
which persisteth with an obstinate mind excommunicate
40. dayes.
            
               
The 1. may be done other by them, or without
them. The 2. for the kind of punishment
and forme of proceeding is a part of the Maximinian
law, which was made in the time of K.
Henry 4. whereof the 
                  •
               ath ex officio is the other
part. The 3. is used after this manner. If one
be excommunicate for the smallest trifles in
their Courts, or for a supposed offence, where
there is none indeed. if hee stand wilfully 40.
dayes together excommunicate, and accordingly
certified by the Bishop into the Chauncerie,
that then he is to be committed to prison, by
vertue of a writ directed to the Sheriffe,P. 8. sayth
the authour of the Apologie of certain proceedings
in Courts Ecclesiasticall. Neither is intimation
at the common law required, but these
certificats mention onely in generalitie the parties
coutumacie and disobedience. The effect
of the writ de excommunicato capiendo, is two-fold,
1. upon the certificate of the Bishop the
party excommunicated is to be debarred action
in all the Queenes Courts. 2. the partie is to
be imprisoned, and is not to be delivered, unlesse
he submit himselfe to the Bishop, except
he hath appealed to a superiour Ecclesiasticall
judge.
            By the municipall law, and confirmed by
the Ecclesiasticall, as 1. to cause the testaments
of the deceased to be proved, and registrate,
2. to grant the administratiō of the
goods of him who died intestate, to the
neerest kinsman. 3. when no man will enter
here, to command to collect and keepe in
custodie Bona caduca. 4. to cause account

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
to be rendred of the savd administration,
and to approve and reject the same, as law
shall require.
            All 
                  •
               auses testamentarie, and their appendicles
are impertinent for Episcopal audience, or
any Eccl
                  •
               siasticall o
                  •
               sistorie. Bona caduca is taken
in the lawes, as when failing him to whom
they belonged by law, the goods fal to another,
as the akorn which falleth to the ground, when
there is none to take it up, is called Caduc
                     •
                  
glans.
            
            By law Ecclesiasticall, and co
                  •
               firmed by
the Municipall, as 1. to conferre benefices,
or to institute into a benefice at the presentation
of others. 2. to command the persons
institu
                  •
               ed to be inducted. 2. to command
the fruits of vacant benefi
                  •
               es, to bee
gathered and kep
                  •
                in su
                  •
               e custodie by some
indifferent man, to the use of the next successor.
4. to assigne a competent portion
to a vicar
                  •
                5. To grant dimissorie or testimoniall
letters. 6. to visit every third yeare
th
                  •
                Diocie.
            O
                  •
                institution, collation induction, we shall
entreat in a fitter place. As for the third, the
sequestration of the fruits of the vacant benefices,
the authour of the Assertion of the true
Christian Church policie, thus writeth. By the
interest where by the Bishop challengeth to be custos
Eccl. siarum, there happen as bad, if not worse, then
these▪ for there is no sooner a Church voyd, but a
post is sent in all haste with letters of sequestiction
to sequester the fruits, to the use of the next incumbent;

which next incumbent for the greater care taken
to preserve the fruits to his use, before hee can
obteine to be put in reall possession, must pay 10.
shillings, or a marke, or more, for these letters of sequestiation,
with as much more also for letters, so
called, of relaxation, besides 2 pence 3 pence, or 4
pence a mise for pottage Somner▪ 
                  
                     •
                   And from hence,
as 
                     •
                   take it, is the Patron very much 
                     〈◊〉
                  : For he
being, as appeareth by the Statute of 25 Edm. 3.
Lord and Avower of the Benefice ought to have the
custodie, and possession, thereof during vacancie.
The fourth should not be at the Bishops carving,
but it is no great matter what be modified
to them, seeing they are for the most part
hirelings or blind guides. As for the fift, it is
agreeable to good ordour, that no Clergie man
passing from one Diocesse to another, should
be admitted to take on any cure without letters
of commendation, and a Testimoniall of
their honest life and conversation, and sufficient
qualification: but that this should be in the
Bishops power is against reason, and therefore
no wonder if many abuses and inconveniences
arise upon their flight Passe-ports. Visitation
is needfull, and it were better for the Church,
if it were annuall: But that the Bishop, or any
other should be sole Visitor, is hurtfull. A
number is more able to make a sharpe enquirie,
for moe eyes see better then one, and would
not be so foone drawen away with corrupt partialitie.
            The chiefe part then of voluntarie jurisdiction,
is every three yeare to visit the Diocie,
and to enquire by the Church-wardens
and Side-men, of the excesses, and defects,

either of the minister, of the Church wardens
themselves, or the rest of the parishioners.
Or the Minister, as he is Minister, or as he is
another sort of man. As Minister, either in
respect of his publick function, in committing,
or omitting what hee ought not:
or in respect of his private life; for many
things are tollerate in lay men, which do
not bes
                  •
               eme Ministers. Or the Church-wardens
themselves, and that concerning
their office, either in the Kirk or temple, or
out of it. O
                  •
                the rest of the Parishoners, 
                  •
               ither
as having some peculiar function, or any
other Christians. As having peculiar
function, Phisitians, Chyrurgians, Schoolemasters,
Mid-wives, if they exercise their
function, not being approved, or use 
                  ••
               rcerie
or superstition: keepers of hospitals, when according
to their foundation, the Bishop is
only appoynted visitor or no other. Of the
other Christians offending against pie
                  •
               ie,
righteousnesse, sobrietie. Against pietie, as
by blasphemy against God, or the holy
scripture, idolatry, superstition, s
                  •
               rcerie, if
it be such, as by civill lawes of the kingdom
is either not at all corrected, or by order
and dir
                  •
               ction of the lawes, is made also subject
to Ecclesiasticall censures, Breach of
oath (called Laesio fidei) made before an Ecclesiasticall
Iudge, or voluntarily to any
private man, Heresie, error against the Articles

of Religion set forth in a Nationall Syno
                  •
               
holden the yeare 1562. and confirmed
by royall authoritie, sch
                  ••
               me, unlaw
                  •
               ul conventicles,
absence from divine service in
their own parish upon the Lords daye
                  •
               , or
other festivall dayes, where there is not a
lawfull impediment, unlawfull abstinence
from par
                  •
               aking of the Lords Supper, which
is to be celebrated thrice every year. Against
justice, calumnie contumely, r
                  •
               proach anent
any cause Ecclesiasticall, Simoniacall suing
for sacred orders or degrees, or of a benefice.
Vsurie above the rate often in the hundred
by yeare. Temerarious administration of the
goods of the deceased, subornation of perjurie▪
falshood or forgerie committed in any
Ecclesiasticall action, violence to a minister,
de
                  •
               eining of that which was left in legacie to
the use of the poore, or of goods due to the
publick uses of the Church, d
                  ••
               apidation of
Ecclesiasticall goods, and buildings. Against
sobriety, as incontiniencie whatsoever, committed
with one of his kindred or bloud, or
of alliance, either of them within the 4. degree,
exclusive, according to the computation
of the civill law, which is called incest,
or adulterie, or committed with a widow,
which is called stuprium, or where both bee
single, tearmed fornication, fi
                  •
               thy speech,
sollicitation of anothers chastitie, drunkennesse,
clandestine mariages, either in respect

of consent of parents or tutors not obteined,
or of the private place, or witnesses
moe▪ then two not being present, or the
bannes not proclaimed three several times,
upon the Lords dayes, or holy dayes in lawfull
distance.
            In this table we have an enumeration of offences
belonging to Ecclesiasticall cognisance,
but it is unsufficient. For there are many moe,
then are here expressed: as Theft, Sacriledge,
Murther, Prophanation of the Sabboth. Sodomie,
disturbance of divine service, Polygamie,
Diffamation, &c. as by opening of the 10. commandements
may be drawn out to a great number,
which ought to be censured by the Church.
This partition wall of crimes made in the Canon
Law, to make some crimes temporall, others
spirituall, hath made the crimes reputed
Ecclesiasticall to bee neglected by the Magistrates,
and many crimes not reputed Ecclesiasticall,
on the other side to be neglected by the
Church. As Adulterie, howbeit by Gods law it
be capitall, & so ought to be also by the law of
man, is not made capitall by their lawes, but referred
to the Ecclesiasticall Courts, as proper to
them; many sins of witchcraft, and sorcerie
likewise: And on the other side a Theefe should
not passe uncensured by the Church, howbeit
he be overseen by the Magistrate. For the church
ought to deale with every scandalous sinner, to
bring the sinner to repentance, notwithstanding
the Magistrate pardō, or neglect to punish.
Next they have the offences there reckoned up
onely for the fashion, & of others not their
mentioned, they take a severe
                  •
                account. As

for example, Mucket doth adde these following:
Delay of Baptisme at the point of death, contempt
of Episcopall confirmation, not bowing the
knee at the Letanie, and at the name of Iesus, reproaches
against the Liturgie, the government of the
Church, &c. Profanation of the Chalice and the
plate: Profanation of the Church-yards with Markets
or Faires, with weapon shewing, with dancing,
&c. In the Admonition to the Parliament it is
said, Now great sins, either not at all punished, as
blasphemie, usurie, drunkennesse, &c. or else slieghtly
passed over, as with pricking in a blanket, or pinning
in a sheet, as Adulterie, Whoredome, &c. Again such
as are no sins, as if a man conforme not himselfe to
Popish orders, and ceremonies; if he come not at the
whistle of him who hath no authoritie to call, wee
meane Chanscellours, Officials, and all that rable,
are grievously punished, not onely by Excommunication,
Suspension, Deprivation, and other, as
they terme it, spirituall coertion, but also by banishing,
impris
                     •
                  ning, reviling, taunting, &c. So
howbeit the offences; which are abovementioned
in the Table; belong to Ecclesiasticall enquirie
in respect of the slander, they are taken
from the lawfull iudicatorie of the
Church, and transferred to the Bishop to enquire,
as he thinketh good. And therefore it is
but pro froma, that they are here set downe. Simonie
is one of the number, and yet what Simonie
is committed, and how that may be dispensed
with, wee have already manifested.
Where is horrible blasphemie so rife? It were
longsome to goe through all the particulars.
But this I cannot passe vvith silence, anent
the prophanation of the Lords day, howbeit
it bee not heere expressed. The Bill for the
better observation of the Sabboth, 27 Elizabeth,

being 
                     •
                  assed by both houses of Parliament, was notwithstanding
gainesaid,Assertion of 
                        •
                     rist Poli. 
                        •
                     ag. 187. and withstood by none so
much as by certaine Euangelicall Bishops, and
whi
                     •
                  h, as there men generally conceived, was onely
stayed from being made a Law by the Queene,
upon their counsell and perswaasion. When the
Bshop doth visite, he doth not visite every parish
by it selfe as our Presbyteries wont to doe,
but all the Parishes in the bounds of foure or
five rurall D
                  •
               anries at once. When his lordship
comm
                  •
               th to some principall Kirk of one of
the Deanries, then the Ministers, Church-wardens,
and Sidemen within the bounds of
those Deanries are to repaire to that place,Mucket 325. 326.
The Parishes which perhaps have just matter
of complaint against their dissolute Minister,
of Church wardens, are not warned to be present
at this Visitation. The Bishop being set on
high, and the rest standing before him: the
Church-warden touching the book and kissing
it, is enjoyned at an appointed day to make
known to the Bishop, or his Vicar, such offences
as in a book of Articles given them are
expressed. For he hath his Chancellour or Vicar
and Arch-deacon, to assist him. At the appointed
time the Church-wardens come, and
giue up their bills of presentments, the names
and dwelling places of the delinquents. The delinquents
are sent for, if they can round over
the matter with the bishop, or his chancellour,
or vicar, there is no more of the matter; but
if not, then is the delinquent enjoyned to take
an oath: suppose there be no evidence of the
crime▪ but onely a slanderous report and bruit,
and if he free not himselfe by an oath, he shall
be holden as guiltie: yea further, he must have

sixe or eight besides to sweare at a set day, their
oath of credulity, that they perswade themselues
he hath sworn the truth, and thus hee
is purged by canonicall purgation. Thus are
they very careful, when the matter is not rounded
over. For, as Lindwood, Canterburies principall
Officiall, who wrote about 200. yeares
since, saith,De vit
                     •
                   & honest. 
                     〈◊〉
                   corum. 
                     •
                  . 1 S à crapule verb vigilan
                     •
                  er. 
               Vigilare non curant proelati quamplures
ut obseruentur statuta nullam utilitatem bursalem
inducenti
                     •
                  : Many Prelates are not vigilant and
carefull to have statutes observed which bring no
purse profite with them. Many abuses and corruptions
are in their V
                  •
               sitations, no doubt,
which have not as yet come to my knowledge,
but you must be content good Reader with the
little, that I have delivered.
            In contentious jurisdiction, are to be
considered either the persons, or the causes
judged, or judgement it selfe. The persons,
either the ordinarie judge, or else his surrogate,
or the parties, the pursu
                  •
               r and def
                  •
               ndant:
and they doe plade, either by themselves,
or by others; as by the advice of
advocates, or the diligent travels of their
Procurators. The things judged, are either
of publike, or private interest: of publike,
as I contribution for reparations of the
Church fabrick, and Church-yard dike, and
for acquiring any other thing which is l
                  •
               cking
in the Kirk: or 2 punishment some Ecclesiasticall
offence, or contumely.
            It is true, every Church ought to be carefull
to hold up the fabrik of the Church, and to
furnish it with all necessarie utensils: but if the

Parishioners who ought to bee contributories,
be slack, they ought to bee pursued for the money
in the Kings Courts, not in Church consistories.
If a man holding land which usually
payd a pound of waxe to the Church, do withhold
it, the Churchwarden may very welpursue
before a civill judge. Suchlike if the Church be
uncovered, or the churchyard unclosed. Church
officers may not impose taxations.
            Of privat interest in causes of 1. matrimony,
2. succ
                  •
               ssion to the goods of the
deceased, 3. Ecclesiasticall rights. Of matrimonie.
either by action, or for supporting▪
or dissolving of it. By action, either to
conciliate & knit, as when we sue at law, that
matrimonie may be celebrate and consummate
according to the contract, or that after
the celebration, the mutuall marriage
duties may be performed, which is called
Actio directa, or when we intend actiō of lactication
of ma
                  ••
               mony against another, who
falsely pretendeth a matrimonial contract to
our prejudice, which is called Actio contraria.
For supporting or upholding of matrimonie,
as when aft
                  •
               r the marriage, we sue for
the money promised in dowrie with the
Bride. For dissolving of matrimonie, either
for a precontract matrimoniall of either of
the parties, with some other, or perpetuall
and incurable frigiditie, or consanguinitie
or affinitie by lawfull or unlawfull copulation,
or adulterie, or for rigorous dealing,

in which case separation from the bedd,
and bo
                  •
               rd, but not from the bond is
granted.
            Such matrimoniall causes as are meere civill,
belong not to Ecclesiasticall courts, as debts and
dowries promised in marriage are not properly
demandable in Ecclesiasticall courts. Matrimonie
as it is a civill contract, may be ordered
by civill lawes, seeing upon it dependeth
the right of inheritances providing that nothing
bee done repugnant to these conditions,
which God in his word hath superadded to
that contract, as to determine within degrees
prohibited, or polygamie to bee lawfull. So
farre as it is divine, in that God conjoyneth and
interveneth as third person, and setts downe
conditions both of conjunction and dissolution,
in the word, the Church is to see, that
that order and these caveats bee observed,
which are contained in the word. For it may
fall out, that both in binding up of marriage
they may commit incest, and in dissolving without
a just cause may offend also. It is the Churches
duty to prevent and remove such offences.
But of other lawes civil and municipal, they are
not executors. These lawes which are divine, are
of a mixt nature. These which are civill, belong
onely to the civill Magistrate. The Churches
part is transferred to the cognisance of officials,
to whom it doth not belong. And therfore Beza
concerning this abuse writeth thus. Sed quorsum
hoc ad officiales,
               Volum. 2. D
                     ••
                  repudijs & Divortjs. p. 3
                     •
                  5. 
               promotores, procuratores, totam
deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illam procorum colluviem, quae Ecclesiam Dei
i
                     •
                  mpridē devastat, quorsum hoc ad illa non Ecclesiae
tantūmodo Christianae, verumetiā universi mundi de-

But what maketh this, sayth he, for officialls, promoters,
Proctors, and all that filth of swine, which
now a long time doth waste the Church of God?
What is this to these shamefull staines, not onely of
the Christian Church, but also of the whole world.
Further, beside the Churches part, which is to
take heed to offences and breach of Gods law,
they have taken the Canon law for the rule of
their proceedings, both in spousalls, mariages,
and divorces. And thirdly, have taken in debts
and dowries, goods and chattels, which are accessorie
to marriage, to judge upon, and this
must be called Ecclesiasticall cognisance. Lastly,
these causes are of such weight, that they are
not to be committed to the skill or conscience
of one base officiall.
            It is observed by the author of the Assertion
for Christian policie, that mens inheritances
many times hang in suspence upon question of
l
                  •
               gitimation or illegitimation of their children,
to be allowed or disallowed by the Canon law,
and that many Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen
doe complaine, and bewa
                  •
               le the stealing away,
and mariages of their daughters, neeces,
neere kinswomen, or wards. Couples
have been married, and lived together 4 6, or
moe yeares as man and wife, and upon a new
and sudden dislike and discontentment, or upon
a surmised precontract, pretensedly proved by
two suborned witnesses, by vertue of the Canon
law the husband was adiudged no husband, &
the wife no wife. Another example he relateth
of one solemnly maried to a wife, and after by
reason of a precontract, solemnly divorced from
the same wife, and compelled by censures of the
Church to marry her for whom sentence of

precontract was adjudged, and yet authorized
by the same consistorie about ten or twelve
yeares after the divorce to resummon, recall,
and rechallenge his first wife, she having a testimoniall
out of the same consistorie, of her
lawfull divorce, and being againe solemnly maried
to another husband. Licences of mariage
have been granted out of their Ecclesiasticall
Court with a blanke. So the partie licenced was
enabled, if it had been their pleasure, to marry
another mans wife, or his wives sister. Many
moe grosse absurdities are there alledged by
th
                  •
                learned authour, which the Reader will
s
                  •
               arce beleeve. But I omit them, and many other
things which might be sayd anent the particulars
set down in this Table.
            Succes
                  ••
               on to the goods of the deceased,
is either or him, who hath made his testam
                  •
               nt,
or who hath died intestate. The first

                  〈◊〉
                her universall, when the plea is for proving
or improving the testament exhibited,
or particular when the suit is for to obtain a
cer
                  •
               ain lega
                  •
               ie. The s
                  •
               cond is, either properly,
when no testament is made, or by
way of in
                  •
               estate, as when there is none who
will take upon them the burthen of executorie.
In either of the cases the action is either
to obtaine the administration of the
goods, and that eithe
                  •
                simply, or with the
later will annexed, that it may be fulfilled, or
wit
                  •
                the tutorship, and to the use of the
Min
                  •
               r
                  •
                or else the action is against him that
ingyreth himselfe into the administration,

and intrometteth with the goods of the deceased,
not being inabled with any warrant.
            Causes testamentarie, and their appendicles,
are meere civill and temporall, and therefore do
not belong to spirituall Courts. It is by the
grant of Kings, not by Ecclesiasticall right, that
Church consistories have medled with such
causes. Because Bishops were supposed to bee
men of good conscience, and that they would
be carefull to see the later will of the deceased
performed, then others, therefore they were
reserved to Episcopal audience, and cognisance
of Ecclesiasticall Courts. But this respect was
not founded upon Gods word. For we must not
looke so much to conscience, as to a lawfull
calling: or else all civill causes pleaded before
a Iudge should be referred to Church-men, because
of their supposed good conscience. And
the truth is, it is but supposed indeed. For a Bishop
or pastor that will medle in matters impertinent
to his calling, hath but a bad conscience.
Such a man will never make conscience
of it, more then another religious Christian.
And what conscience they made of the matter,
may bee seene, in that they transferred that
which was committed to their trust, to a base
Officiall, who hath as bad a conscience as the
Bishop himselfe, and badder, if badder may be.
And as for skill in deciding such causes, no man
will deny, but the civill judges are more able to
cognosce and determine in them, then Church-men.
By the common law, sayth Lindwood,
these causes were not committed unto the
Church, but by the free grant of Princes:

And therefore in the lawes alledged by him,
approbation and insinuation of testaments are
forbidden Clergiemen. Et ratio redditur in juribus
illis allegatis,
               De testamen
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   cap. 
                     •
                  em verb. extorqueant. 
               quia opprobrium est clericis, si peritos
ostendere vel
                     ••
                  t rerum for 
                     •
                  ense
                     •••
                  . May not
matters of legacies, and bequests of goods, as
well as of lands, bee determined in remporall
Courts? Cannot the Iudges in temporal courts
discerne upon proofes, and other presumptions,
whether the testator was of perfect memorie,
or distracted, as they doe in questions of lunacie,
madnesse, or idiocie, in men living? Can
they not define of two wills, which is the first,
which is the later will, whether the legacie remaine,
or bee recalled; whether it bee pure or
conditionall. If a creditor may recouer his
debt due by the testator in the tēporall Court,
what should hinder a legatarie to recover his
legacie in the same Court?P. 105. 106 This poynt is
made cleare, and amplified in the Assertion
of true and Christian Church policie.
            To conclude then, probates of wills, committing
of Administrations, sequestrations of
the goods of the intestate, recovering of legacies,
taking up of inventaries, &c. belong
not to a Church Consistorie, and it is a very
great abuse that such Consistories should be
called Church consistories, and that spirituall
censures should bee put in execution
by them.
            Ecclesiasticall dues and rights, are 1.
tithes, which are either Praediall, Personall
or Mixt.
            
               
Praediall tithes are such, as come of the fruits
and crop of the ground, as of corne, or fruits
of trees. Personall are such, as are payed by
reason of the person himselfe, out of the gain
that he maketh of this trading, handicraft, hunting,
warfaring, &c. The Mixt is added by s
                  •
               me
as a third kinde, but others reduce them according
to their diversitie to one of the first two,
and such are the birth of bestiall, wooll, milke,
whether they be fed at home, or be at pasture in
the field. Tithes of whatsoever kinde, are but
temporall goods, not spirituall, howbeit they be
annexed to spirituall things, and be appoyn
                  •
               ed
to uphold and maintaine divine service, and
spirituall functions. Tithes were of old recovered
in the Kings Court, not in Ecclesiasticall,
as is averred in a treatise alledged by the author
of the Apologie of proceedings in Courts Ecclesiasticall.
                  
                     ••
                  art. 1. p. 
                     •
                  .
               We think that the Kings Courts be put
out of iu
                     ••
                  sdiction for tythes, by a custome of the
Realme, and not by the immediat power of the law of
God. And againe. That suits for tithes shall be taken
in the spirituall court, is onely grounded upon a
favour that the Kings of this realme, and the whole
realme have in times past borne to the Clergie. That
the kings Courts of his Bench, and common
pleas, and also other inferior courts were put
out of jurisdiction for tythes, & suits for tithes
were granted to spirituall Courts, was a favour,
it is true, granted to the Clergie, inabling them
with power within themselves to recover tithes
destinate to their maintenance, but wee must
not look so much to the commoditie wee may
reape by the grants of Princes, as whether
Church consistories should medle with such
controversies concerning things temporall.

This man owe me a cole, that man a sti
                  •
               k, the
third two stone of butter, the fourth such a
number of Saffron heads, the fift so many sallow
Trees: such, and such suits, were verie pertinent
for a Presbyterie to sit upon; for the
Presbyterie is the true and right Consistorie.
Now change this Consistorie as ye please, and
make the Bishop alone to be the Church consistorie,
it is all one For the causes themselves
being temporall, the qualitie of the person
doth not alter the nature of the cause. In the
Assertion for true and Christian policie, it is
said, That by a statute 32. Hen 8. c. 44. it is enacted,
That the Parsons,
               P. 99. 
               and Curates of five Parish
Chu
                     ••
                  hes whereunto the Town of Royston did extend
it selfe and every of them, and the successors of
every of them, shall have their remedie by authorit
                     •
                  
of that Act, to sue, demand, aske, and recover
in the Kings Court of Chancerie, the tithes of
corne, hay, wooll▪ lambe, and Calfe, subtracted, or devyed
to be payed by any person, or persons. Are the
tythes of other Parishes more spirituall then
these of Royston? But admitting such pleas
to be pertinent for a spirituall Court, they
should not be turned over to a Civilian, the Bishops
Officiall. And what favour is granted to
Church men by Princes, when a Doctor of the
Law shall determine in these pleas!
            2. Oblations due of custome either every
quarter of the yeare, or in baptismes, or at
blessing of mariages or at Churching of
women, or at burials: 3 Mortuaries▪ 4 Indemnities,
5 Procu
                  •
               a
                  •
               ions. 6 expences laid
forth for the repairing of Ecclesiastical buildings
decayed by the negligence of the Predecessour,

7. Synodalls, 8. wages and feel
due for causes judiciall, as to the Iudge, the
Advocate, the Proctor, the Clarke. Or for
causes out of judgement, as to the Curate
or Sexten.
            A procuration is the furnishing of necessarie
expenses for the Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon,
or any other having power to visit in respect
of their visitations. For howbeit the Bishops
have great temporalities and possessions
Ecclesiasticall, that doth not content them, but
they must be sustained besides in their travelling.
They say, they must have great riches, because
they have a great burthen, and must not
discharge their charge still in one place, but
through the whole Diocie. And yet when they
have gotten more then may suffice reasonable
men, they will not travell without a new pension,
and their expenses borne. For no man is
bound, say they, to goe on warfare on his owne
cost. And so with a new trick they got procurations
annexed to their visitations, as proper
stipends due to visitors. At the first, the visitor
and his retinue, had their sustentation in victuals
for the day which he visited the particular
Church. Afterward the procuration was rated
to some value of money, answerable respectively
to the dignity of an Archbishop, or Archdeacon:
for their retinue was prescribed in the
Canons and Constitutions. The Archdeacon
was appointed to have onely to have 4. persons
on horseba
                  •
               ke, and one Sumner. What
think ye then shal be the retinue of the Bishop
or Archbishop, if this be moderate in the Archdeacon.
Farther, whereas they ought not to

have procurations, except they visit every particular
Church. They will visit 30. or 40. churches
in one day at one place, and yet receive the
diet in money of 30. or 40. churches or dayes.
They make commodity of their visitations otherwise
also, as ye have heard. Synodals are another
pension due to the Bishop by every
Church in the Diocie for convocating Synods.
And yet their Synods are not worthy the name
of Synods, for the Diocesan Bishop is onely
Lord and Iudge, the rest are to bee judged, rather
then to partake in common with his power.
A Mortuarie is the second beast, that the
deceased person hath within the parish, if hee
have three, or above, the best being excepted
and reserved to the iust owner. If the three be
of one kind, or of divers, the parish Priest must
have the second: and wherefore I pray you?
for recompensation of the personall tithes, or
offerings withholden, while he lived, yea howbeit
ignorantly and unwittingly,L. 1. de consuetud 
                     〈◊〉
                  , statutum. sayth Lindwood,
and to what end, pro salute animae suae, sayth
Simon Langham Bishop of Canterburie in his
Provinciall constitution. For the safetie of the
soule consisteth in remission of the sinn, sayth
Lindwood in his glosse upon that constitution,
which is not remitted, sayth hee, unlesse that
which is withholden be restored. These are the
Mortuaries, as yee see, which are demandable
in their spirituall courts. Oblations should be
free from compulsion, and superstition, not offered
immediatly to God upon the Altar, as
sometimes they doe, nor exacted under the colour
of maintenance of the ministerie, whereto
the tithes are already bestowed to that use. The
rich parson, yea the Bishop himselfe claimeth a

right to these oblations, as well as the poorest
Priest. To compell men to offer by the censures
of their Courts, is against the nature of a free
offering. The fees demandable in their Courts,
as due to the Iudge, the Register, the Advocates,
the Proctors, are unreasonable. Large fees are
payd for the Iudges sentence, for the Register
and the proctors pains, above the rate set down
by their Canons, as the defender of the last petition
doth affirme.P. 113. What is there obtained
without paying a fee? They have fees for excommunication,Assert.
of Christ. poli. p. 73. 74. for absolution, for institution
and induction, for letters of sequestration, &
relaxation, for licences to preach, for subscription
of a testimoniall, for commutation of pennance,
for licence to marry without bannes, &c.
            The judgement it selfe, in which is to be
considered, 1. the calling for the parties to
law, 2. Litis contestation, 3. cognition of
the cause, 4. the sentence, 5. such things as
follow the sentence, as execution, or appellation.
            These things are common to every court of
contentious or litigious jurisdiction. Here is to
be observed, that such a litigious kinde of pleading
for things civill and temporall, becommeth
not the Church of God. Nos scimus, sayth
the Bishop of Spalato,Lib. 3. cap. 8. num. 13. 
               quia 1. Cor. 11. contentione
                     •
                  
faciendi Ecclesia Dei cons
                     •
                  etudinem non habit,
nisi postquam facta est p
                     •
                  ne tota temporalis, & pervenerint
ad papatum inquieti & theologiae expe
                     •••
                  
juristae. Here also is to be remembred the longsomnesse
of Ecclesiasticall suits, depending in
their Courts.P. 219. 
               Now the Iudge, Register, Advoca
                     •
                  t,

Proctor, are all agreed to prolong suits for their advantage,
and so as the Prophet sayth, they wrap it
up, Mich. 7. 3. sayth the Defender of the last petition.
Where he doth also insinuate that suits
have been prolonged aboue two yeares in their
consistories.
            Wee have seene what civill causes, and after
what manner they are handled. Criminall causes
are brought in judgement, either by accusation,
when there is one to accuse, or by denunciation,
as when the Churchwardens make their
presentments into ther courts, twice in the year,
and at the visitations, or by inquisition, when
the judge of office doth inquire into offences.
What are the offences and crimes punishable in
Ecclesiasticall Courts, and what are these which
they chiefly search out and punish, we have declared
in the table of Visitation.
         
         
            CHAP. 5. Of Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries
Officials, and Vicars generall.
            NOW followeth the jurisdiction exercised
by the Bishops Deputies, and
Archdeacons, whereunto I will premit
the rest of Sir Francis Bacon now
Lord Chauncellour his censure.
            For the second poynt, which is the deputation of
their authoritie, I see no perfect and sure ground for
that neither, being somwhat different from the examples
and rules of government. The Bishop exerciseth
his jurisdiction by his Chauncellor and Commissary,
Officialls, &c. We see in all lawes of the world, officer
of skill and confidence cannot be put over or exercised

by Deputie, except it bee specially contained
in the Originall granted, and in that case it is dutifull.
There was never any Judge, in any court,
made a Deputie. The Bishop is a Iudge, and of
a high nature; Whence commeth it that he should
depute, considering that all trust and confidence,
(as was sayd) as personall, and inherent, and cannot,
and ought not to bee transposed? Surely in
this againe, Ab initio non fuit ita. But it is
probable, that Bishops▪ when they gaue themselves
too much to the glory of the world, and became
Grandoes in kingdoms, and great Counsellors
to Princes, then did they delegate their proper iurisdictions,
as things of too inferiour nature for their
greatnesse, and then after the similitude of kings, and
Count Palatines, they would have their Chauncellors
and Iudges.
            But that example of Kings and Potentates
giveth no good defence. For the reasons why kings
administer by their Judges (altho
                  •
               gh themselves
are the supreame Iudges) are two. The one, because
the offices of Kings are for the most part inheritance,
and it is a rule in all lawes, that offices
of inheritance are rather matters, that sound is
interest, then in confidence, forasmuch as they
may fall upon women, upon infants, upon lunatickes,
and Idiots, persons not able to exercise Iudicature
in person, and therefore such offices by all
lawes, might ever bee administred by delegation,
The second reason is, because of the amplitude of
their iurisdiction, which is as great, as either
their birthright from their Aun
                  •
               estours, or their
sword-right from God, maketh them. And therefore
Moses, that was governour over no great
people, and those collected together in a campe, and
not scattered in Provinces, and Cities, himself
                  •
               
               
l
                  •
               kewise of an extraordinarie spirit, was neverthelesse
not able to suffice, and hold out in person, to
iudge the people, but did by the advice of Ie
                     •
                  hro
his father in law, approved from God, substitute
Elders and Iudges, how much more other Kings and
P
                  •
               inces.
            There is a 3 reason likwise not much from the present
purpose, and that is, that Kings either in respect
of the common-wealth, or of the greatnesse
of their own patrimonies, are usually parties in suits,
and then their Iudges stand indifferent betweene
them and the subiect. But in the case of Bishop,
none of these reasons hold. For first, the office is
E
                  •
               ective and for life, and not patrimoniall, or hereditarie.
An office worthy of science, confidence,
and qualification. And for the second
reason it is true, their jurisdiction is ample and
spacious, and that their time is to bee divided between
their labours, as well in the word and doctrine, as
government, and iurisdiction. But I doe not see, supposing
the Courts to be used uncorruptly, and without
any indirect course held to multiply causes for
gaine of fees, but that the Bishop might very well for
causes of moment supply his iudiciall function in
his owne person. For wee see before our eyes, that
one Chauncellour of England dispatcheth the suits in
equitie of the whole kingdome, which is not by reason
of the excellencie of that rare honourable person,
who now holdeth that place, but it was ever so,
though more or lesse burthenous to the suiter, as the
Chauncellour was more or lesse able to give dispatch,
and if heed bee taken to that, which was sayd before,
that the Bishops labour in the word must take
up a principall part of his time, so I may say againe,
that matter of state have ever taken up most of
the Chauncellours time, having been for the most

part persons, upon whom the Kings of this Realme
have most relied for matters of Counsell. And therfore
there is no doubt, but the Bishop whose circuit
is lesse ample, and the causes in nature not so multiplying,
where the helpe of references, Certificates, to
and from fit persons, for the better ripening of causes
in their neere proceedings, and such ordinary helps
incident to jurisdiction, may very well suffice his office.
Yet there is another helpe: for the causes that
come before him are those, tithes, legacies, administrations,
and other testamentarie causes, causes
Matrimoniall, accusations against Ministers, tending
to their suspension, deprivation or degrading.
Symonie, incontinencie, heresie, breach of Sabboth,
and other like causes of scandall. The first two of
these differ in mine opinion, from the rest, that is,
tithes and testaments, for those be matters of profit,
and in their nature temporall, though by favour
and connivencie of the temporall jurisdiction, they
have beene allowed and permitted to the Court Ecclesiasticall.
The one, to the end the Clergie might sue
for that, that was their sustentation, before their own
Iudges, and the other, is a kinde of pietie and religion
which was thought incident to the performance
of dead mens wills. And surely for these two, the
Bishop in mine opinion may with lesse danger, discharge
himselfe upon his ordinarie Judges. And I
thinke likewise, it will fall out that those suits are in
the greatest number. But for the rest which require
a spirituall science, and discretion in respect of their
nature, or of the scandall, it were reason in mine opinion,
that there were no audience given, but by the
Bishop himselfe, he being assisted, as was touched
before. But it were necessarie also, he were attended
by his Chauncellour, or some other his officers, being
learned in the civill lawes, for his better instructions

in poynts of formalitie, or the courses of the Court,
which if it were done, then were there lesse use of the
officiall Court, whereof there is now so much complaint.
And causes of the nature aforesayd being
drawn to the audience of the Bishop, would represse
frivolous suits, and have a grave and incorrupt
proceeding to such causes, as shall bee fit for
the Court. There is a third forme also, not of jurisdiction,
but of forme of proceeding, which may deserve
reformation, the rather because it is contrary to
the lawes and customes of this land, and state, which
though they doe not rule this proceeding, yet may
they be advised with for better directions, and that
is the oath ex officio, wherein men are forced to accuse
themselves; and that is more, are sworne unto
blankes, and not unto accusations, and charges declared.
By the lawes of England, no man is bound to
accuse himselfe. In the highest causes of treason,
torture is used for discoverie, and not for evidence.
In capitall matters, no delinquents answer upon oath
is required, no not permitted. In criminall matters
not capitall, handled in the Starre-chamber, and in
causes of conscience, handled in the Chauncerie, for
the most part, grounded upon trust and secresie, the
oath of the partie is required. But how? where there
is an accusation, and an accuser, which we call bills of
complaint (from which the complaint cannot varie,
and out of compasse of the which the defendant may
not be examined) exhibited into the court, and by
processe certified unto the defendant. But to examine
a man upon oath▪ out of the insinuation of fame,
and out of accusations secret or undeclared, though
it have some countenance from the civil law, yet it
is so opposite ex Diametro, to the sence of the
common law, as it may well receiue some limitation.
            This wise Polititian maketh this overture,

supposing that the Bishops ample and spatious
circuite will not be contracted, and that these
causes, which in their owne nature are temporall,
wlll not be drawne from the ecclesiasticall
Courts. For such a reformation is not, nor may
not be 
                  〈◊〉
                at in these dayes, at least Polititians
will not hazard their places and hopes in
seeking of it, le
                  •
               t Caesar 
                  •
               tart. But their is a
day coming for the Antichrist, and them also.
What we have spoken before against medling
with civill causes, their large Diocie, and excluding
the Presbyterie from the cōmon governement
here not m
                  •
               lled with, I need not to repeat.
Alwayes the reader may take up very solide
reasons against the deputation of their authoritie.
            The ordinary Iudges, who under the
Prince execute judiciall administration in
name of others, are the Bishops deputies,
to wit, the Vicar generall, for the universitie
of causes belonging to voluntarie jurisdiction,
2. The officiall principall, for the
universitie of causes belonging to contentious
jurisdiction. 3. The Comm
                  •
               ssary, for
certain
                  •
                causes, within a certaine part of the
Diocie.
            The persons having judiciall admininistration
not brought in by any law, have it
eyther by Royall composition, or privilege,
or prescription of time. By prescription of
time as 1. some in exempt jurisdictions. 2.
Archdeacons, whose office constitute by
law, is to enquire in the repairing and covering

of Kirks, & their implements, in ecclesiasticall
enormities to be punished, to refer
to the ordinary matters or greater moment
to induct into benefices. 2. jurisdiction, as
they haue it by prescription. It is 
                  •
               xerced
e
                  •
               ther by themselves, or by their Officials.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Byshop hath a two fold power, one of order,
another of jurisdiction. The power of order
he committeth to his Suffragane Bishop, as
ordaining of ministers and Deacons, Bishoping
of children, dedication of Churches and church
yards etc. Their jurisdiction, is eyther voluntary,
or contentious. The voluntary he cōmitteth,
when he is absent, to his Vicar generall,
the contentious he commiteth to his Chauncelour,
and Com
                  ••
               ssarie. The Vicar generall then
in absence of the Bishop may visite the Diocie,De sequest
                     •
                  . c 1. veodo Vicarios.
or any part thereof, give certificates into the
Kings Courts of bastardie and of excommunicates,l.
5. p. 153. commit administrations, give licence to
eate flesh upon forbidden dayes, & doe all that
may be done by the Bishops voluntarie jurisdiction,
whereof we haue entreated already. D.
Field sayth, that Bishops had Vicars generall, that
might doe all things almost that perteyne to the
Bishops iurisdiction. And Lindwood sayth, that
they might not onely enquire into, but also punish
and correct offences. The other deputies
of the Bishop may be also called his Vicars, yet
are they designed 
                  〈◊〉
                distinct name, because
they haue a distinct office, to wit, the Chancelour,
and the Commissarie.
            The Chauncelour is the Bishops principall
officiall, deputed for his principall Consistorie.
The Commissarie is the Bishops officiall.

also, but in some remote part onely, or some
places, exempted from the Archdeacon, and he
is called in the Canon law,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   juris 
                     •
                  anonici. 92. 
               Officialis foraneus, id
est extraneus, sayth Canisius. This distinction
betwixt the Chauncellour and Commissarie, is
made cleare in Cowells interpreter, as followeth.
Officialis in the Canon law, is especially taken for
him, to whom any Bishop doth generally commit
the charge of his spirituall iurisdiction. And in this
sence one in every Diocie is Officialis principalis,
whom the statutes and lawes of this kingdome call
Chancellour, Anno 32. Henr. 8. c. 15. the rest, if
there be more, are by the Canon law called Officiales
foranei, gloss. in Clement. 2. de rescriptis, but
with us termed Commissaires Commissarij, as in
the statute of Henr. 8. sometimes Commissarij
foranei. The difference of these two poynts you may
read in Lindwood. tit. de sequestra, c. 1. But this
word Officiall in our statutes, and common law, signifieth
him whom the Archdeacon substituteth in
the executing of his iurisdiction, as appeareth by the
statute above mentioned, and many others places. Againe,
Commissarius is a title of Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction,
at least so farre as his commission permitteth
him in places of the Diocie, so farre distant
from the chiefe citie, as the Chauncellour cannot
call the subiects to the Bishops principall Consistorie,
without their too great molestation. This Commissarie
is of the Canonists termed Commissarius, or
Officialis foraneus, Lindw. de accusat. c. 1. in
glossa, and is ordained to this speciall end, that hee
suplieth the Bishops jurisdiction and office in the
out places of the Diocie, or else in such parishes as
be peculiars to the Bishop, and exempted from the iurisdiction
of the Archdeacon. For where either by
prescription, or composition. there bee Archdeacons

that have iurisdiction within their Archdeaconries, as
in most places they have, there this commissarie is
but superfluous, and most commonly doth rather
vexe and disturbe the countrey for his lucre, then of
conscience seeke to redresse the lives of offenders.
And therefore the Bishop taking praestation money
of his Archdeacons yearly, pro exteriori jurisdictione,
as it is ordinarily called, doth by superonerating
their circuit with a Commissarie, not onely
wrong the Archdeacon, but the poorer sort of subiects
much more, as common practise daily teacheth,
to their great woe. The Bishops Chauncellour
and Commissarie, and the Archdeacons official,
are all three termed officialls in the canon law,
the Chauncellour the principall officiall, the
Commissarie, Officialis foraneus, the third, the
Archdeacons officiall, or by the generall name
of officiall. In the lawes and statutes of England,
the first is called Chancellour, the second
Commissarie, the third by the generall name of
Officiall.Lib. 5. p. 15. 
               The name of Chauncellour in this sense, is
not so ancient as that of Officiall, sayth D. Field,
and that in a generall signification it is used for any
one that is employed for the giving of answer to sutors,
for keeping of records, and notes of remembrance,
and generally for the performance of some
principall duties pertaining to him, whose Chauncellour
he is sayd to be. The principall officiall, that
is, the Chauncellour, howbeit he be but onely
a Deputie, yet by fiction of the law, when hee
cognosceth any cause, hee is interpreted to bee
but one person with the Bishop, and to make
but one consistorie with him. So that howbeit
the Bishop be not present there, yet it is his
consistorie. Such fictions of law have been made
by, cosening and deceitfull Prelates, to deceive

the world. And therefore say the Canonists,
there lieth no appellation from the principall
Officiall to the Bishop, but to the Archbishop:
yet from the Commissarie, who is Officialis foraneus,
there lieth appellation. Regularly appellation
also may be made from the Archdeacon,
and other inferiour Prelates, to the Bishop,
sayth Canisius,
               
                  
                     •
                  anisius in 
                     〈◊〉
                   pag. 
                     •
                  1. 92. unlesse the custome of the
countrey hath brought in another order. The
Archdeacon hath a certaine circuit of the Diocie,
wherein he exerciseth his office and iurisdiction.
For everie Diocie is divided into certain
Archdeaconries, comprehending about the
fourth part of the Diocies, if they be great Diocies.
sucket, p. 
                     •
                  4. But if they be lesser Diocies, they haue but
one Archdeacon, as Canterburie, Rochester,
Glocester, Bristow, Worcester, &c. The Archdeacon
by vertue of his degree and order,
hath no jurisdiction, but onely by prescription
of time, that is a papall custome, which is yet retained
in the English Church.Id Evag. 
                     ••
                  st. 85. In Hieroms time
at Rome the Deacons began to exalt themselves
above Ministers, against which usurpation
& evil custome of the Church of Rome, he
inveigheth with great vehemencie, as a thing
unsufferable, that the ministers of tables, and to
widowes, should be lifted up with pride aboue
the minister of the word and sacraments, and
opponeth to the custome of the church of
Rome, the custome of all the churches in the
world. And yet the old corruption of that one
church, (wherin ther institutions ye see if they
were excellent) hath spread over the whole
church, and grown to a great height. So that the
Archdeacons will not,
               Reply. p. 
                     •
                  . sayth Mr. Cartwright, take
the best Ministers of the church, as their equalls.
               
They are called Archdeacons, not of one particular
Church, but of a whole shire, whereas
Deacons were appoynted in several churches. It
is true, that many of their Archdeacons are also
ministers, but yet they exercise their iurisdiction
over a whole shire, ministers and others
within the bounds of their Archdeaconrie, not
as Ministers, but as Archdeacons. When the Bishop
should have visited his Diocie, and inquired
into needfull reparations of the church, and
what other things were out of order, hee sent
his chiefe Deacons to visit for him. At the first
they were sent onely to visit and make report,
Lib. 5. p. 15▪ 153. 
               but not to sententiate in any mans cause,
sayth D. Field, or to meddle with the correcting
and reforming of any thing: but afterwards in
processe of time they were authorized to heare and
determine the smaller matters, and to reforme the
lighter and lesser offences. Hence in time it
c
                     •
                  me, that Archdeacons much used by Bishops,
as most attendant on them in the visitation of their
churches, and reforming small disorders, at length by
prescription claimed the correction of greater things,
at having of long time put themselves into the exercise
of such authoritie. So the Archdeacons
in the end became greater then the Deanes,
let bee common Ministers. The lazie Bishop
sent his Deacon to enquire into the life and
conversation of the Clergie and Ministers,
which was not his office, yet ye see from what a
small beginning he is risen to so great a height.
It is dangerous to depart from the right paterne
shewed upon the mount. Againe, to
make a Preacher of the word a Deacon, is to
conioyne these two offices, which the Apostles
did separate.
            
               
Archdeacons then almost through all England
by papall prescription have jurisdiction within
their bounds, and power to visite, to inquire
into offences, to receive presentments, & to punish
with ecclesiasticall censures, to substitute
officialls to supply their roomes in their Consistories,
whereby it hath happened, that the subjects
haue been molested for one and the selfe
same fault by the Bishops Chauncelours, and
the Archdeacon or his officiall.Canon 101. In a Canon lately
made anno 1603 they haue transacted the
matter so, that they shall not medle with the
presentments, received at others visitations; how
the transaction is kept I cannot tell. It is to be
observed that Chauncelours and officials are
Civilians,
                  
                     •
                  etition to 
                     •
                  be Queene. 70. Ministers doe sometime also beare
these offices, but utterly ignorant in these faculties.
For these Courts being confused Courts wherin
matrimoniall, testamentarie and other causes
of temporal matters are handled not belonging
to ecclesiasticall cognisance, no wonder the
Minister be ignorant in them. But on the other
part, it were a shame if a Civilian should know
better how to deale with an offender, and to
bring him to repentance. Againe what a grosse
absurditie and intolerable abuse is it in the
Church of God, that Chauncelours, Commissaries,
& officialls being Civilians should meddle
with the censures of the Church. The Bishop
hath vendicate to himself the whole power
of excommunication, and then he transferreth
this his power by a generall commission to
another, which he may not lawfully doe, no
not to a minister, far lesse to a Doctor of the
Civill lawe, whom he appointeth to be his
Chauncelour, or the Archdeacon to him, whom

hee appoynteth to bee his Officiall.
            They have found out a new trick, which will
not serve their turn. The Civilian, the Chauncellour,
or officiall, when he is to excommunicate,
he hath a minister to assist him, who
pronounceth the sentence. The defender of the
last petition telleth us,P. 175. that the minister assistant
to the Chauncellour, who is for the most part
of the meanest and simplest of the clergie, is
but a cyphar, he doth nothing but his masters
direction, excommunicateth and absolveth at
his pleasure. The Minister is not judge here, the
sentence is set downe in writ to him in Latine,
which he must rehearse. A memorable example
we have in the Assertion for true and Christian
church policie,P. 387. 388. together with the Article
made anent this matter.Anno 1584. 
               Vniusquis
                     •
                   Vicarius generalis,
officialis ceu commissarius, qui ordines Ecelesiasticos
non susceperit. &c. Every Vicar general,
officiall, or Commissarie, which hath not taken upon
him Ecclesiasticall orders, shall call and associate
unto him, some learned Presbyter, who being armed
with sufficient authority from the Bishop in his jurisdiction,
or from the Archdea, being a presb. in his
iurisdictiō shall denounce, and that by the prescript of
the judge present, the sentence of excommunication
for contumacie. The example and practise of this
precept followeth. Dr. Hone the Archdeacon
of Surrey his officiall, being to excommunicate
certaine persons, had a silly Curat, Mr. Rowland
Allen to attend his service, and to denounce
the lesson which was written to him in paper
to read, Iohannes Hone, legum Doctor, officialis
vener
                     •
                  bilis viri Domini Archidiaconi Surr. omnibus
& singulis Rectoribus, &c. salutem. Cum nos rite &
legitime procedentes, omnes & singulos, quorum nomina

&c. in non comparendo, 
                     •
                  oram nobis, &c.
ceu saltem in non satisf
                     •
                  ciendo mandatis nostris,
&c. pronunciaverimus contuniaces, ipsosque ex
communicandos fore decreverimus. Cumque 
                     •
                  iscretus
vir Magister Roul. Allen Presbyter, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
omnes et singulos subscriptos ex officio nostro ex cō
                  municaverit
in scriptis iustitia id exigente, vobis igitur
committimus &c. quatenus eos omnes sicut
prefertur ex officio nostro excommunicatos futsse, e
                     •
                  
esse palam denunci
                     •
                  tis Datum sub sigi
                     •
                  o officialitatis
nostrae 19 die Decembris Anno Domini
1587. Iohn Hone Doctor of the lawes, official
of the venerable man the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Surrey, to
all and singular persons &c. greeting: Whereas wee
otherwise rightly and lawfully proceeding, all and
singular, whose names are 
                     〈◊〉
                   in not appearing
before us, or at least 
                     〈◊〉
                   in not satisfying of
our mandates, haue pronounced contu
                     •
                  ci
                     •
                  us▪ and
decreed them to be excommunicated. And whereas,
also the discreet man Mr Rowland Allen Presbyter,
out of our office, hath excommunicated 
                     〈◊〉
                   and singular
underwritten 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  stice so requiring. Wherefore
we charge, that openly you denounce, and declare
them, and every of them, so as aforesaid, out
of our office to be excommunicated. Given under
the seale of our officiality, the 19 of December 1587.
The poore curate, sayth this authour, jerked
these, whose pointes soever the other untied.
Now in this case it cannot be sayd, that it was
onely the poore Curate, who 
                  〈◊〉
                excommunicate.
For he is but the hangman, the
other is the Iudge. Poore Rowland Allen rehearsed
the sentence by the prescript of Doctor
Hone. Doctor Hone 
                  ••
               ted, pronounced them
contumaciously absent, and upon the con
                  •
               umacie
decreed them to be excommunicated, prescrived

the lesson to poore Rowland Allen, without
which things the sentence should be a nullsentence.
D. Hone the Archdeacons officiall,
hath power to call and associate unto him,
               P. 392. 
               and to
prescribe Rowland Allen presbyter, and another mans
hireling Curate in Southwarke to excommunicate,
not onely the parochians of anothers Pastors charge,
but also any other Pastor whatsoever, subiect to the
Acchdeacons jurisdiction. If it be lawfull at the
voyce of a lay stranger, that an hireling and stipendiarie
Curate should chase another mans sheepe out of
his owne fold, how much more is it lawfull that a
true shepherd should disciplinate his own sheepe, feeding
and couchan
                     •
                   within his owne pasture, and
within his own fold. Ye see then whereto this
alteration of discipline will turne in the end.
The censures of the Church as a matter of no
worth or moment, shall be put in the hands of
base Officialls, and blind Rowland Atlens. An
Oxe and an Asse shall plow together in the
Lords field. The Chauncellors, Commissaries,
and Officialls, have power to convent a minister
before them, and if hee compeir not, first
suspend, and then excommunicate him, as is evident
by their latest Canons.Can. 12
                     •
                  . Thus shall the
worthiest of our ministrie bee brought under
bondage. The Reader may see how unworthily the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Archdeacons deale with
the Church, which not content themselves to use tyranny
over it, and to take upon them of their private
authoritie, which belongeth unto other with them,
have also brought it into bondage under their servants,
and servants servants,
               2 Reply, 2. part. pag. 96▪
                
               I meane Chauncellours,
Commissaries, &c. sayth Mr. Cartwright. The
Commissarie court is but a little stinking ditch,
say the authors of the admonition to the Parliament.P. 17.
               
In this Court one alone doth excommunicate,
one alone sitteth in judgement, and when he will
can draw back the iudgement which hee hath pronounced,
having called upon the name of God, and
that for money, which is called the changing of penance.
In this Court for none payment of two pence,
a man shall be excommunicate, if he appear not when
he is sent for. This Court pouleth parishes, scourgeth
the poore bedge-priests, ladeth Churchwardens
with manifest perjuries, punisheth whooredome and
adulterie with toyish censures, remitteth without satisfying
the congregation, and that in secret 
                     〈◊〉
                  
giveth out dispensations for unlawfull marriages,
and committeth a thousand such 
                     •
                  ike abomina
                     •••
                  ;
where the Iudges, Advocates, and Proctors are for
the most part papists. And as for Scribes and Notaries,
as greedi
                     •
                   as Cormorants: If they all should
perhaps see this writing they would bee as angry as
Wasps, and sting like 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Three of them would
be enough to sting a man to death, for why, they are
high Commissioners.
               P. 50. Againe, who be their Chauncellours,
but most suspected Papists. I heare not of
one of them, but he is a br
                     ••
                  er. Who be their Sumners,
but the veriest varlets? What are the Canonists?
what are they but suspected Papists, and where have
they the most countenance, but of the Bishops? To
be their chiefe doers, and high Commissioners, with
them to wr
                     •
                  g their brethren, if they bee Gods children,
and to 
                     •
                  et papists passe free, or to bee punished
lightly. How are matters dealt with in their Courts,
but all for Mistres Money. What a charge are they
to the Clergie? and what a summe have they yearly,
that might be saved, and it is no small matter that
maintaineth their Courts.
               P. 58. Again, It would grieve
a chast eare to heare the bawdie pleading of many
Proctors and Doctors in those Courts, and the Sumners,

yea and Registers themselves. Mr. Archdeacon
and Mr. Chauncellour are even faine to laugh it out
many times, when they can keep their countenance no
longer. Suppose our high commission were never
so odious, yet the Bishops shall bee sure of
such servile varlets Commissaries, Officialls,
and Chauncellours to sit with them, for why
they shall be their own creatures. It is no wonder
they be bribers, for the Bishops and Archdeacons,
set in farme their jurisdiction to them.
Some Chauncellours and,
               P. 213▪
                
               officialls pay 20. some 30.
some 50. pounds yearly for their place, Registers
some an hundred, some two hundred pounds, some
more. How then is it possible but they should extort
in their office, and by unreasonable and untollerable
exactions make up their hard rents? as it is sayd in
the Defence of the last petition for reformation.
Many greivous complaints have been made
against Officialls, Commissaries, and Chauncellours
from time to time, in Germanie, France,
and other countries, which I might produce to
make this bondage yet more sensible.
         
         
            CHAP. 6. Of Suffraganes, Deanes, and Cathedrall
Churches.
            WE have seen in the former Tables,
what persons have judiciall
administration. Now follow,
            Persons having no Iudiciall administration.
Those are either Ecclesiasticall persons,
or lay-men. Ecclesiasticall persons are the

Deacon, and the Minister: and they have
their function, either without perpetuall title,
as Curates, or with title. The second
sort, either have a peculiar function beside
their common function, or have not a peculiar
function. These who have a peculiar
function beside the common, either
have it through the whole 
                  ••
               iocie, or but
in a part of it. Through ane whole Diocie,
as the titular Bishops, who were
of old called Chorepis
                     •
                  opi, that is, Rurall
Bishops, now they are called Suffraganes.
They are to bee considered either according
to the place, which they hold in
the Common-wealth, to wit, next unto
Barones, or according to the place which
they have in the Church, to wit, that
they are Bishops both in calling and order,
but wanting jurisdiction, 2. Dedicate
Churches, 3. confirme children, instructed
before in the Rudiments of Christian
religion, and that in a Diocie allotted
unto them.
            That which is here sayd of Suffraganes, that
of old they were called Chorepiscopi, is controlled
by Mucket himselfe.Cap. 9. pag. 339. For hee sa
                  •
               th,
that the Rurall D
                  ••
               nes are like the old Chorepiscopi.
De
                     ••
                  ni 
                     〈…〉
                   is Ecclesiae Chorepiscopis
& A
                     •
                  chipresbyteris Regionarijs haud absimiles.
               Bleyni. introduct. p. 422. And so doth Bleynianus also in his introduction
into the theorie and practique of

benefices. At the first, where the Gospell was
spread through the Countrey townes and villages,
as it was through Cities, so they had
Coun
                  •
               rey or rurall Bishops, as well as Bishops
in cities. But ambition and pompe in
Citie Bishops increasing, it was thought a disgrace
that such a dignitie should bee obscured
with a meane place of residence.Se Damasus, Decretal. Therefore it
was decreed, that it should not bee lawfull to
ordaine any Bishop, either in villages, little
forts or small Cities, lest the name and authoritie
of a Bishop should waxe vile. Sathan
was advancing this way the great mysterie of
iniquitie. Because he would make of Bishops
young Princes, hee went about, as is well observed
by Mr. Cartwright,2. Reply. 1. part. p. 525. 
               with robberie of the rest,
to lift up the head of one: otherwise the great
pompe which they were striving for, could
not be maintained. At the first, the countrey
or Rurall Bishop had the same power in his
circuit which the Citie Bishop had in the citie
and suburbs of it. Hierome sayth,Ad Eva
                     ••
                  . that the bishop
of an obscure citie hath as much authoritie
as hee of the most famous citie. The
Presbyters who were ordained by them, their
ordination was not made voyd and reversed,
untill they were throwne downe through the
pride and dispite of citie bishops, to the order
of priesthood, which is an argument sufficient,
that they were in estimation and judgement
of the Church, bishops of that same
sort and kinde, that the citie bishops were.
Beeing spoyled of the greatest part of their
power, and name also, they there called Archipresbyteri,
at the last, Countrey or Rurall
Deanes, and were made subject not onely

to Bishops, but also to their Archdeacons, No
propter subrogationem in locum Chorepiscoporum
superbirent Archipresbyteri, & idem, sibi quod antea
Chorepiscopi arrogarent, si immediate Episcopis supponerentur,
sayth Bleynianus a Papist. This is
his conjecture, that the Archpresbyters were
thrust downe to a degree lower then Archdeacons,
lest if they had been immediatly subiect
to Bishops, they might perhaps have claimed
the power of the old countrey Bishops, to
whom in place they succeeded. For justly Archpresbyters
may claim by their order, that which
Archdeac. cannot do. For howbeit they be inferiour
to Archdeac. in Popish dignitie, yet they
are greater then Archdeacons in respect of their
order. Countrey Bishops at their first erection
being equall to Citie Bishops, were not
their Deputies. In the later, and corrupt ages,
proud Prelates, and loytering Lords, addicting
themselves to the world, seeking ease, or intangling
themselves with wordly affaires, as they
commited the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction to
Chauncellours and Commissaries, so that
which is most proper to them, as they pretend,
as ordination of Priests and Deacons, confirmation
of children, and dedication of Churches,
they committed to Suffraganes, that they
might give themselves to ease, and wait upon
Councells, Parliaments, and other civill
Courts: and reserved nothing belonging to
their owne charge, that might trouble their
ease, or draw them from attendance upon Princes
Courts, and civill employments. D. Field alledgeth
against these Suffragane Bishops,L. 5. p. 158. 
               Melchior
Canus a papist. Such Bishops Melchior Canus
entreating of Councells, and the persons wherof

Councells consist, sayth, they are so farr from having
any place, or voyce in councells, that they neither
have, nor ought to have any place in the church at all.
The Bishops he speaks of, he calleth annular Bishops,
happely for that whereas full Bishops had both staffe
and ring expressing their jurisdiction, as well as their
espousing to the church, these had the ring onely.
That Suffraganes may ordaine Priests and Deacons,Can. 35. 6
                     •
                  
                and confirme, in their Church, is evident
by their latest Canons. Now if Bishops may
transferre these things which belong to their
order to one Suffragane, they may transferre it
also to moe, and consequently to all the Cathedrall
and countrey Deanes, and restore the
countrey Deanes to their old liberties againe.
It dependeth onely upon some new Canon.
The Bishop of Spalato sayth, Imo si vult Epis
                     •
                  opus,
               L. 2. cap. 9. n
                     •
                  m. 15. 
               & canones non prohiberent, potest suos parochos
plene Episcopos facere, & ordinare ut omnes sui
or dini
                     •
                   actus pl
                     •
                  ne possint explere: & simul ac in soli

                     〈◊〉
                   cum ipso Ecclesiam gubernare. The Bishop
may make all his parish priests, not onely halfe
but full Bishops, that they might governe the
Church in common with him, sayth he, if the
Canon law were not an impediment. The parish
priest may curse this Canon law, that h
                  •
               ndreth
them of that which Gods law alloweth
them. But that which Divine law hath given to
every pastour, neither Canon nor civill law
should take from them.
            In a part of the Diocie, as Archpresbyters
whom they call rurall Deanes, and now they
are imployed for the most part, to convocate
their Classis, 2. to intimate to them
something directed by missive from the ordinarie,

as occasion shall require. 3. to Induct
into benefices in place of the Archdeacon,
being busied in some remote
part.
            There were two sorts of Acchpresbyters of
old. The citie Archpresbyter, who is now called
the cathedrall or citie Deane, & the Countrie
Archpresbyter, who is called now the rurall
Deane, who was at the first institution moderator
of the classis, or countrey Presbyterie,
& thereafter made a countrey Bishop, or Chorepiscopus
within his owne circuit, as the citie Bishop
was at the first but President, or moderator
of the Presbyterie of the citie and suburbs.
For we must not think that the country Bishop
ruled alone without his classicall Presbyterie,
more then the citie Bishop did. In processe of
time the citie Bishop grew to this great statelynes,
which now we see, and the o
                  ••
                
               Chorepiscopus
decreased, and was throwen dovvne by degrees,
till at last he is come to this poore estate
of a rurall Deane. He it not ranked in this hierarchie
amongst the persons having iudicial administration,
but among those vvho haue
none, as ye see, to intimate to the Priests with
in his Deanrie, what is the Bishops pleasure
eyther severally, or to convocate them togither
to that effect, or to put any person in
possession sometime of his Benefice,Pueket p. 24. for the
Archdeacon. Every Diocie in England, as vve
heard before out of Mucket, is divided in Archdeaconries,
moe or fevver according to their
extent: Achdeacour. into Deanries. The Deanries
comprehend ten Parishes, sometimes moe,

seldome fewer. But cathedrall and collegiat
churches are exemed out of the Archdeaconries,
and rurall Deanries. Over these Deanries
are set rurall Deanes, qui
                     •
                  us praeficiuntur
Dec
                     •
                  nirurales, antiquis Archipresbyter is non multum

                     •
                  issimiles sayeth hee. Then againe in every
Diocie there are iurisdictions exempt eyther
from the Archdeacon, and subiect immediately
to the Bishop, or exempt from
both, or from the whole Province of the ArchBishop,
and subject immediatly to the King
in respect of appellations, They want no corrupt
order of governement, which they had
in time of Poperie: no not so much as their
exemptions. To returne then to the rurall
Deanes. These rurall Deanes upon the Bishops,
or his deputies warrant cited such within
their Deanries, as were to compeir before
the Bishop, or his deputie, and this their citation
under the seale of their office they were
to certifie to the Bishop, or his deputie. But
Lindwood sayth,De iudicijs cap. Quidam. 
               quod per eos potius quam per alios,
qui hibent sigilla authentica, multae multae fiebant fraudes,
and that they colluded with the partie in
sealing the certificates of their citations, when
as they had not made any due citation, and
therefore Iohn Peccham Archbishop made a
constitution, that every yeare they should
svveare to give out no certificates without
due citation. They were sworne every yeare
sayeth Lindwood quit quolibet anno mutantur
Decani,
               1. 5. p. 150. 
               et fiunt noui. They were to hold
Chapiters in a sett course foure times in the
yeare, and at other times, as often as occasion
should require sayth D. Field out of Lindw. But

               Lindwood writeth thus,De Consti
                  
                     •
                  utionth cap Qui
                     ••
                   verb 
                     ••
                  pitulis. 
               Et horum capituloru
                     •
                  
quaed
                     •
                  m tenentur de tribus hebdomadis in tres; qu
                     •
                  ,
dam semelin quarta anni, & haec dicuntur, Capitul
                     •
                  
principalia propter majorem confluen
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  m Cleri, &
quia in his de negotijs arduioribus tracteri consuevit.
Some did meet every three weekes, some every
quarter of year. Their Chapiters convening every
three weeks, were our presbyteries which
doe meet in some place every weeke, in other
places in two or three weeks, especially in winter.
These chapiters were called capitula ruralia,
countrey or rural Chapiters, sayth Lindwood, because
they were assembled in the countrey
towns. In these Chapiters the Deans did publish
the decrees of Provinciall and Episcopall
Synods. For the Bishop himselfe did not demit
himselfe so farre, as to be present: and therfore
sent one to make intimation, or to the
Deane to doe it. Praesertim cum non deceat statum
pontificalem in singulis capitulis hujusmodi interesse,
sayth Lindwood. D. Field proveth that of old,
they had power to visit their circuit twice every
yeare, and to suspend laymen from the sacraments,
and clergie men from the execution of
their offices. This was a remainder of the old
power of the Countrey Bishop. Now his office
is onely to intimate decrees of Synods, or the
Bishops will in any matter, without any iurisdiction
reserved either to him, or to the
ministers of the Deanrie assembled together
in chapiter, or as wee speake in scripture
language, presbyterie. So that their Deanries
are a footstep of that which have beene, and a
shadow of that whereof we had the substance.
This alteration of government among us, will
in the end turne to the same desolation. There

are some Deanes exempt, which are subject immediatly
to the Archbishop, and these have Archi
                  ••
               aconall
jurisdiction, sayth Lindwood. Wee
have before made mention of some rurall
Deanes exercising spirituall jurisdiction, but
that is not common; next it is Episcopall, for
they doe it by themselves without the Chapiter.
            Those which beside the common have
no peculiar function, are placed either in
so
                  •
               e cathedrall or collegiat Church, or in
a parish Church. In some Cathedrall or
Collegiar Church, whereof they are members,
or no members. Of those who are
members, the chiefe is the Deane, then in
some Churches of ancient foundation, other
dignities also, as the Subdeane, the
Chauncellour, the chiefe Chaunter, the
Thesaurer. Lastly, the Canons or Prebendaries,
of which in the Churches which are
more ancient, some are Residentiaries, some
not. The greater Residentiaries administrate,
and governe in all things with the
Deane in that Church, and they have a seat
in the Quire, and the power of a voyce in
the Chapiter. Canons or Prebendaries
no
                  •
                Residentiaries, have a seat in the Quire,
but not a voyce in the Chapiter. Those who
who are not members, serve either to the
administration of the publick Liturgie, or
Sacraments, as the pettie Canons or Vicars
chorall, or by assisting those who

do celebrate, as the Pistler & the Gospeller.
            There are also others bearing office in cathedrall
Churches, but they are ranked among the
lay sort, by the composer of the tables, such as
are singing boyes, vergerers, Ballifs; and others
set down afterward. The authour of the admonition
to the parliament doth thus muster the
Droanes of these Cathedrall Churches.Pag. 15. 
               Wee
should be too long to tell your Honours of the cathedrall
Churches, the dennes aforesayd of all loytering
lubbers, where Mr. Dean, M. Vicedeane, Mr. Canons,
or Prebendaries, the greater, M
                     •
                  pettie Canons, or Canons
the lesser, M. Chauncellour of the Church, M.
Treasurer, otherwise called Iudas the Purse-hearer,
the chiefe ch
                     •
                  unter, singing men special favourers of
religion, squealing Qui
                     •
                  isters, Organ players, Gospellers,
               
                  
                     •
                  ialog. l. 4. 26.
               pistlers, pensioners, vergers, &c. Wicl
                     •
                  ffe
sayth, there 
                     •
                  e 12 disciples of the Antichrist; Popes,
Cardinals, Patriarches, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Officialls, Deans, Monk
                     •
                  s, Canons, Friers, &
Pardoners. He reckoneth yee see the Deans and
Canons among the disciples of the Antichrist.
And in truth what are they else but idle lubbers,
lying in the cloysters of their Cathedrall
Churches having either no necessary or profitable
charge in the cathedral church, where they
loyter, or else have a charge in other places, but
under colour of their prebends, absent thēselves
from the churches where they are bound to a
cure of soules, and that which they spoyle and
raven in other places,Reply. pa. 3. 164. 165. there, sayth M. Cartwr, they
spend and make good cheere with. And againe he
sayth, they should indeed be the rewards of learning,
if they were converted unto the maintenance, and
bringing up of Scholers, where now for the most

part they serve for fat morsels, to fill if might bee,
the greedie appetites of those, which otherwise have
ynough to live with, and for holes and dennes to keep
them in, which are unworthy to be kept at the ch
                     •
                  ge
of the church, or else whose presence is necessarie,
and dutifull in other places, and for the most part
unprofitable there. The Deane, and Canons or
Prebendaries, are not sustained with the Ecclesiastical
rents and possessions of the citie, where
they loiter, but for the most part of the rents
and possessions of their charges in the countrey,
to their ruine and desolation, the great steeples
devouring the little steeples, the great
Quires overthrowing the finall pulpits. It was
done no doubt in a foolish and pretensed imitation
of the temple of Ierusalem, to appoint
such idle serving and singing men to uphold in
the cathedrall Church daily chaunting and
singing, as was the custome in the temple of
Ierusalem. But all the people in the land had
communion of worship in the sayd temple, and
repaired to it thrice in the yeare to that effect
and purpose, beside that the daily worship was
for the use of all those who were upon severall
occasions to repaire unto the sayd temple, and
therefore the whole people of God is called
the church of the Iewes; because they had
communion of worship in one place. But there
is no such place in the Christian churches appointed
either for countries, counties, or shires.
Every church even the meanest, hath as great
interest & priviledge to all the points of Gods
worship, as the greatest cities, lett be the Cathedrall
seats, which are not ever the greatest.
Then againe their curions singing and chanting

serveth not for edification of the soule, but
rather to hinder true devotion, and carie away
the mind from heavenly meditation with a carnall
and sensuall delite. He that singeth should
be liker pronuncianti quam canenti to one who
pronounceth the word, then to one that singeth.
Psalmes as sung by course▪ & side after side:
some few singing, the rest of the people resrayned
from singing: One half sung with the hart,
the other half with hart and voice. Then again
their musicall instruments were unknowen to
the church of God for 800 yeres. Yea it appeareth
that they were not brought in, in the
dayes of Aquinas. For he sayth, sed instruments
musica sicut cytharas,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. quest. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . art. 2. 
                     ••
                  g. 4. 
               et Ps
                     •
                  teria non assumit ecclesia
in div
                     •
                  nas laudes ne videatur iudaizare. The
Church then it seemeth used no musicall
instruments in his time lest it should seeme to
Iudaize. Yea amongst the Iewes themselves
these musicall instruments were not used in
their synagognes, but only in the temple, which
was the theater of all the ceremonies of the leviticall
law. Againe that one should read the
gospel another the epistle, what an idle distinction
of idle officemen in the church is this? for
by this reason they may make a third sort also
for reading of the law.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 336. The Treasurer, Chancelour,
Vicedeanes offices are not all alike in every
cathedrall church, sayth Mucket, but divers
according to the different statutes of divers places.
It is hard therefore distinctly to define
particularly their offices. The Deane of the cathedrall
Church succeedeth in the roome of
him, who was called Archipresbyter urbanus, the
citie Presbyter, as the rurall Deanes doe the
Countrey presbyter. But the cathedaall chapter

doth not consist of the presbyters of the citie,
as the rurall chapiter did consist of the presbyters
within the rurall Archpresbyter his praecinct:
yea they were bound to sit in chapiter
with the Deane,Lib. 5. p. 15
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                sayth Dr. Field. But all the
Presbyters of the cathedrall citie doe not at any
time sit in chapiter with the cathedral Dean
as I gave a lively example before of the citie of
London, where the Ministers of the severall parishes
doe not sit in chapter with the Deane of
Pauls, but onely Canons and Prebendars, who
for the most part ought to serve at parishes perhaps
20. or 30.Pag. 151. miles from the citie. The cathedrall
seat of Canterburie hath 12. or 13. parishes,
but not 4 able preachers, sayth the author
of the Assertion for true and Christian Church
policie. I have been in some of their cathedrall
cities, where they have no parish minister to
preach, but onely the watering of some prebendarie,
who commeth to attend on service in the
temple, and neglecteth his owne charge with
cure of soules. Againe, suppose this chapiter did
consist of parish ministers within the citie, yet
that some should bee made cardinall to sit in
chapiter, either with Bishop or Deane, and others
secluded, having as great interest in the
common government of their stocks, as it is not
grounded on the word, so it was not known to
puret antiquitie,Pag. 
                     •
                  0▪
                as wee have already made evident.
And it is acknowledged also by Bellarmine,
howbeit hee doeth conjecture upon a false
ground,De Clerici cap. 16. what was the cause of it. Nam à tempore
Apostolorum per multos annos, imo etiam per
aliquot soecula, quia pauci erant Presbyteri & Diaconi,
omnes simul ad electionem Episcopi, & ad concilia
vocabantur, neque opus erat tunc distinguere à

Cardinalibus non Cardinales sicut etiam in alijs Ecclesi
                     •
                  s
non disting
                     •
                  ebantur Canonici à non Canonicis.
And yet there were many Presbyters at
Rome in Cornelius time, as they themselves confesse,
yet even then this distinction was not
made, as Bellarmine in that same place doth acknowledge.
Farther, this same chapiter hath
not any medling with jurisdiction in common
with the Bishop. The Deane and Prebendaries
in many places have power severally to
excommunicate in their parishes▪ which belong
to them in peculiar, but they convene not
chapiterl
                  •
               e▪ to exercise spirituall jurisdiction,
and inflict spirituall punishments, and censures,
upon every delinquent within the Diocie, yea
or cathedral seat onely, either with the Bishop,
or without him. Alienation of church lands,
or setting of takes, and such like, which concern
the possessions of the Church, may not passe
without them, but for spiritual jurisdiction they
are content that the vicar generall, and officiall
principall part that betwixt them. To what use
then serveth the cathedrall Deane, and his Canons
or prebendaries, &c. but to wear copes and
caps, tippets, and hoods, rochets, surplices, to pipe
on organs▪ to sing curiously, to read gospels and
epistles, according to their severall offices, and
in their severall turnes and courses. In the 24▪
canon of the last constitutions, when the communion
is to be celebrated upon principal feast
dayes, if the bishop himself be not present, then
the Dean is to administer the communion with
a cope. And notwithstanding of all this, the
Deane must sit in some chiefe place of the
Church, with his velvet cushion before him,

and cloth of estate, and be brought to his place
with a silver Mace before him.
         
         
            CHAP. 7. The calling and function of English
Priests and Deacons.
            THE name of Priest to signifie a minister
of the Gospell, is usuall with
them, even in their latest Canons.
Howbeit it seemeth to bee derived
from the Greek word Presbyter, yet seeing it
hath been used to signifie a sacrificing Priest,
such as the Masse-priest was thought to be, and
is still retained in their latest translations of the
Bible, to signifie a sacrificing Priest, their pretext
of the originall of the name, is frivolous,
for either they should translate the Leviticall
Priest sacrirficer, if they would retaine the proper
signification of the word priest, or else abstaine
from, or alter the name of Priest, seing
they may have choyce of names.
            The Ecclesiasticall persons in the Parish
Church are, the minister, and Deacon. In
the minister are to bee considered, his externall
calling, and his publicke function.
His externall calling is, either to the order
and degree, or to the benefice, and place of
the ministerie. The externall calling to
the order and degree is seene, either in
things preceeding the ordination, or in
the ordination it selfe. In things going before
the ordination, as 1. publick intimation
made by the Bishop, in the most famous

places of the Diocie of the day of ordinations,
2. Letters testimoniall to the Bishop
ordainer, from men of good credit and religion,
as well of the conversation of him
who is to be ordained, as of his birth, that
that he is not a bastard, or bond-man. 3.
the examination of him who is to be ordained,
either of his education, whether hee
were brought up in a common Schoole, or
in an Academie, or of his progresse in humane
literature, or theologie, in which is to
be considered, either the proficiencie it
selfe to be tried by the Bishop himselfe, or
the Archdeacon, or some other appoynted
for him: or else, the degree which hee hath
taken on in the Schooles. The ordination
it selfe consisteth in prayers for him, who
is to be ordained, 2. in exhortations to him,
and 3. in imposition of hands.
            You may see, that they make the calling to
the ministerie, and the calling to the place, two
divers actions distinguished in time, whereas
none ought to be admitted to the ministry, but
when and where there is a place voyd. The Apostles
ordained not ministers to rove abroad
through a whole province, but appointed them
towne by towne, Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. The
Councell of Chalcedon decreed, that no presbyter
should bee ordered loosely, that is, unlesse
(as it is there added) it bee in some
congregation or citie. The word Apole
                     •
                  ymeno
                     •
                  s
they interpret without a title, but then by a
title they meane, not a particular charge, but

some possession or living to be maintained by.
But who will ever admit (sayth Mr. Calvin) that the
title which the Councell requireth,
               Instit. lib. 
                     ••
                   cap. 5. Se
                     ••
                  
                
               is a yearly revenue
to maintaine himselfe with? In the latest canons
this Popish interpretation is approved,
where are set downe the titles of such as are to
be made ministers. If he be provided to a place
in some cathedrall, or collegiate Church, or if
he be a Fellow, or in the right of a fellow, or if
he be to be a conduct or Chaplain in some colledge
in Cambridge, or Oxford; or if he be a
Master of Arts of five yeares standing,Can. 33. that liveth
of his owne charge in either of the universities,
or if by the Bishop himselfe that doth ordaine
him, he be shortly after to bee admitted
to some benefice, or curatship then voyd, is he
sayd to have a title, howbeit hee have not as
yet a particular flocke, which was not the meaning
of the councell of Chalcedon, farre lesse
the meaning of the holy Ghost in the scripture.
They have made 60. 80. or 100. at a clapp,
               Pag. 
                     •
                  . 
               and
sent them abroad into the countrey, like masterlesse
men, say the authours of the admonition to the
Parliament. And againe, When they have made
them,
               Pag. 15. 
               either they may tarry in their colledge, and lead
the lives of loytering losels as long as they live, or
else gad abroad with the Bishops Bulls▪ like to Circumcellions
to preach in other mens charges, where
they list, or else get benefices by friendship, or money,
or flatterie, where they can catch them: or to conclude,
if all these faile, that they may goe up and
downe like beggars, and fall to many follies, or else
as many have done, set up bills at Pauls, or at the
Royall Exchange, and such like publike places, to see
if they can heare of some good masters to entertaine
them into service. In the late Canons foresayd,

the Bishop is ordained to maintaine him in all
things necessarie, who hath not one of these titles,
till he preferre him to some Ecclesiasticall
living, which is but one of the rotten Canons
of the Canon law. If this were kept, 3. or 4.
Bishops in this realme would have kept such
houses, as never any did in this land, as is sayd
in the foresayd admonition. Their order in making
Priests, is this. First they must be Deacons
before they be made Priests, for so they interpret
the words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 13. they
that have ministred in the office of a Deacon wel purch
                     •
                  se
unto themselves a good degree, that is, say
they, a step to the ministerie. The Apostle sayth
not that they who doe the office of a Deacon
well shall get a good degree or standing, but that
in so doing, they get themselves a good degree,
that is, authoritie and estimation in the church,
and consequently great boldnesse in the faith.
For a man may have gifts sufficient for a Deaconship
and yet never have gifts sufficient for
the ministerie. But admitting the office of the
Deacon were a step to the ministerie, that hee
who is a Deacon may be a Minister, it followeth
not that there is not accesse to the Ministery,
but by this step of the Deaconship. And
therfore not to admit a man to the ministerie,

                  •
               nlesse hee first take upon him the office of a
Deacon, is a na
                  •
               gh
                  •
               ie device. It was decreed in
their lat
                  •
               st Canons, that no Bishop should
make any person, of what qualities or gifts soever,
a Deacon and a Minister both together upon
one day. Not that alwayes every Deacon should
be kept from the Ministerie a whole yeare, when the
Bishop shall finde good cause to the contrary: but
that there being now foure times appointed everie

yeare for the ordination of Deacons and Ministers,
there may be ever some time of triall of their behaviour
in the office of a Deacon, before they be admitted
to the order of Priesthood. Yet they are
not so nice,Pag. 309▪
                but this order may be dispensed
with, and that one may take on both the
orders upon one day, as Mucket doth record.
When the time of giving orders draweth neere,
the Bishops Bull is set up upon the Church
doore, to give warning, that if any be minded
to receive orders, let them repair to the Bishop
at such time and place. This is, sayth Mr. Cartwright,
like the sound of a trumpet to gather an
Armie. But the Bill which is set up upon the
Church doore, is in latine, so that the people
cannot understand the sound of the trumpet.
This Bill doth not desire the people to come, &
object against the persons to be ordained. And
suppose that were the end, it wer but a deluding
of the people: for either they have a Priest or
Curat already, and then they have not need to
object, or else the place is voyd, but they know
not against whom to object, for amongst 40, 50,
or 100. perhaps they know not who is the man,
that is appoynted for them. The Bishop and
the patron out of the whole number wil choose
afterward when and whom they thinke meete.
And howbeit there were not one voyd Church
in all the Diocie, but incumbents in every one
of them, yet the Bishop will give orders. And
againe, if none of them have ever been conversant
in these vacant parts, how can they stand
up and object against them. The day of giving
orders being published, which is ordinarily upon
the Lords dayes, after the Ember weekes,

then there is repaire to the citie or village
where the Bishop is to give orders. He that
can purchase the letters commendatory of some
nobleman, or knight, shall come best speed.
Then is he to be tried by the Archdeacon, who
is but a Deacon onely in respect of his Archdeaconrie.
Howbeit sometimes the Archdeacon
be also a Priest, beside that it is a confounding
of distinct offices, it is not by vertue of his
Priesthood, but of his Deaconship, that he trieeth
the persons who are to be ordained. They
are tried by some questioning, but as the Archdeacon
pleaseth. Their pastorall gifts of utterance,
doctrine, and exhortation are not tried either
by the Archdeacon, or any particular
church: may these gifts are not needfull in an
English priest; for a bare reader is sufficient to
bee an English minister. The Archdeacon is
sometime in one part of the countrey, and the
bishop in another.
                  
                     ••
                  stract. p. 
               The Bishop making ministers at
Exceter, and his Archdeacon at Oxenford, or the
Bishop making ministers at Leichfield, and his Archdeacon
at Durham. When the day of ordination
is come, after an exhortation made, & the communion
celebrated, the Epistle and Gospel read,
and the hymne, Veni creator sung or sayd, the
Archdeacon presents to the Bishop all those
who are to take on the order of Priesthood that
day, with these words, Reverend father in Christ,
I present to you the persons here present, to be admitted
to the order of Priesthood. Then after some
demands and answeres, of the Bishop, and the
other, who is to be admitted, he demandeth of
the people who are present there, where he giveth
orders, if they know any impediment
which may hinder any of these present to bee

admitted to the order of priesthood, which is a
manifest mockage. For it may be, that none
there present ever heard or saw any of them, or
all of them, before that day. But these words
import that ordinations of old were performed
before the congregation, whereunto he was to
bee appoynted. Thereafter the oath of the
Kings supremacie is taken, then againe after an
exhortation, follow other demands an answers.
After that the people who are present, are desired
secretly to commend the businesse to God,
for which cause they are all silent for a little
space. After that the Bishop readeth a prayer,
which being finished, they who are to be ordained,
sitting on their knees at the Bishops feet,
the Bishop and the rest of the Priests who are
present, lay hands severally upon the heads of
every one of them, the Bishop uttering these
words, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sinnes thou
doest forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sinnes
thou doest retaine, they are retained: and be thou a
faithfull dispenser of the word of God, and of his
holy sacraments. In the name of the Father, and of
the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Hee
commandeth the ordained to receive the holy
Ghost, as our Lord and master did when hee
breathed on his Disciples, bestowing in very
deed the gifts of the spirit when hee breathed
upon them. Ordinary pastors cannot con
                  •
               erre
the gifts of the spirit, whether breathing as
Christ did, or by laying on of hands as the Apostles
did. They may as well imitate Christs
breathing, as they may usurpe these words.
Whether the ordained receiveth the holy Ghost
or not, let the world judge. Calvin sayth of the
Popish Priests, ex equis fieri asinos, ex fatuis phre

neticos, quicunque in sacerdotes consecrantur. Is any
of their Curats after the pronouncing of these
words, either the holier, or more apt to teach,
and yet beside this blasphemie, they will the
ordained to dispense the word of God, who
cannot divide and cut it aright. Where it is sayd,
whose sinnes yee forgive shall be forgiven, &c. a power
to reteine and forgive is given them separate
from the preaching of the word, as in the
Roman Church an infinite number of Priests
cannot preach, yet all have power to absolve
from sins. So may the blind English Curates.
Sicklike it is a mockage, 
                  •
               hen after that the bishop
delivereth to each of them the Bible in
his hand, saying, Take thou authoritie to preach the
word of God, and to minister the holy sacraments, in
the congregation where 
                     •
                  hou shal
                     •
                   be appointed. He
should rather have put the service-book in his
hand. For either they are ignorant and cannot
preach, yea not tried in that facultie: or if they
can, they may not till they get a licence of the
Bish, and whether they shal be appointed to any
congregation, or not, they are uncertaine, because
it dependeth upon the p
                  •
               trons pleasure.
Reply, 1. 
                     •
                  rt. p. 298. 
               So that, if either the forethinking himselfe,
like the shop better then the Church, or if the Patron
will keepe the doc
                     •
                  e shut against such insufficient
men, which the Bishop opened so wide, or as somtime
falleth out, they cannot agree of their market, it commeth
to passe that he is made a minister, which either
cannot, or will not, not onely not fulfill, but not so
much as lay hand of that Ministerie whereunto hee
was appoynted, sayth Mr. Cartwright. When all
this is done, the companie convened sing the
Creed, and they goe to the communion, which
all they that receive orders take together, and

remaine in the same place, where the hands
were layd on them, untill such time as they
have received the communion. The celebration
of the supper went before in the beginning of
the action as is enioyned in the book of ordering
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, but they
communicate not till the end of the action. The
first celebration then was nothing but a consecration,
as they call it, of the bread and wine,
without the pertaking of the communicants, &
all the rest of the action must intervene before
they partake: for to what end els is there made
twice mention of the communion. So the first
is like the offering of a sacrifice, the last is liker
to the supper. Is not this great cōfusion betwixt
the first and second part of that holy action, to
intermingle another action, yea as some say, another
sacrament, confounding two sacraments
together. Their Letanies and Collects, for brevities
sake, I passe by.
            The external calling to the benefice, or certaine
place of the ministerie, is either to a
parsonage or a vicarage. In each of them is
to be considered, 1. nomination, either when
the right of presentation is in another person
nor his, who doth nominate, as somtime
it falleth out: or when the right both to nominate
& present belongeth to him. 2. The
Bish. triall of his gifts & qualification, whether
he be capable or not of such a Benefice.
3. Admission either to the title it
selfe, as when the Bishop doth institute at
the presentation of another, which is called
Institution, or when the Bishop himselfe

who doth institute hath the right of patronage,
which is called Collation: or else admission
is to the possession it selfe by inducting,
which is either done by the Archdeacon
himselfe, or by his deputie.
            After they have thus received their order of
Priesthood, and are ordeined at large in nubibus,
they pay for their letters of Orders (for their
admission to their Ministerie must not be free
of fees) and runne abroad through the whole
Diocesse, where they please, preaching any
where, if they have gotten after their Ordination
another licence to preach. For they must
not preach by vertue of their order of Priesthood
in the intendment of the Prelates, but
must have the Bishops warrant to that end.
They are put in remembrance at their ordination
in the Bishops interrogatories, & exhortations,
in the Gospels and Epistles, and at the deliverie
of the Bible in their hand, of the dutie
of preaching and teaching. But that is onely
for a fashion, for they read of the booke these
Gospels, Epistles, Exhortations, which were used
of old, and are reteined still in the booke
rather to be a monument of that which hath
been, then for their right use and end. For in
the Romane Church, when the Masse Priest is
to receive orders, by the Epistles and Gospels,
&c. he is put in remembrance that he must
blesse, governe, preach, baptize, 
                  〈…〉
                doctrine
should be spirituall medicine to the people of
God▪ that the Church of God is to be edified
both by preaching and good example. These
are peeces of the ancient order, which was in
the Church, lying still in their corrupt pontificals,

to be rehearsed in the forme of a service.
But when they come to the action it self, wherin
the order of Priesthood is actually conferred
at the laying on of hands, there are no such
speeches used. So in the English, much is said
of preaching and teaching before they come to
the laying on of hands, but then there is a generall
word used, Be thou a faithfull dispenser of
the word of God: not mening to dispens by preaching,
for they know that many of them cannot
teach, but to dispense it, as it is divided & set in
order to be read, & sung in the service book. Or
else they mock God, his word, and his Church,
after the old Popish manner, not intending the
right dispensing of the word by preaching.
When he is to be set in a certain place, he seeketh
the Patrons favour, or maketh some simonicall
paction with him, as we have alreadie
heard out of Brightman, and a little before out
of M. Cartwright. The Patron presenteth the
man whom he thinketh fittest for his own humour,
and the Bishop doth try his gifts, and
qualification. Heere the liberty of election is
taken from the Congregation, and given to the
Patron and the Bishop. That the Patron should
be some way acknowledged for his liberalitie
toward the Church we doe not gainesay. Therfore
jus utile, that is, if he be redacted to poore
estate, that he be relieved with the rents of the
Church, and jus honorisicum, right to a fear in
the Church, and jus onerosum, to have a care
that the rents be not dilapidate, as also to be
gardian and keeper of the rents of the Church
during vacancie, or what other thing else, not
savouring of superstition, or ostentation wee
grant unto them, but the right of presentation

of Clerkes to the pastorall office we cannot
grant. The Church may not resigne this liberty
of election in the hands of another man, but
is ever bound to retaine in her own hands the
freedome to choose the fittest person to have
charge of their soules. This liberty of Election
was acknowledged to be so equitable, & grounded
upon the principles of nature, that there
should be more Clerkes then one tryed when a
Church was vacant, where this order might
be had, that in the Councell of Trent, some others
also chosen by the Synode beside the Bishop,
were ordeined to examine and chose the
fittest of those who offered themselves, or were
offered to a tryall, and this is called examen per
concursum. But in our neighbour Church
they have no such constitution. The Bishop
himselfe tryeth or appointeth whom he pleaseth,
none is depute by a Synode to joyne with
him. And where the Bishop himselfe is Patron
of a benefice, he maketh not, nor yet receiveth
any offer of a leite of many that the worthiest
may be chosen, but the Church is under the
same bondage, whether the Bishops or Laymen
be Patrons. Now what is this examination
of the Bishop, surely very superficiall, and
imaginarie. The request of any in authoritie
is able to obtain the Bishops institution, suppose
he be unsufficient. And indeed there is no
extreme suite, the doore is not so hard locked, sayth
Mr. Cartwright,
               2 Reply 1 part, p. 133. 
               there needeth but the lifting up of
the latch. And in another place he sayth, that
many say, that for a dish of fruit of the golden griffe,
they lease out, and make all manner of marchandise
of the Lord Orch
                     •
                  rds, that he which hath no gift
in the heart,
               p. 110. 
               yet if he have a gift in the band, need

no other key to open the Church doore, and enter into
a benefice.
               Abstract p. 83. He that came to the Bishop of Winchester
to serve in his Diocesse, borne at Norwich,
and made a Minister at Peterborow,
knew not how many Sacraments there were,
and requested a dayes respite to answer the Bishop,
what the office of a Deacon was, may be
one for example, to let us see, what manner of
men may▪
               p. 236. 237. receive orders amonst them. Have
not the Bishops chosen, sent, and commended
unto us, saith the Authour of true and Christian
Church-policie, such as know not a Bee
from a Battle-dore, or the Lords prayer from the
Articles of faith, of which sort of Ministers, the
Parson of Haskam now living, a Chaplaine in Winton
Diocesse may be produced for a witnesse, omni
exceptione maior. It is related there, that this
Parson at the instant request of a Knight, was
demanded by the Bishop, which was the first
petition of the Lords prayer, after he had a
pretie space pawsed and gased towards heaven,
at length made this answere; I beleeve in God
the Father Almightie, &c. This profound Clerk,
howbeit hee could not obtaine the institution
at that time: yet afterward,
               p. 238. sayth this Authour,
by corruption of the same Bishops Chancellour
he was instituted in the same benefice, and to
this day possesseth it quietly, though he can hardly
read English to the understanding of his people. I
could informe him also of many other such Clerkes,

                     ••
                  siant and beneficed in that Diocesse, &c. That
which the Bishop could not doe at the first, by
reason of the Knights opposition, he did afterward
at his Chancellours desire. Lest any man
should thinke, that there hath been but a
few of these examples, let us heare what

Mr. Cartwright sayth,2. Reply. 1. part. p. 537. 148. 
               I am well assured, that all the
                     •
                  
Ecclesiastical stories extant, are not able to furnish 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of so many unworthy ministers chosen by al the churches
throughout the world, which have been since
the Apostles times: as have swarmed these few yeares
out of the palaces, as out of the Trojan horse, of that
small number of Bishops, which are in England. Of
the other side, if a man will cast his eyes to France,
both in persecution and peace, and from thence looke
into the Churches of some parts of Savoy, and yet
stretch them out further to some certaine commonwealths
in Germanie, and come home to our neighbours
the Scots, and compare generally the ministers
chosen of the Churches, with the most part of these,
which the Bishops make: (if he love not himself too
much, and be not a stubborne defender of that hee
hath undertaken) he shall be compelled to confesse, as
much difference betwixt the one and the other, as between
gold and copper, or any other refuse mettall.
The people which are fed, are to the people
which are unfed with preaching, like an handfull
to an house-full, or an inch to an ell, sayth
the author of the Assertion for true Ch. policie.P. 245.
These are the fruits of the Patrones presentation,
and the Bishops sole election, institution, or
collation. The person duely chosen, and lawfully
ordained, should have testimoniall under
the hands of the Pres
                  •
               yterie, and chiefe of the
people, to certifie, that he is duely and lawfully
chosen, and ordained, that is, that he hath the
just title to the temporalities, and in place of
the Archdeacon the kings officiaris appointed
to that effect, being certified by this testimonial,
may by another writ confirme, and really induct
into the possession of manse and glebe, &
other possessions. So the Archdeacons pretie

signet should give place to the kings great seal,
sayth the authour of the Assertion. For as the
order doth stand, there falleth out many contentions,
and suits in law, sometime betweene
the Patron and the Bishop,Assertion, p. 258. 259. sometime between
two Clerkes presented by two Patrons: sometime
between the Clerke presented, and the
Bishop, the Clerke calling the Bishop by a
double quarrell before the Archbishop, or the
judges of the court of audience, for not granting
institution: sometime between the Clerke
instituted, and the Archdeacon not executing
the Bishops inductorie mandate, because the
Church is not vacant, and betwixt him who
pretendeth the title, and the reall incumbent,
whereupon doe fall out many foule riots, breaches
of the kings peace, and unlawfull assemblies
upon entries. and keeping of possessions.
What a great hinderance the patrones power to
present, is to the planting of churches with a
learned and faithfull ministerie, not onely the
Church of God in former ages, but also our
owne since the reformation in a part, can beare
witnesse. This is the difference betwixt us and
them in this poynt, that they defend this right
of the Patrone, which taketh away libertie of
Election, wee craved a reformation of it, and
were more carefull to try and sift the person
presented, yet this is the inconvenience, that
seldome it fell out that the worthiest were nominated,
where patrons had a right to present.
You see then, what wayes a man commeth to
the ministerie, and a benefice. First,Assertion, p. 259. hee must
receive orders, and pay well for them. For it can
not be denied, but the Bishops Secretarie, Gentleman
Vsher, groome of his chamber, Butler, Pantler, Porter,

and other the Bishops menials (besides his own
and his Registers fees, and his Clerke for expedition)
doe usually (all, or most of them) challenge
and receive fees (some more, some lesse) before the
poore minister with his boxe of orders can be suffered
to passe by the porters lodge. When all this is
done, what crooked mean
                  •
               s he must use before
he come to the possession of a benefice, ye have
heard also, and how the Congregation is all this
time neglected. This cannot be denyed, that there
is not any one man, or woman,
               P. 252. 
               amongst 40. in any
one parish among 40. that can tell that ever he, or she,
did see or heare of the Minister appointed, and sent
by the ordinarie to be Parson, or Vicar, of the Parish
Church vacant, before such time, as he did heare,
or see the Parish Clearke to trudge with the Churchdore
keyes to let in the S
                     •
                  xtin, to ring the bells for
the said Parson or Vicars induction, and reall possession.
            
            The publicke furction of the minister, is
either in preaching, or in the rest of his administration.
In Preaching, either with licence
granted him for that part after the
Bishops approbation, and that either to his
own flock, or without to Clergie, or people,
or without licence 
                  •
               b
                  •
               eined to that effect, as
if being master of Arts, or in any superiour
degree, he preach to his owne flocke without
licence.
            We see then that the giving of orders is not
a giving of power to preach, for then every one
who receiveth orders may preach without any
further licence, as well as a Master of Arts,
who is n
                  •
               w come from Cambridge from his

Rhetoricks and Physicks. This licence granted
to some, and not to all; yea, not to the most
part, declareth that they doe not esteeme preaching
any essentiall part of the Priests function,
more then the Papists doe, and the practise
among the one and the other is just the
same. For none of their Priests do preach, but
such as are licentiate. The author of the Petition
to the Queene sayth, Where the Bishops ordeine
one minister that can teach,
               P. 5. 
               they make twenty
that cannot teach: and so idle shepheards are set up
in the roome of true Pastors. They that can teach
are bound hand and foot till they get a licence:
But sithence Christ bad his Priests preach, who
should forbid them preaching, said Wickleffe, in the
exposition of his Conclusions exhibited to the
Bishops. When they have gotten licence either
they loyter: or if they preach, their preaching
is hedged in with penalties, injunctions, caveats,
canons, advertisements, that they may not
deliver the whole counsell of God: or else they
play the part of prophane Orators,P. 52. with affected
eloquence; or make the people laugh with
merry tales, as the Authour of the Admonition
to the Parliament doth relate. To conclude
then, a bare Reader of the service booke
in English, is sufficient to be an English priest.
            In the rest of his administration, according
to the prescript, either of the Q. Injunctions,
so that they be not repugnant to
the lawes, or of the Liturgie set forth by publique
authoritie.
            This Liturgie maintaineth a Reading Ministerie:
for it requireth nothing necessarily to bee

done by the Minister,C. 1 Repl. 104. which a child of ten yeare old
cannot doe, as well, and as lawfully, as that man
wherewith the booke contenteth it selfe. Preaching
is but accidentall and accessorie, without the
which their office doth, and may consist. And
indeed boyes, and senselesse Asses,
               
                  
                     •
                  dm. p. 47. 
               are our common
Ministers for the most part; for common reason
may serve the turn, and do this feat well enough. It is
indeed lesse busie, then the Popish Priests service, because
the Kalender, and the Rutricks of the book are
fewer and plainer, then his Portuise, and Pic were.
So that lesse Clerkes, then 
                     〈◊〉
                   pri
                     •
                  sts which had
but some blind Latine in their belly, may serve for
our store, say the Authours of the Admonition
to the Parliament.
            The administration according to the prescript
of the booke of Liturgie doth concerne,
either the Bishop or the Church, or
the Minister himselfe. The Bishop, to wit,
in confirmation of children: The Church,
either in certaine rites, as bowing the knee,
or in certaine answeres.
            Of Bishopping we have entreated before.
The Congregations part standeth in some rites,
and gestures, or in some answers: Now the people
sit,
               
                  
                     ••
                  . 93. lm. p. 14. 
               now they stand up. When the old Testament
is read, or the lessons, they make no reverence, but
when the Gospell commeth, then they all stand up;
they thinke that to be of greatest authoritie, and are
ignorant that the Scriptures come from one Spirit.
They make curtesie when Iesus is named, either
in Sermon, lesson, or otherwise, uncovering
their heads, and making a leg, with such scraping
on the ground, that the Minister or Reader

cannot be heard for a space thereafter. And
yet saith the Author of the Petition to the Qu.
The Bishops and their Chaplaines seldome use this,
               P. 65
               unlesse it be at reading of the Gospell, as if the Gospell
were more holy then the rest of the Scripture:
especially they forget it, when lustily and bravely they
sweare by the name of Iesus. The name of Iesus
is more reverenced, then the name of Saviour,
which is of the same signification; or other titles
of Christ, as when he is named Messias,
Christ, Mediator, the Son of God, &c. or when
God is named: as if the Apostle had meant
Philip. 2. that every knee should bow at the naming
of Iesus, when as he onely saith, At the
name of Iesus: that is, every creature shall bee
made to acknowledge his power, and authoritie,
which is his name, as the word is often
taken in the scripture. It is not the sound of
syllables, but his divine power that is meant.
Then again for answers, the people are appointed
at divers prayers to rehearse word for word
after the minister, whereby an opinion is ingendred
in their minds, that other prayers do not
so much pertaine to them, as those which they
utter with their own mouthes. As the minister
is the mouth of God from God to the people:
so should he be the mouth of the people from
the people to God. Sometime the minister saith
one part, and the people another. And in sundry
parts of the Letanie, the people make the
prayer, and the minister onely directs them
what to pray for. At the communion one of
the people is allowed to make the generall confession
in the name of the whole congregation.
At some prayers they are enjoyned to kneele
devoutly, and not at others.
            
               
In the administration which doth concerne
the Minister himselfe, or to be considered,
either the substance of the booke it
self, or certaine directories.
            As for the substance of the book, it is taken
out of the Popes portuis, with some rubricks,
and glosses of their own framing. The same
matter which is conteined in the English, is also
contained in their service book, with some
little addition. The same forme is also observed
with a small alteration, wheras our forme
of service should be as different as may be, from
the Popish. And for length, it is so wearisome,
that many times it shutteth out Preaching, viz. when
Baptisme, the Communion Marying, Churching,
and Buryal, con
                     •
                  urre together, as often they doe in
great Congregations,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     •
                  0. as it is said in the Abridgement
of Lincolne Ministers. Divine service in
the Apostolicall Church was not spent in reading
prayers, Psalmes, Epistles, Gospels, &c. but
for the most part in doctrine and exhortation.
When the Congregation assembled, their Pastor
was with them, and he spent not the time in
reading lessons, prayers, collects, &c. but uttered
some word of exhortation, and doctrine,
upon the parcell of Scripture which was read;
as was the custome also in the Sinagogues.
And suppose it had bene omitted at any time
in the Sin
                  •
               gogue, we reade not of any such
lame Liturgie in the Christian Church, in the
dayes of the Apostles, nor in many ages following,
till blindnesse, ignorance and lazinesse,
made the chiefe part of divine service to be omitted,
and a prescript forme to be made, for

                  〈◊〉
                and ignorant Priests. For shal we beleeve

that as long as Pastors were able to teach and
exhort, that they posted over a number of prayers
and lessons, &c. and no farther? No The
bels of Aaron should give a sound, as often as
the Lords Priest entreth into the Sanctuarie. Or
doe they thinke, that their Pastor was abroad at
his pleasures, when the flock was at their pasturage,
as devine service, and some other reading
minister serving them. The Apostolicke
Church, and purer Antiquitie, knew no such
minister. Out of the lessons, or Psalmes,
which were read, the minister took the argument,
and ground of his sermon, beginning after
this, or the like manner: Ye have heard brethren
the booke of, &c. read. The booke is read, wherein
it is prophecied. We heare brethren, when the
Gospell was read, the Lord saying that &c.
            
            The directories are contained, either in the
Kalender, or the Rubricks. In the Kalender,
to direct the minister in such things, as
belong either to the minister himselfe, or to
the whole Parish. To the minister himselfe,
either in reading some Psalmes each
day of every month, or of the rest of the
Bible, partly out of the Canonicall Scripture,
partly out of the Apocrypha bookes,
and that within the yeare.
            The reading of Psalmes, and other parts of
Scripture, is not preaching, but the word read
is like a loafe unbroken, or not divided in peeces,
and morsels. And therefore it is not a right
set forme of service to prescribe all the Psalmes
to bee read within the space of a month,

or so many lessons of the Scripture within a
year to take up the time, which should be spent
in preaching. Lesse Scripture read, and withall
explained, and opened up to the use of the hearers,
is more profitable. And if the other prejudge
this, howbeit the matter be good, for it is
the good word of God, so much as is canonicall,
yet the forme is naught, and in this case
unlawfull. Then as for the reading of
the Psalmes, they make daily prayers of
them, when as they bee not all prayers, or
else the matter of these which are pra
                  •
               ers, doth
not agree to the present time and state of the
Church, but are read hand over head. The Apocrypha
bookes should not receive that honour,
as to be read publickly in the Church, as
canonicall Scripture is. Because they containe
sundry false and frivolous things; and suppose
not, yet they are not the trompets which are
set apart and sanctified by God, to bee blowne
by his priests in his temple. The church
of the Iewes read no other scripture but Canonical,
Moses and the Prophets, and the Psalmes:
and the Christian Church in the purer times,
onley the monuments of the Prophets and Apostles.
The Councell of Laodicea decreed the
same also. The reading of them in the Church
hath made the people beleeve, that they are
portions of the old and new testament.66. 
               Sundry
of the Prelates take texts out of the Apocrypha,
sayth the authour of the petition to the Queen.
Divers chapters of the Apocrypha are appointed
to be read for extraordinarie lessons upon
Feast daies, and some parts of the canonicall
Scripture are omitted.
            
               
The directories, which direct in such
things, as belong to the whole Parish, are anent
observing feast dayes, and daies of abstinence
from flesh.
            They have a number of feasts, and fasting
daies, more then the Iewes had appointed to
them. The holy dayes observed by them, besides
the weekely Sabboths, are these following,
the dayes of the Feasts of the Circumcision,
of the Epiph
                  ••
               ie, of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin▪ of S. Matthias the Apostle, of
the annuntiation of the virgine, of Saint Mark
the Euangelist, of Saint Philip and Iacob the
Apostles, of Christs Ascension, of the nativitie
of Iohn Baptist, of S. Peter the Apostle,
of Iames the Apostle, of Bartholomew the Apostle,
of S. Matthew the Apostle, of S. Michael
the Arch-Angel, of S. Luke the Euangelist,
of S. Simon and Iude the Apostles, of all
Saints, of Saint Andrew the Apostle, of Saint
Thomas the Apostle, of Christs Nativitie, of
S. Steven the Martyr, of S. Iohn the Euangelist,
of the holy Innocents, Munday and Tuesday in
Easter weeke, and Munday and Tuesday in
Whitson weeke. This is their number and order
as it is set downe in the beginning of their
service booke. They keep the same order in
the observation of them, that the Popish
church observeth, with the same distance of
time from other, upon the same dayes, Gospels,
Epistles, Collects, and proper lessons the same,
howbeit some time fewer, with the like observation
of rest. And howbeit S. George be left
out in this reckoning, yet is his day honoured.
This Saint, saith Barrow,Discov. p. 8
                     •
                  
                
               hath no small entertainment

with his solemne procession (and that by no
small estates,Disco. p. 82. but even the greatest of the land) with
Cornets, Trumpets, Harbe, Shackebuts, Ps
                     •
                  lteries,
Du
                     ••
                  imer, and all instruments of musicke, &c This
Saint beside his noble ordour of Knighthood hath
also his peculiar Chaplaine Palatine of the order who
it to weare a gold ring on his thomb. The holy
dayes are dedicate to the Trinite, to Christ alone,
to Saints, to Angels. As for the day dedicated
to the honour of the Trinitie,De cultu 
                     •
                  anctor. c. 15. Bellarmine
doth confesse that it is recent, that it was
not observed at Rome in the dayes of Pope
Alexander the third. It was celebrated in some
particular Provinces, but not received into
Rome, till the time of Pope Iohn the 22. It
was thought needlesse, seeing the Trinitie was
remembred, either one way or other in the
daily service, but especially upon the Lords
day: for the Preface of the Trinitie day was of
old sung upon the Lords day; and the Creed
wherein the Trinitie is remembred, was not
omitted. If there should be a holy day for every
great mysterie of our religion, then must we
have many more holy daies, then we have yet
had. If a particular day for the Trinitie entred
but of late in the Church, for the respects foresaid
then what mysterie of Religion is remembred
frequently on the Lords day, in hymne,
prayer, confession, creed, or sermon needeth not
a speciall day, and a set service with bodily rest
for that mysterie. You see then, that the feast
which was rejected a long time by the Popes
themselves, the English doe retaine. As for the
feastgoelonging to the life & death of Christ the
most 
                  •
               enoumed, & most ancient, is Easter, and
yet it was not observed by the Apostles. The

hote contentions about it, whether it should be
observed upon the day of the full Moone, or
the Sabboth after, declareth that they did not
institute it: for they could have easily decided
that question, whether shall we be conforme to
the Iewes in observing the same day with them
or not: yea, the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. 8. speaking
of the celebration of our Easter, tyeth us not to
a certaine number of dayes, as the Iewes were,
who after the eating of the Lambe; might not
have any levened bread in their house for seven
daies, but sayth, ours is all the yeare long to be
observed, ye through our whole life, & with other
kind of unleavned bread, both by particular
Churches, & persons. No where doth he refer
us to anniversary Easter. The Christian Pentecost
was not observed by the Apostles, howsoever
sometime some of thē went up to Ierusalem
at the Iewish Pentecost, to confirme or

                  •
               ucrifie the Iewes, as long as the Temple stood.
If the Apostles thēselves, upon whom the gifts
of the H. Spirit were powred that day, did not
observ it themselves, who were the receivers of
the benefit, what warrant haue we to observe it.
If neither Easter nor Pentecost were Apostolical
institutions far lesse the Ascension day, and
the Nativitie. The feast of Circumcision Bellar.
saith is very recent, & it is to be observed that
they have a service day, or holy time for Christs
circumcis. but not for his Baptism for upon the
E
                  •
               iph, day they make mention of the 3 wisem.
& the star, but nothing of Chr. Baptism in their
G
                  •
               spels and Epistles. In a word all the dayes dedicate
to Christs severall acts are all humane inventions,
some later, some more ancient, & Iewish
formes, wherwith that people was brought

up under the pedagogie of the law, a rudimentarie
kind of instruction, not beseeming the
Christian Church, nor answerable to the cleare
light of the Gospell. The Iewes anniversarie
dayes were abolished not onely for their peculiar
service, or signification of things to come,
but altogether, howbeit memorials of by-past
benefits. Christ and his Apostles did institure
no day for remembrance of a particular benefit,
no not the weekly sabboth, let be an anniversary
day. For the weekly Lords day was
not appointed for remembrance of the particular
benefit of Christs resurrection, but for the
whole worship of God. If the Lords day were
referred directly and expressely to the commemoration
of the resurrection, then should it be
the proper and peculiar service of the Sabboth,
then should we not have at all a day determinate
in the new 
                  •
               estament, and institute to worship
God for himselfe, and all his workes in generall.
There was then no memoriall dayes
appoynted in the new testament, but a morall
day for the worship of God. The sacrament
as often as it is celebrate, it is a memoriall of
his passion. When the word is preached, Christ
is crucified before our eyes. But dayes of particular
commemorations of some speciall actions
with solemnitie and cessation from worke, we
have none, nor was it the intention of Christ, or
his Apostles. If there be no warrant to dedicate
anniversarie dayes to Christ, farre lesse to the
virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, and of
Angels. Their holy dayes of Saints are called
the Saints dayes as well as Christs dayes are
called his. And they have their collects, gospels,
epistles, as well as Christ hath his: and what

reason have they to have some anniversarie remembrances
of so many Saints of the new testament,
and never one for any of the old? Can
they give any reason of this difference, but a

                  •
               opish one? And among these of the Christian
Church, why is Timothy and Titus, and many

                  •
               oe not remembred as the rest are? Is the 
                  〈◊〉
               
purification of our Lady upon the candle
               
                  •
               masse
day, a matter of such moment, that it is
to be honoured with some speciall day, and actions
of greater importance are not so to be
celebrate. This night the Maior of London
kneeleth downe at S. Edwins tombe in P
                     •
                  ules
Church, and sayth a P
                     •
                  ter noster,
               Discov p 84. as Barro
                     •
                  
                reporteth.
If I should insist upon every particular
day, and rip up their collects, gospells, pis
               
                  •
               les,
hymnes and songs, I should be too pro
               
                  •
               ixe.
For we should fall upon many fooleries,
and impertinent application of the word of
God. In the collect from Christmas to Newyeares
day, they are appointed to say, that
Christ was borne upon this day, when as it be
               
                  •
               oved
him to be borne onely upon one day,

                  〈◊〉
                it is grounded upon an erroneous conceit
of Zacharies high priesthood, that he was born

                  •
               n the 25. day of December. In the collect
upon Innocents day, it is sayd that the infants
whom Herod murthered, were Gods witnesses.
Athanasius creed is to honour the high dayes,

                  〈◊〉
                not the common creed, and is appointed
to be read onely upon certaine holy dayes, it
must not grace other dayes Venite may not
serve at Easter, as it doth all the yeare before,
and after follow Domine labia mea. They have
no reason for these and other like superstitious
vanities, but such as Durandus, or any other

papist can give them, out of their reasonless
                  •
               
Rationalls. What holynesse they place in
their holy dayes may be seene in that they
haue a stricter rest enjoyned upon them, not
they urge for the sabbath, whereas the Lord
required a stricter rest upon the Sabbath,
then upon other dayes appointed by himself.
Then againe their principall feasts
haue Eaves and devout fastes going before.
Thirdly they say they will not change them, to
let us see that they may be changed; but retaine
the same dayes which the papists observe, and
which, they say, were consecrate and made
more holie then other dayies, be the actions,
which were wrought on these dayes, as the manger
and crosse of tree was with the truth of
Christs body. Even howbeit this reteyning
without change, doeth nourish in the people
both a superstitious and popish conceit of the
holynes of the day and the erroneous conceits,
that Christ was borne on such a day, Iohn Baptist
on such a day, that Zacharie was high priest
etc. To let passe other popish opinions of worship,
and merite. The most part observe it
with masking, dancing, gluttonie, games, enterludes.
For the which superstitious, and erroneous
conceits, and incorrigible abuses, they
ought to be abolished, suppose in themselves
they had bene never so indifferent.
            Besides their Eaves they have their ordinary
fridaies, Ember weeks, and lent fast. And if
they say that abstinence from flesh onely is cō
               manded
for some politicall respects, I would
demand wherefore is the minister or Curate
enjoyned after sermon, homilie, or exhortation,
to declare unto the people, whether there

be any holy dayes, or fasting daies the week following.
Are not the people commanbed likewise
to repaire to the Church to pray,
and to heare divine service. Their lent beginneth
as the popish doeth upon Ashwednesday,
with a terrible cōmination, where are pronounced
many bitter curses and the people answer
& ratifie every one of them with their own
mouth saying, Amen. The priest before he utter
the curses, after the lettanie is sayd, goeth to
the pulpit, to imitate the levites who pronunced
curses upon mount Ebal, and never but once, &
he saith, Brethren, in the primitive Church there was
a godly discipline, that at the beginning of lent, such
persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open pennance,
and punished in this world, that their soules
might be saved in the day of the Lord: and that others
admonished by their exāple might be the more afraid
to offend. In stead wherof untill the same discipline,
may be restored again, which thing is much to be wished
etc. it is thought good that at this time should be
read the generall sentences of Gods cursings against
impenitent sinners. Yee see that corporall and afflictiue
penance is commended for good discipl.
for the disci. of the prim. church, for the discipl.
of lent, and espetially on ashweonesday, & that
it is wished to be restored again. I beleeve thē.
It is displing, ashes, shriving, and such other gear
that they would haue. In the last collect upon
the first day of lent, or ashwednesday, the priest,
or Curate sayth, Be favourable to thy people, which
turne unto the in weeping, fasting, and prayer. Is
this to fast for ciuil respects onely, for the main
tenance of sea faring men, and preservation of
cattell. The Priests and Clerks kneeling say
the Psalme, miserere mei Deus. The prayers,

and special exhortations tend to begin their repentance
that day. The week before Easter hath
a prescript service, epistles, and gospells for every
day, which no other week in the yeare hath,
say the ministers of Lincolne in their Abridgement,
p. 90. 91. They observe likewise that
not one day in all they care hath three collects.
but good Friday, the Friday before Easter. May
we not see then, that the end of their Lent fast
is the same with the Popish, to wit, that they
may be prepared to receive the communion at
Easter, as if that communion needed a greater
preparation then at other times, or had a greater
vertue: Item, to be prepared against the celebration
of the feast of the resurrection: to repent
for the sinnes of the whole yeare: to imitate
Christs fast of 40. dayes, which was a miraculous
fast, a fast of another kind, for it was
without hungring, a fast for one time, and not
used againe either by himselfe or his Apostles,
Mat. 9. The Ember weekes, which were called
Ie
                     •
                  unia quatuor temporum,
               
                  
                     •
                  an. 31. are appoynted, they
say, for praying, and fasting, because the Bishop
is to give orders upon the Sundayes immediately
following, as it is sayd in their latest Canons.
They tie the giving of orders to set seasons
of the yeare, when as ministers should be
thrust out into the Lords harvest, whensoever
there is need. Then againe such are enioyned
to fast, as have no need of a pastor, for all the
parishes of the Diocie are not destitute. Where
there is no feele of a want, the prayers will bee
cold. It is expedient indeed that the particular
congregation which hath need, humble themselves.
Thirdly, this their fast is but abstinence
from flesh, but not from fish, or any other

delicacies which they can get, as if flesh were
an uncleane creature, and polluted. So their fast
in all the orders and rites of it, is the Popish
fast. Lastly, they joyne not fasting and giving of
orders together, as they should doe, if they
followed aright that example which is set
downe, Act. 13. 1. 2. but they observe their ceremonious
fast, or rather superstitious abstinence
from flesh on the week before, and not
upon the Lords day following, when they give
orders. For upon the Lords day they thinke it
unlawfull to fast. And yet they will rather sever
their ceremoniall fast from the action, then
that it should not be performed upon the Lords
day: for why? that was the day on which the
fierie tongues came downe upon the Apostles:
and they observe the third houre of the day
commonly, that is about nine a clocke, because
it was about that time that the gifts of the holy
Ghost were powred on them. For the Bishop
must say to the Priest, Receive the Holy Ghost.
And so one superstition is at jarre with another,
and great confusion there is, and disorder
in their rites and ceremonies, and no wonder,
for they are Babylonish. Yet for all their apish
imitations, the cloven tongues come never
downe upon any of their silly Curates. The
Friday fast is like the rest, and dependeth upon
their mother good Friday, which hath bred
them. These are their set and superstitious fasts.
Extraordinary and occasionall fasts for urgent
calamities, and the miseries either of their owne
Church, or other Churches abroad, they have
none, or very rare.
            Other directories are contained in the

Rubrickes, which serve to direct in the manner
of administration, either of some parts
of the liturgie, or of the sacraments. Of
some parts of the liturgie in such things as
concerne all which are of that congregatiō,
or some onely. Of such as concern all, as
in the publick prayers, or reading of sacred
homilies. In publike prayers eyther ordinary
or peculiar to some time, and occasion.
            Their prayers are to be consi
                  •
               ere
                  •
                both in
matter and forme. In the matter, as when in
the collect upon the 12 sunday after Trinitie
sunday, it is sayd, Almighty and everlasting God
po
                     •
                  re do
                     •
                  ne upon us the ab
                     •
                  ndance of 
                     •
                  hy mercie
giving unto us that, that our prayers dare not presume
to ask. There is nothing which is needfull for
us and lawfull, but wee dare and should aske it.
They pray to be delivered from thundering, &
tempest, when there is no appearance of danger.
The third part of their prayers concern
the commodities or incommodities of this life.
They crave to be delivered from all adversitie,
as if the petition in the Lords prayer, deliver us
from that evill one, or wicked one, to witt, the
Divill should be translated, from all evill. In S.
Bartholom
                  •
               w his collect they pray that they
may follow his sermons, and there is none of
them extant. Why say they, O Ananias, Azarias,
and Misael, praise the Lord, more then O
Peter, Paul, and virgin Marie, praise the Lord.
The forme of their prayers is set downe as a lesson
for the minister to read. So that the gift &
exercise of the spirit is stinted, & circumscribed
with their prescript prayers. For howbeit hee

could pray with the tongue of an Angell, he
                  •
               
must be tied in time of their service, to the
words which are set down in the booke. Sometime
the Minister is enjoyned to beginne the
Lords prayer with a loud voyce. Sometimes the
Clarks and people are directed to say the Lords
prayer with a lowd voyce at one time, and not
another. Then againe their prayers are shred
into many small peeces,T 
                     •
                   1. Repl p. 108. 
               They pray in two or three
lines, and then after having read some other thing,
come and pray as much more, and so to the 20 or
30 time, with pawses betweene. Prayers should be
continued together; not cut off and interrupted,
or cut in small peeces. They doe with their
prayers, as they doe with their Gospels and Episties;
which they rent from their contextis,
which would serve for memorie and greater
edification. They multiply words tending to
the same effect; using repetitions and babbling.
How many Kyrie eleeson and Christe eleeson will
they have at one time.Abridg
                     •
                   p. 35. 
               At one and the same meeting
of the Assembly, the Lords prayer is to be repeated
8 severall times, and Gloria patri 12 times. May
not the Papists justly defend their beads.Survey of the B. of cō
                  mon prayer, p. 47. 
               Glorie
to the Father, &c. is not sayd after Te Deum laudamus,
as after Benedicite, Magnificat, and nune dimittis.
They have their times to kneel at some
prayers, not at others. The Minister is ordained
to stand in the accustomed place, or at the discretion
of the Ordinarie. So that is left to the
discretion of one man which tendeth to the
edification of many. The accustomed place is
the Chancel. Thereupon, saith M. Cartwright,
the Minister in saying morning and evening prayer,
               1. Repl. pag. 105.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in the Chancell with his back to the people,
as if he had some secret talke with God, which the
                     •
                  
                  
people might not heare. And hereupon it is likewise
that after morning prayer, for saying another number
of prayers, he climeth up to the further end of
the Chauncell, and runneth as far from the people,
as the wall will let him, as though there were some
variance betweene the people and the minister, or as
though he were afraid of some infection of the
plague, and indeed it renueth the memorie of the
Leviticall priesthood, which did with-draw himselfe
from the people into the place called the holiest place,
where he talked with God, and offered for the sinnes
of the people. The chauncel distinguished from
the body of the Church, is their holy place for
the Priest, and He hath a peculiar dore to this
chancell, through which none might passe but himselfe,
               Disc. p. 131.
saith Borrow, For the ch
                     •
                  piters and letanie,
there is commandement given, that they should be read
in the body of the Church,
               p. 105. 
                     •
                  . part. p. 187. saith M. Cartwright in
his first Reply, In his second Reply, he saith, I
am assuredly perswaded, that the tenth Church in
England hath not all the service said in that place,
where the whole Church may heare it. They will
rather stick to the Iewish or popish rites, and
imitate Masse priests, then edifie Gods people.
For mariage he commeth to the bodie of the
Church, for Baptisme to that part, which is over
against the Church-dore, and so trudgeth
from place to place. The Letanie must not bee
used but upon Sundaies, Wednesdaies, and Fridayes,
except the Ordinarie appoint other
dayes: the Minister propoundeth things to be
prayed for, or against, the people performe the
prayer, saying with a lowd voyce. Good Lord
deliver us,
               Survey of 
                     •
                  he B. of 
                     〈◊〉
                   pray
                  
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  . 
               we beseech thee to heare us good Lord,
and this they often repeate. And yet one suffrage
is put out of the letany, which was in it

before, to wit, From the tyrannie of the Bishop
of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord
deliver us. They say certaine Psalmes and prayers
over the corne and grasse, and certaine gospels
at crosse-waies,Disc. pag. 6 saith Barrowe, In the service
booke, the Curate is thus directed anent
Homilies. After the Creed, if there be no Sermon,
shall follow one of the Homilies alreadie set forth, or
after to be set forth by common authoritie. Who
knoweth what is hereafter to be set forth. The
Survey of the booke of common prayer doth
relate, that many points of Poperie and Lutheranisme,
               P.
6
                     •
                  . 
               are broached in Court, and citie pulpits, and
yet not called into question, as be Doctrines tending
to the Reformation of Popish ceremonies. Iudg then
what corrupt Homilies may be set forth. And
yet Ministers are urged to subscribe to the
book of common prayer, notwithstanding of
the foresaid Rubrickes. It is the office of a Pastor
to preach, and not to reade Homilies. Hee
ought to cut and divide the word aright, and
apply it to particular sores, which cannot be
done by homilies. What was said against Apocripha
bookes, may be throwne against them.
The reading of homilies is a cushion for idle
or blind Priests to rest upon. What say you to
the Vicar of W. who upon an holy day in stead of
preaching the Word,
               Assertion the true 
                     •
                   Christian pol. pag. 
                     •
                  . 
               which he could not, or reading
of homilies which he would not (to terrifie his Parishoners
with the judgements of God, and to move
them to repentance) solemnly read, and published a
counterfeit fable out of a little pamphlet, intituled,
Strange newes out of Calabria, pretended to be prognosticated
by M. Iohn Doleta.
            
            
               
The parts of the Liturgie which concerne
onely certaine persons are 
                  •
               nens. 1. Celebration
of matrimonie.
            In the first words uttered to the married persons
by the Priest it is said, that Matrmonie signifieth
unto us the mysticall union, which is between
Christ and his Church. Then againe in a
Collect after the conjunction it is said, O God
which hast c
                     •
                  nsecrated the state of matrmonie to
such an excellent mysterie, that in it is signified
and represented the spirituall marriage, and unitie betwixt
Christ and his Church. Is not this to apply
these words, Ephes. 5. 32. This is a great Mysterie,
to the conjunction of man and wife,
which the Apostle uttereth of Christ and his
Church, by which interpretation the papists
have made mattimonie a Sacrament, and the
band betwixt the married persons inseparable,
and not to be dissolved but by death. In the
first part of their homilie of Swearing, Baptisme,
and Matrimonie, are called Sacraments.
The minister receiving the woman at her fathers,
or friends hands, is to cause the man to
take the woman by the right hand, and give his
troth to the woman. Then are they to loose
their hands againe, and the woman taking the
man by the right hand, giveth her troth. Then
shall they againe loose their hands, and the man shall
give unto the woman a Ring, laying the same upon
the booke, with the accustomed duty to the Priest &
Clerke. And the Priest taking the ring shall deliver
it unto the man, to put it upon the 4 finger of the
womans left hand. And the man taught by the priest
shall say,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               with 
                     〈…〉
                   thee wed, with my bodie I
thee worship 
                     〈…〉
                   worldly goods I thee 
                     〈…〉
                  
name of the Father, Son, and H. ghost,

Then the man leaving the ring upon the fourth finger
of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   left hand, the minister shall say,
set us pray. O eternall God, &c. In the prayer,
the ring given and received is said to be a token
and pledge of the vow and convenant made betwixt
them. Is there not heere an heap of
toyes, and yet never one wanteth a signification.
The ring must be put upon the fourth finger
of the left hand, because say they, there is
a nerve which runneth from that finger straight
to the heart. The ring must be layed on the
service booke, I know not to what end, except
it be to sanctifie it, in stead of that blessing and
sprinckling with holy water, which the Popish
Priest used,Rituale R
                     •
                   manum, p. 174. 175. as may be seene in the Romane Rituall.
Then againe what sense can be made of
these words, with my body I thee worship, One
of a thousand doth not understand them, their
P
                  •
               elats have not explaned them. The words of
the Apostle Peter, 1. Epi. 3. 7. giving honor to the
wife, as to the weaker vessell, doe signifie onely
honest care and follicitude, and to beare with
her infirmities, she being the weaker vessell. For
honor after the Hebrew phrase is largely taken.
To give honor as to the weaker vessell, and to
worship her with the body is farr different, as
the word worship foundeth in our Language.
The Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 23. saith, And those members
of the bodie which we thinke to be lesse honourable,
upon these we bestow more abundant honour,
that is, with greater carefulness we cover, then
wee doe other members: But we are not
to worship the members, which are lesse honourable.
The Priest is appointed to say to God
in his prayer, that the ring is a token & pledg of

covenant made betwixt them. If the ring had
beene used onely at the contract, as a civill rite,
it might have been comported with, but to
bring it into the Church, I meane to divine
service, is either to prophane the same with civill
ceremonies, or pollute it with Popish and
superstitious rites rather, as these are. For they
were counted in time of poperie holy and religious
rites of a holy Sacrament. The married
persons must communicate also, as was the custome
in time of blindnesse, where every holy
action behoved to have a Masse: and so that
action, which should be common to the whole
Congregation, who are members of one body,
is made private and particular to a few, howbeit
in a publique place. Then againe they have
their forbidden times to marie in; yea, moe
then the Papists have, at least, so many as have
embraced the decrees of the Councel of Trent,
from Advent to the Epiphanie, from Septuagesima
sunday to the octaves of Easter, from
the Rogation weeke to the octaves of Pentecost,
amounting in all to the third part of the
yeare: as if marriage which is called honourable,
did prophane these holy times. The councell
of Trent hath dispensed with the Pentecost
and the second they beginne at Ashwednesday.
Now notwithstanding of these forbiddē times,
they may get a dispensation for some money,
and then it shall be lawfull enough, and these
holy times shall receive no pollution; for mony
hath a great vertue with it.
            2. Thankesgiving after childbirth.
            This is commonly called the Churching of
women. I
                  •
                standeth more in Psalmes, suffrages,
and collects, wherein help is craved at God, not

notwithstanding he take upon him authority to

                  〈◊〉
                from sins. Then there is a Psasme, and

                  〈◊〉
                prayers read. The silly curat can give no
more comfort, then the few set words, which
he must read, can minister to the departing soul.
If the 
                  〈◊〉
                person can get some to communicat
                  •••
               
with him 
                  〈…〉
               , as being ashamed to looke-up for
some folly committed. When she commeth
to the church shee must kneele downe high unto
the place where the table standeth, that is,
nigh unto the Quire dore, as the Rubrick in
2. Edward beareth, as the women did who after
the dayes of their purification were ended,
were appointed to bring their offering to the
dore of the Tabernacle, Levit. 12. 6. unto the
Priest, who shall make attonement for them.
Then the Priest readeth over her the 121. Psal.
and assureth her, that the Sun shall not burn
                  •
               
her by day, nor the Moone by night. Is not
this a very pertinent Psalme for the purpose?
The Lords prayer being sayd, and some versicles
and answeres, and then another prayer, she
doth offer her accustomed offrings: and if there
be a communion she receiveth the communion.
Call this churching a thankes-giving, yet what
reason is there of publick thanksgiving in the
Church more for deliverance after childbirth,
which is ordinarie, then from drowning, or other
extraordinary dangers, or diseases? and of
womē more then of men? were not that the imitation
of the Iewish purification is the Mysterie
of it. And so was this service intituled in the
booke 2 Edw. The order of the purification of women,
               P.
147. as is reported in the Survey. This superstitious
service is not voluntarie, but enjoyned:

When they come to the grave, while the corp
                  •
               
is made ready to be laid into the earth, they
sing, or say againe another parcell of Scripture
out of Iob: then while the earth is cast upon
the body by some standing by, the Priest again
saith something, and confidently affirmeth that
God hath taken his soule and is of assured hope

                  〈…〉
               
            
            3. The visi
                  •
               a and comfort of the sick.
            The Priest entering into the sickmans house
sayth, peace be in this house, and to all that dwel
in it. When he commeth to the sickmans presence,
he kneeleth downe, and prayeth his prescript
lines for forgivenes of sinnes, with two
kyrie eleesons, and one Christe eleeson, the
Lords prayer, and some other versicles and responsories;
when as yet he hath not spoken a
word to the diseased, or understood, whether
hee bee sleeping or waking. After the exhortation
read which he may break if need be, and
the Creed rehearsed, he desireth him to make
his will, and also declare his debts, what he oweth,
and what is owing him. Thereafter he moveth
him to liberalitie. Then shall the sick person
make a speciall confession, if he feele his
conscience troubled with any weightie matter,
after which confession the priest shall absolve
him. When he absolveth, he sayth. By his (that
is, o
                  •
               r L. I. Christ) authoritie committed to me, I
absolve thee from all thy sinnes, in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the H. Ghost. Amen.
He absolveth like a judge, as the Popish Priest
doth, giving out a definitive sentence, and absolutel,
doth forgiue, not by way of deolaration.
This absolution is seuered from the preaching
of the word. For the dumb Gurat cannot preac
                  •
               
               
in thansgiving. This help is to live and walk
                  •
               
faithfully in their vocation, as if they were
made uncleane by their childbirth to enterprise
any thing. Shee will not stirre out of the house
suppose she were never so strong, till the compleate
time be expired, that is a month commonly.
When she commeth forth, she is muffled

                  〈…〉
               
him, the communion. If others may not
conveniently come neere him, yet the minister
and he alone may communicate together: and
for shortnesse of time, they have but one collect
pistle and Gospell. Thus are the people
nourished in an opinion of the necessitie of the
sacrament, and the action which should be publick,
and solemne, as the institution beareth, and
the practise of the Apostolicall Church declareth
is made private, & administred peculiarly
in a corner, as if there were no other meane to
eat the flesh and drink the bloud of Christ, of
that grace were tied to the externall signes.
            4. The Buriall of the dead.
            They have a threefold peale enjoyned in their
latest canons.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                When any is passing out of this
life, a 
                  〈◊〉
                is to be tolled, after the parties death, a
short peal is rung, another before the buriall, &
another after the buriall. When the time of the
funerals draweth neere, the Priest & the clearks
make them ready. The Priest putteth on his
surplice, and then commeth to the Church stile
to meet the corps. Then the Priest shall say, or
the Priest and cleark shall sing and so go either
to the Church or towards the grave. The words
which are sayd or read alowd by the Priest, or
sung by the Priest and clearkes, are 2 or 3 small
sentences of scripture. For any part of scripture
is sung by thē as well as Psalms, in their services.

and the Bishops haue punished women for not
being churched, sayth the authour of the petition
to the Queen.P. 62. Some are churched at home
by the Priest,P. 149. and therby saith the Surveyer
They confirme women either in pride, if they be able
to goe to church and will not, or in superstition if
being not well recovered, they yet must needs be chur
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
of his resurrection to 
                  〈…〉
                againe
is said or sung a sentence out of the Revelation,
after the lesson, two Kyrie eleesons, with one
Christe eleeson betwixt them, after that the
Lords prayer: then the Priest prayeth, that God
might histen his kingdome, that we with our brother,
and all other departed in the true faith of thy
holy name, may have our perfect consummation and
blisse, both in body and soule. Is not this to pray
for the dead brother? When he is laid in the
grave, he is laid east and west, in such manner,
as that he may rise with his face to the East,
for why? they looke for Christ to come from
the East, and it is no easie matter to turne about
if one rise with his face toward the west. This
ceremonie is not enjoyned in the booke, yet it
is usuall, as many moe, as a white or bla
                  •
               ke
crosse upon the mort-cloath, candles burning
over the dead corpes in the house, the 
                  •
               etwand,
cakes sent abroad to friends. The priest
must have his offering, and beside that the 
                  •
               ortuarie,
wherof I made mention before. VVhosoever
is not buried after this manner in church
or churchyard, howbeit in a peculiar buryall
place of his owne, he is ill deemed. But this you
must note,
               
                  
                     •
                  isc. p. 127. 128. saith Barrow, neither rich nor poore,
neither yong nor old, can get bury all without money
in the church of England: N
                     •
                   peny, no paternoster
there please the Priest, and then he will burie his brother,

and pray for, and over him, whatsoever he be,
so far as his booke will goe. The minister is so tied
to this office, that if he neglect it at any
time, he is to be suspended from his ministerie
by the space of three monethes. So they make
that a part of the Ministers function, which is
not a ministeriall dutie, nor at any time, let be
ordinarily, performed by ministers in the Apostolicall
Church. Howbeit the Iewes had not
so cleare a light in the resurrection as we have,
yet did not the priest reade prayers, and fragments
of Scripture at burials; nay, they are
expressely forbidden to be present at them. Funerall
Sermons cannot be made without acceptation
of persons. For if it be the Ministers office,
he ought to make them as well at the buryall
of the poore, as of the rich. It is required,
and so is made to serve more for pompe or
superstition, then for edification of the living.
Men that never were greedie of a sermon all
their life long, must have one then, to grace
their funerals in the eyes of the world.
M. Cartwright testifieth, that there are none more
desirous of funerall Sermons,
               1. Reply p. 16
                     •
                  . 
               then the Papists.
VVhat lying commendations are made of the
dead, howbeit never so vitious, all men doe
know. Neither doe these hired Orators, or Sermon-mongers,
lie for nothing. They must have
either a mourning gowne, or a noble.Pag. 16
                     •
                  
                
               I will say
nothing, saith M. Cartwright, of the great abuse
of those, which having otherwise to live on the
Church, take nobles for every such Sermon, and
sometime a mourning gowne, which causeth the papists
to open their mouth wide, and to say that the
Merchandise of Sermons is much dearer, then of
the Masse: for that they have for a gr
                     •
                  ate, or sixe

pence, and the Sermon they cannot have under 
                     •
                  
rounder summe.
            
            The Rubricks serving to direct to the
maner of administration of the Sacraments,
are for the administration of Baptisme, or
the holy Supper, & that either in the church,
or in a private house.
            In the administration of the Sacraments
there are two things generally to be observed:
First, that power is given to an ignorant Curate,
or reading Minister, who cannot preach,
to administer the Sacraments of Baptisme and
the Lords Supper: Next, it is said in their Catechisme,
that there be onely two Sacraments,
as generally necessarie to salvation, that is to
say, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper: implying
that there are other Sacraments peculiar,
not generall, as matrimonie, and orders: and
others generall, but not necessarie to salvation,
as Confirmation. In the Preface before Confirmation
are set downe these words: And that no
man sh
                     •
                  ll thinke that any detriment shall come to
children by deferring of their confirmation, he shall
know for 
                     〈◊〉
                   that it is certain by Gods word, that
children being baptised, have all things necessarie
for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. These
words imply three things, first, that all children
baptised be undoubtedly saved; secondly, that
children unbaptised be not undoubtedly saved;
thirdly, that confirmation is not absolutely necessarie
to salvation. Estius a papist, saith the
like of Confirmation. That the custome of the
universal Kirk doth prove sufficiently,
               lib. 4. sent. 
               that confirmation
is not necessarie to salvation,
               ist. 7. 
               otherwise the
godly and carefull mother the Kirk, would not neglect

to see this Sacrament ministred at the point of
death.
            
            1 Of Baptisme.
            In the preface to baptisme they commend
the ancient custome of baptizing onely at
Whitsuntide and Easter, except in the case of
necessity, which was a superstitious and damnable
custome. They say in this Preface, they
will follow this custome, as neere as they can,
therefore doe ordeine, that Baptisme be ministred
onely upon Sundaies, and holy daies. Vpon
any ordinarie preaching day then, they must
not baptise, except it be coincident with an holy
day: as if baptisme were not as holy a Sacrament
ministred upon an other day, as upon an
holy day. The child must be baptised at the font
and therefore the Priest must come to that part
of the Kirck, where the font is, over against the
church dore, for that wanteth not a signification;
to signifie the entry of the child into the
church. He must not be baptised, where the minister
stood in time of divine service, or with
water out of a bason. The godfathers and godmothers
standing at the font, the Priest doth
aske, if the child be baptised or no. In the first
prayer the priest saith, that God by the baptisme
of his Son, did sanctifie the s
                     •
                  oud lordan,
and all other waters to the mysticall washing away of
some; as though vertue vvere in the water to
wash away sinne, or as though Christs baptisme
at one time, and not Christs institution,
which serveth for all times, did sanctifie
the element. In the second prayer he saith,
that they comming to thy holy baptisme may 
                     〈◊〉
                  
remission of their sinnes by spirituall

regeneration, when as the rem
                  •
               ssion of our sins
doth standin notimputation of them, and not in
regeneration. The questions which were wont
to be demanded of converts from paganisme,
who were able to answer to the questions demāded:
absurdly & foolishly now they demand
of the infants, or their godfathers in their name.
The interrogatories are these, doest thou forsoke
the Divill and all his works &c. Doest thou beleeve
&c. Wilt thou be baptised in this faith? The
child hath not understanding, nor faith, nor desire
of baptisme. And how be it the child had
faith, can the Godfather tell absolutely, and in
particular, that this child whom he presenteth,
doth beleeve, desire baptisme, or forsake the
Devill. It is a foolish thing therefore, and great
mockerie of Gods service to demand that of infants,
which was at the first demanded of such,
as were come to yeares of discretion, and were
converted from gentilisme. The children of
faithful parents are within the covenant of
grace, whereupon it is that they are made partakers
of the seale of the covenant. The covenant
being made with the parents in their faith,
& not the faith of the child, the parents should
give confession of their owne faith, and not of
the faith of the child, which is not, because
their owne faith is the condition of the covenant
upon their part, wherupon God promiseth
to be their God, and the God of their seed,
Wherupon also it followeth, that the father of
the child should present the child, and give
confession and not another, because the covenant
is made with him, and his seed, and the
child is his seed, not the seed of another, whom

                  〈…〉
               
               
proper godfather. Others may be witnesses of
baptisme, but that the father should, or can
resigne this duetie to another, I deny. Before
the Priest dip the child in the water he sayth
in his prayer, grant that all thy servants, which
should be baptised in this water, may receive the fulnes
of grace. This prayer was read in 2 E. once
every moneth at the changing of the water in
the font, as is sayd in the Survey. Howbeit it
be now placed in the baptisme it self, it seemeth
to be directed to the same end, to the hallowing
of the water, which is then in the font. After
that the child is dipped, and baptised in the
name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost.
the Priest maketh a crosse upon the childs
forehead, saying, We receive this child into the
congregation of Christs flocke, and doe signe him
with the signe of the crosse, in token that hereafter
he shall not be ashamed to confesse the faith of Christ
cru
                     •
                  ified, and manfully to fight under his banner,
against sinne, the world, and the devill, and to continue
Christs faithfull souldier, and servant unto his
lives end. He sayth not we have received, but we
doe receive, as if the child were not received by
baptisme, but by crossing, or as if the child were
againe received by crossing which was before
received by baptisme. This signing with the
crosse is no decent gesture: It is rather like a
Iugglers gesture, then a gesture of decencie,
and comelinesse. It must then be used, as a symbolicall,
and significant rite. But we have no
such signe set downe in the word, as to make
two crosse lines in the aire with our fingers, to
represent the crosse of tree, or to signifie unto
us that we should not be ashamed to confesse
the crosse of Christ, &c. Thou shalt make unto

thy selfe no image, that is, any representation
forged in thy owne braines to be set up in the
worship of God. Admit once the aereall cross
in baptisme, yee cannot refuse to set up the
the materiall crosse, and the Rood in the Kirck,
nor the woodden or stone crosses in the high
wayes. For all may signifie the same thing, that
the crosse on the forchea
                  •
               . And by this reason
every one may weare a Giver crosse upon
his forehead also. Further not onely other significant
crosses materiall may be brought in upon
this ground, but also all the rest of the beggarly
ceremonies of baptisme, to deface & deforme
the puritie, plainnes, and siniplicitie of
Christs institution. As to put salt in the mouth
of the child, to annoynt with oile the breast &
shoulders, and the top of the head with holy
chrisme and to put a burning taper in his hand,
&c. for these toyes had their owne glorious significations
as well as the Crosse. Lastly what
doth in signify, but that which is already signified
in baptisme. The same valour and courage
& constant prosession & fightiug under Christs
banner, is a part of that grace, which is sealed
by baptisme. But beside that it is a significant
toye,Can. 3
                     •
                  . it is also esteemed effective. For they say,
that by it, the infant is dedicated to the service
of him that dyed on the crosse. Who did sanctifie
this signe for such an use? Are men able to
doe it? It was made also a consecrator of water,
bread, and wine, and all other holy things in
time of poperie, for the which corruption we
ought to abhorr it. Againe, we signe that 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
token, that he shall continue Christs saithful souldier
to his lives end: these words (shall continue is
his lives end) compared with the like in the Epistl
                     •
                  
                  
of the 22. Sonday after trinitie) God shall continue
the worke in you to the end shew unto us, that wee
use the crosse for a pledge to give assurance to the
child to continue in grace to the end; which if it bee
so then it serveth to work faith,
               1. Part. p. 34. 
               and is used effectively,
               L. 5. c. 65.
sayth Parker. Hooker sayth, that there cannot
be a more forcible meane to avoyd that which
may deservedly procure shame. If in be in some sort
a mean to secure from confusion everlasting,
then is it in some sort effective of grace. In a
word, suppose there were no sinfull use of it for
the present, the horrible abuse of it in times by-past,
and the danger and perill of these same abuses
are sufficient to remove it out of this holy
sacrament, where it is set up in such honourable
state beside the Lords owne altar. After
the signing with the crosse, the Priest sayth,
Seeing now dearly beloved brethren, that these children
bee regenerated, and grafted into the body of
Christs congregation, and not before the crossing.
Privat baptisme is administred in privat houses,
sometime by a privat person, sometime by a
publick. Howbeit it be not enjoyned by law, not
prescribed by their service booke, that lay men
or women shall baptise in time of necessitie, yet
it is permitted and allowed in their practise, and
hath been defended by Whitgift and Hooker in
print. When it is administred, they call upon
God, and say the Lords prayer, if the time will
suffer. Then if the time wil not suffer they omit
prayer. So that not onely they omit preaching,
& the doctrine of the sacrament, but also praying,
if there bee haste. If the child live, it is
brought to the Church, and the maner of the
privat administration is tried. The minister demandeth,
by whom was the child baptised: and

               because some things essentiall to this sacrament may
happen to be omitted through feare or hast in such
time of extremitie, he demandeth of those who
bring the child, with what water and words
was the child baptised, and whether they think
the child to be lawfully and perfectly baptised.
If a lawfull minister did baptise the child, these
demands were needlesse. We may perceive also
to what indignitie and prophanation the sacrament
is exposed, in that it must bee ministred
with such haste, and feare, that the ministration
of a sacrament being intended, yet it may prove
to be no true sacrament, because it is marred
with haste and feare. The Lord doth not allow
his sacraments to be so prophaned, but to be administred
with gravitie, with due time and leasure,
without feare, that may make the minister
miscarry in the action. If after triall he finde all
right, he receiveth the child as one of the fleck
with certain words which he pronounceth. After
the Gospel is read, the minister together
with the godfathers, and godmothers, say the
Lords prayer. Then he asketh of them, the
questions whereof we made mention before in
publike baptisme. If these, who bring the infants,
doe make uncertaine answers to the Priests demands
as that it cannot appeare that the childe was
baptized with water in the name of the Father, and
of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, the Priest baptizeth
the child. Then howbeit that it appeare
not, that a lawfull minister did baptize, that shal
not move the priest to baptize the child: wherby
we may see, that baptisme by lay men, and
women is not made null by their service book,
but standeth for good and sufficient. When after
uncertain answers the priest baptizeth, he

useth this forme of words: If thou be not already
baptised, I baptise thee in the name of the Father
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. But
what if the child be already baptised, is it not
now re-baptised in publique. Again, in private
baptisme the Congregation is neglected. The
Church hath interest in the baptisme of the
child, as well as the Minister, for the child is
received into the Congregation to be a member
thereof. And therefore the confession of
the parents should be given publiquely, before
that the childe receive the seale of the covenant.
Wee see then, what are the fruits of private
baptisme; baptisme by private persons,
lay-men and women, unworthy handling of
such a Mysterie for feare and hast, baptisme by
supposition, and rebaptization, &c. Adde, that
it doth foster an opinion of the necessitie of
baptisme, or rather is grounded upon it. It is
said in the Preface before Confirmation, It is
certaine by Gods word, that children being baptized
have all things necessarie for their salvation, and be
undoubtedly saved. Yee see, they affirme that all
baptised children be undoubtedly saved, and
againe, doe imply in these words, that for all
such as are not baptised, we have no sure warrant,
hat any of them shall be safe. The Bishop
of Canterburie in the Conference at
Hamp
                  •
               on Court, affirmed, that, If an Infant die
baptised, there is evident assurance, that it is saved,
wheras the state of an infant dying unbaptised is
uncertaine. Is not this sound Divinitie? The
Surveyer of the booke of common-prayer relateth,
that by occasion of private baptisme,
many children be baptised by Masse-priests after
the Popish manner, and many bastards concealed.

Many pretend infirmitie, when they
need not, and the solemnizing of private baptisme
in publique is often omitted.
            2 The Holy Supper.
            The Sacrament of the Supper, as also of baptisme,
may be ministred amongst them without
any Sermon made, or doctrine upon the
Sacrament which is to be ministred; yea, it is
ministred by such as cannot teach. In their latest
canons it is said plainely, that both the Sacraments
be equally effectuall,
               Can. 57. 
               whether they be ministred
by a Minister that is no Preacher, or by one
that is a Preacher? In the same Canon, they are
are said to be seduced by false Teachers, who refuse
to have their children baptised by a minister that is
no preacher, and to receive the holy Communion of
his hands in the same respect, as though the vertue
of these Sacraments did depend upon his abilitie
to teech. And therefore it is 
                  •
               r
                  •
               a
                  ••
               ed in
that canon, that they shall first be suspended,
persisting in their wilfulnesse, and then after
a monthes obstinacie excommunicated. A
Minister it is true is no part of the essence of
the Sacrament, as a Sacrament is defined to
consist of outward signes, and invisible graces,
yet is a Minister necessarie to the right and lawfull
ministration of the Sacrament, and is of
the essence of it, that is, he is of the essence of
the Sacrament, as it is defined to be an holy,
and sacred action, for he is appointed by
Christ to be the minister of the action. Now
we acknowledge none to be a lawfull Minister,
but him who is able to teach. Christ joyned
preaching and baptizing in his commission,
Matth, 28. To whom he committed the dispensation

of the charter, and the word of reconciliation:
to those also he committed the
dispensation of the Seales, and to those onely.
Tryall and particular examination of the
communicants they have none, to try their
knowledge in the mysteries of religion, and
growth in Christianity. It is enough that they
were once bishoped, when they were little children,
as in time of poperie. The communion
table is not onely covered at the time of ministration,
with a faire linnen cloath, but also in
the 82 canon it is ordeined, that the same tables
shall from time to time be kept and repaired in fufficient
and 
                     〈◊〉
                   maner & covered in time of divine
service, with a carpet of silk, or other decent stuffe
thought meet by the Ordinarie of the place: as if the
communion table were to be regarded more the
other common tables after the action is ended,
wheras the very elements themselves extra usū,
out of the use of the Sacrament, are but comon.
This is done in imitation of the popish rich altar
cloths. The table being covered with a fair
linnen cloth, & placed in the Church or chancel
where morning & evening prayer are appointed
to be said, the Priest must stand at the northside
of the table, he must not stand at the head, or the
southside. He beginneth with the Lords prayer
& a collect, then he rehearseth distinctly all the
to comand. & the people kneeling, after every
command. ask forgivenes. The people of Israel
kneeled not when God himself pronounced the
Law from mount Sinai, howbeit they saw the
mountain smoking, and lightnings, &c. Gods
word uttered by man then should not bee
received with kneeling. VVheras the last praier
is sufficient to conclude with: the repetition of

it at every commandement is superfluous battologie.
Then the Priest saith the collect of the
day, and another for the King, standing up. After
the collects, he readeth the Epistle and the
Gospell. The epistle and the gospell being ended,
he saith the Creed, after the Creed, if
there be not a Sermon, he readeth some Homilie
alreadie set forth, or that shall hereafter be
set forth. After Sermon or homilie, the people
is fore-warned of the Holy-daies, or fasting
daies of the next weeke following, and are earnestly
exhorted to remember the poore. Then
the Church-wardens, or some other by them
appointed gather the devotion of the people,
for so is the almes called, and upon the offering
dayes appointed, every man and woman payeth
to the Curate the due, and accustomed offerings:
then the Priest prayeth that God would
accept of their almes, & for some other things.
Then he readeth a short exhortation: then a
generall confession is made in the name of all
those that are minded to receive the Communion.
And this is allowed to be made, either by
one of th
                  •
               m who are to communicate, or one
of the Ministers, or the Priest himselfe: So a
Lay man is allowed to pray in the Church in
name of the rest. This confession is made kneeling.
Then he standeth up againe, and turneth
him to the people, and prayeth some few words
again. So they have prayer following immediately
after prayer, without any new actiō intervening,
standing at the one, kneel. at the other
so comely is their disorder. The after some versides
and answers, and proper prefaces for holy-daies,
the Priest kneeleth down againe,
sayth a prayer in name of all them who are to

receive the communion. As soone as that is
ended, without any other action intervening
he standeth up againe and sayth another prayer.
In this prayer he rehearseth the words of
the institution to God, as the preist doth when
he consecrateth the bread and wine in the
Masse. For he doth not first end this prayer, and
then turne him to the people to informe them
of the institution, by rehearsall of the words,
but uttereth them in a continuall tenour with
this prayer speaking to God. O horrible prophanation
of the Scripture, and superstitious
consecration! Then without any farther he
and they communicate kneeling, after the Popish
manner, that is, with a gesture of Adoration,
when they are beholding the signes, taking,
eating, drinking, and inwardly in their
minds, should be meditating on the signification,
and the fruit and benefite which they reap
by Christ crucified, and consequently cannot
without distraction of mind from this employment
of the soule and meditation, pray a set,
and continued prayer to God, or cannot meditate
and be employed in the present action
without distraction of minde from the prayer,
and therefore either they pray unreverently,
which they will not grant, or doe communicate
this gesture of adoration to the other imployments
of the soule, and of the outward
senses, and members of the body, about the objects
presented, which they must grant, and so
nill they will they, must be forced to confesse,
that they commit idolatrie. Kneeling is no decent
gesture for a table: for commoditie, they
say, maketh decencie, but this gesture is confessed
not to be commodious, as sitting is. It is

then enjoyned for another reason, to wit, fot
reverence: but to kneele for reverence and religious
respects is ever adoration in the highest
degree. To kneele for reverence, that is to adore,
is not enjoyned here for prayet, neither may
prayer lawfully be enjoyned in time of another
action and part of Gods worship to bee
performed by the same person. And suppose it
were enjoyned for the short prayer uttered by
their priest, yet are not the outward senses, and
inward faculties, employed principally on that
prayer; but upon another action, principally,
and directly intended in the Institution,
whereas the other is onely superadded by man.
Let them frame their canons and acts as they
please, and suppresse, that they kneele for reverence
of the Sacrament, common sense may
teach us, that it is done for that respect, either
totally or principally. But let it be in the least
part, yet that least part is idolatry. Beside the
idolatry of this gesture, it cannot stand with the
right manner of celebration and rites of the institution.
For when they kneele for adoration,
they cannot carie the cup from hand to hand,
nor divide the elements amongst themselves, as
Christ hath commanded. In many places the
people are raised from their kneeling, to come
about the table there to receive kneeling, and
then are directed to their places again, saith the
Authour of the Survey.
                  
                     •
                  . 72. The Priest giveth the
bread and the wine to every one severally out
of his own hands. When the cup is to be caried
from one to another, the communicant is too
prophane to reach it, the priests holy hand must
take it from one, and give it to the other. But
Christ willed his Disciples to divide it among

themselves, & it was carried from hand to hand
indeed, after the manner of the last paschal cup,
which was changed in this communion cup.
When Christ therfore gave the bread and the
wine, he sayd in the plural number, Take yee, eat
yee, &c. The English priest speaketh in the singular
number, when he giveth the elements, he
annexeth not Christs words containing a comfortable
promise, and uttered in an enunciative
form, but other words invented by man, and in
form of a prayer, converting one part of Gods
worship in another, or else confounding them.
Then the Prisayth the L. prayer, & the people
repeat every petition after him. Is not the minister
the mouth of the people in prayer to God?
And now they wil with their own mouths pray
again. When the minister prayed, did they not in
hart pray with him? if they did, wherfore repeat
they every petitiō? And when they repeat, doth
the minister pray againe the same words in his
hart, which before he uttered with his tongue?
Or is the toung in this exercise both of minister
& people divided from the heart, exercing their
functions severally, & at distinct times? this is the
second pater noster. So I must speak, seeing they
use the L. prayer as the Popish priest doth his
pater. After the L. prayer they have another
prayer.P. 81. At westminster the communion is ministred
in wafer cakes, as the author of the Survey
reports; who also doth conjecture by this,
that the prelates intend to advance superstition
by peecemeal in all places. The like may be said
of some superstitions used in the K. Chappell.
            Wee have seen the particulars of the Priests
function,P. 344. whereunto Mucket doth subjoyn that
he must weare a surplice in the administration

of the particulars foresaid, that is, in reading
morning and evening prayer, churching of women,
celebration of matrimonie, at burialls, administration
of baptisme, and the Lords su
                  •
               per.
And if he hath taken on any degree in the Vniversitie,
he must weare such a hood as appertaineth
to that degree. In cathedrall and collegiat
charches,Can. 24. the communion is to be administred
upon principall feast d
                     ••
                  es, sometimes by the
Bishop if he be present, and sometimes by the Deane:
and at somtimes by a Canon, or preben darie the priacipall
minister using a decent cope, and being assisted
with the Gospeller and Epistler. The rich cope
then is not a vestiment for common kirks, and
ordinary priests. No minister being no graduate
may weare a hood under pain of suspension.
Notwithstanding it shall bee lawfull for such ministers,
as are not Graduats to weare upon their surplices
in stead of Hoods, some decent tippet of blacke,
so it be not of sil
                     •
                  k. For their ministring garments
we say first, they cannot be sayd to be enjoyned
for distinction. For the place they occupie in
the time of their ministration, doth of it selfe
distinguish them from all others, who see them
at service. They serve not for comelinesse, and
gravitie, but are rather ridiculous, and stagelike,
meeter for fooles and comedians, then for ministers.
And if gravitie were respected in them,
they should be worn ordinarily, and out of the
true ministration. For he must not cast off his
gravitie, when he hath ended divine service. It
is then for mysterie or signification, that they
weare them. The white colour of the Surplice
signifieth angelicall puritie, for the Angels appeared
in white. So are they painted with wings
to signifie their readinesse to do their office. But

significant garments belong to the priests of the
Leviticall tibe, and not to the ministers of the
new testament. It is beside a lying signe of that
purenesse which is not nor cannot be in sinfull
men. In the angels it might have represented as
well their glory as their purenesse from sin. The
Surplice was esteemed so holy in time of poparie,
that no priest might say service, nor doe
so much as make holy water, without it. And among
themselves, the Surplice is well known to
be esteemed by many people in all the parts of the
land so holy 
                     •
                   thing, as that they will not receive the
sacrament from any but such as weare it, as is sayd in
the abridgement of the ministers of Lincolne.
By what reason the Surplice and cope are retained,
P. 5
                     •
                  . by the same reason the rest of the Massepriests
and Bishops vestiments may be reduced.
The ministers of the Gospell should not bee
made conforme in fashions, let be in mysteries
and significations to Popish Priests, not weare
their badges, either in or out of the ministration
of divine service. It is to be observed, that
in time of preaching he is not urged to weare a
Surplice, as 
                  〈…〉
                of service, belike because
preaching is no 
                  •
               ecessarie part of his function,
as is the saying and singing of service: or else
why should he not use these apish and significant
garments at the one, as well as at the other.
In their 17. Canon students in colledges
are ordained to weare Sarplices in charches St
chappels upon all Son layes, holidayes, and their
E
                  ••
               es. The originall of this is observed in the
abridgement fore sa
                  •
                to be this.P. 37. 
               It is enioyned to
all that are admitted to the very lowest degree of
their clergie, which they call primam tonsuram.
And this was it which brought that custome into

the universities, that every student should at certaine
times weare the Surplice in divine service, because
they did in their matriculation receive this primam
tonsuram, and first entrie into the clergie. I may
may not insist upon this poynt, nor the rest that
follow, being forced to end within this sheet.
            In the Deacon is likewise to be considered
his externall calling and function. His
externall calling is either to the order and
degree, and that in every respect, as in the
minister, except in some things: or to the
benefice, altogether as in the minister. His
function is, 1. to have an over-sight of the
poore, 2. to assist the minister in celebration
of the supper, 3 to blesse them who are to be
maried, 4. to burie the dead, 5. to baptise,
and preach, if he be called thereunto.
            In the book of ordering Priests and Deacons,
the Deacons office is sayd to consist chiefly in
assisting the Priest in divine service, specially in
celebration of the Supper, and distribution of
the sacrament, in reading Scripture and Homilies,
in instructing children in the articles of the
faith, in baptising of infants, in the preaching of
the word, if the Bishop thinke him fit, and in
inquiring into the state of the poore, and the
sick, and intimating the same to the minister.
After imposition of hands, the Bishop delivereth
him in his hand the new testament, saying,
Take thou authoritie to read the Gospell in the
Church of God, and to preach the same, if thou bee
thereto ordinarily commanded. Hee needeth not a
new calling to the ministerie, and therby be inabled,
but remaining still a Deacon, he may by

the Bishops warrrant and licence be authorised
to preach. The Apostles instituted Deacons to
an other end then to preach, and severed them
from preaching, because one person could not
conveniently be a minister of the word, and a
minister of Tables, yet they will confound
them. For so they found them confounded in
time of popery, and it pleaseth them to retaine
them so, and not to distinguish the functions,
as the Apostles did. Why are they permitted to
baptize more then to celebrate the supper? Is
the one sacrament of greater excellencie then
the other. May the one bee ministred by any
Church officer, who may not minister the other?
When the Apostle 1. Tim. 3. descriveth the
office of a Deacon, requireth he either abilitie
to teach, or power to baptize? What in effect
may their Deacon not do, that the priest doth,
except the ministration of the communion?
What can be the reason of this exception, but
that in this ministration there was somewhat
esteemed in time of poperie, proper to a priest,
to wit, the offering of a sacrifice. The Deacon
then is not halfe a minister, but almost a whole,
and he may preach with licence, or at command
of his ordinarie, as well as the Priest. What need
I to insist upon such grosse absurdities?
         
         
            CHAP. 8. Of the administration of Lay-men.
            THE laymen having some administration,
have it either in a cathedral or collegiat
church, or else in a parish church, &c.
In the cathedral church, laymen having administration,

are the receivers of the rents, Bailiffs,
takers up of accounts, overseers and measurers
of land, stewards of courts, and liberties, overseers
of the fabrick of the temple, of the sa
                  •
               ctuarie,
of the bibliotheke where the book of Homilies,
and service-book lye, vergerers, bellmen,
singing men and boyes. Many idle and chargeable
officers are fed in these dennes to uphold
the pompe of a cathedrall church, and that to
the great detriment of other churches. In the
Parish church they have not a Senat of Elders
to joyne with the Pastor for governing the
same, but two or three Churchwardens to see
the Kirke be watertight, and furnished with all
the ornaments and utensils, to provide for the
booke of common prayer, and Homilies, and
the elements for the communion upon the expenses
of the parish, to keep a Register of the
christnings, weddings, & burialls, together with
the Priest, to intimate any contribution which
is to be made for some publick work: and lastly,
to be the Bishop and Archdeacons spie, to
delate or present offenders, howbeit for the
most part they bee perjured, and offences are
winked at, and suffered to passe without correction.
No wonder, seeing the discipline is taken
out of 
                  •
               he hands of the right officers, and
put in the hands of Officials, Commissaries, and
Chancellors, to whom these perjured Churchwardens
are made officers and servants.
            The possessions are either publicke, or
private, &c.
            Heere are reckoned for the possessions belonging
to the Church, bookes, vestiments, the
ornamentsand implements of the Kirk, the

Kirk it selfe, houses, mannours, woods, forrests,
parkes, ponds, fountaines, rivers, medowes,
pasturage ground, arable ground, Baron
courts Hundreds, and Lathis, Tithes, oblations,
obuentions, pensions for indemnit
                  •
               e,
procurations, Synodals, fees, immunities, liberties,
priviledges, &c. It were 
                  •
               edious to insist
upon the use of every one of them in particular.
They are either superfluous and excessive,
or unlawfull, or bestowed upon the wrong
person.
            The constitutions anent both persons,
and possessions, &c.
            There is a controversie among the Lawiers,
what Canons and Constitutions of the Canon
Law be in force among them. Some of best
judgement thinke it to be altogether abrogate,
except so much as is particularly ratified by
Statute. They themselves doe hold,Mucket p. 299. that all the
former canons of the canon law, all the constitutions,
and decrees, nationall or provinciall,
which were in use before in the Ecclesiasticall
Courts, which are not repugnant to the Statutes,
and municipall lawes of the Realme, or
to the late constitutions established by publiqu
authoritie, nor prejudiciall to the Kings prerogatiue
and privileges, make up the Ecclesisticall
lawes of England, and accordingly put the
same in practise. There Canon law, the popes
Testament then, is there principall Law booke.
            THinke not, good Reader, that I have
made a perfect Discoverie of the English
Church-policie: for that requireth the
skill and paines, of the most judicious and painfull
among themselves. Therefore take in good

part, that little which I have in great hast gathered
for thy information, and consider how
dangerous it is to yeeld to a few of their Popish
corruptions. Some few will draw on the rest,
and the whole will make way for full Poperie
to re-enter, in the owne time, which approacheth
very neere in outward appearance, unlesse
the Lord prevent. Hee that persevereth to the
end, shall get the Crown.
            
            BIshop Spotswood hath spread a rumeur, that
M David Calderwood is turned Brounist, but
I assure thee, good Reader, it is not true. That
old impudent 
                  •
               yar, hath together with his supposed
Authour, a yong man, trimmed up a tale with many
circumstances, to make the mis-report the more
credible. But if ever he required by letter, the judgement,
either of that supposed Authour, or of any
other man else, anent their opinions, then let him never
be reputed for an honest man hereafter. If hee
had dou
                  •
               ted, he would not have sought resolution
from yong schollers, and unsetled braines. The
ground being false, all the rest of the circumstonces
builded upon it are knovish forgeries also. If
either Spotswood, or his supposed Authour, persist 
                  〈◊〉
               
their caluninie after this declaration, I shall try if
there be any bloud in their foreheads.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   