
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  A PROGNOSTIGATION MADE FOR THE YEERE OF OVR LORD GOD. M. D. LXXXII.
               
               Conteyning meete matter for ſuch a worne: gathered out of learned Authors, and ſet downe to profite ſuch as lacke the knowledge thereof.
               
                  By Thomas Buckmaſter.
               
               
                  Cecinimus vobis, et non ſaltaſtis: Lamentauimus vobis, et non planxiſtis. Math. 11. 17.
               
                  Imprinted at London, by Richard Watkins and Iames Robertes. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
               
            
            
               Ponde.
               
                  and Prognoſtication for the Lord and Sauiour Ieſu
                        •
                      Chriſt Being he firſt after leape yeare.
               
               the la
                     ••
                  tude and meridian of the honorable Citie of London, and may very well ſerue for all England: wherein are contayned diuers neceſſary and profitable rules for all men to know, more then heretofore hath bene written: the contentes wherof do 
                     •
                  riefly declare the ſame in the next two pages following.
               the Mathematicks.
               
                  aſſignes of Iames Robertes.
               
            
            
               Dade.
               
                  A prognoſtication in which you may beholde the ſtate of this preſent yeere of our Lord God, M. DC.
               
               Made and ſet foorth by Iohn Dade Cent. practicioner in Phiſicke.
               
                  Imprinted at London for Edward White, the aſſigne of Iames Roberts.
               
            
            
               Ponde. 1601.
               
                  A Prognoſtication for this yeere of our Lord MDCI. Being the firſt yeare after leape yeare.
               
               Wherein are contained, the inclination or diſpoſition of the weather for euery day: the change, full & quarters of the Moone, with diuers other things neceſſary to know: Calculated for the Eleuation and Meridian, of the Honorable Citty of London, and may very well ſerue for all England.
               By Edward Ponde practiſioner in the Mathimaticks.
               
                  Imprinted at London by E. White the aſſigne of Iames Roberts.
               
               
                  Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
               
            
            
               Dade.
               
                  Prognoſtication in which this yeere of our Lord God 1600.
               
                  Beeing leape yeere.
               
               
                  Dade Gent, practitioner in Phiſicke.
               
                  Richard VVatkins and Iames Robertes.
               
            
            
               ¶ The Prognoſtication for this yeere of our Lord God, 1581.
               
                  Written by George Hartgill.
               
               
                  Ionah. 3. 8. Let man and beaſt put on ſackecloth, and cry mightily vnto God: yea let euery man turne from his euill way, and from the wickedneſſe that is in their handes.
               
               
               ¶ Imprinted at London, by Richard Watkins, & Iames Robertes. Cum Priuilegio.
               
               
               
            
         
      
   