
      
         
            
               
               
               A Prognoſtication for euer, made by Erra Pater, a Iew, borne in Iury, Doctor in Aſtronomie and Phiſicke: Very profitable to kéepe the body in health: And alſo Ptholomeus ſaith the ſame.
            
            
               Printed by Thomas Eſte.
            
         
         
            
               
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ERRA PATER.
            The Prognoſtication for euer, of Erra Pater.
            
               AS I finde in the Science of Aſtronomie, there bée foure manner of Cholers in mans body, of the foure complections.
            The firſt is bloud, the ſecond blacke Choler, the third Flumes, & the fourth yelow choler, and if one of the foure lack, all the bodie wil be foorthwith dead. Foraſmuch ſuſtaineth one of them the body as the other.
            And euery each of them ought to bée at a certaine, for if one of them ſurmount the other, all the body ſhall haue dommage thereby, and all foure bée perillous, for if the bloud ſurmount the other, hée will the ſooner deſtroy and ouercome the bodie, and make him to dye, for hée gathereth and likewiſe congealeth euen right on the heart and the breath, and in that manner, (leſſening) by little and little, is ouercome and dead, but all that tyme when the great courſe taketh him, he may

ſoone bée aſſwaged to leſſe him a little, ſo take away a little bloud from him, and then all will aſſwage of this perill. Alſo the blacke coler is right perſlous, and they ſurmount all the other, they make great domage to the body by many and diuers meanes, for they may cauſe and make the body to fall as the euill ſickneſſe, and loſe his wit and knowledge, and béecome a foole, and cauſe all the body to be full of euill ſcabbes, and oft times to bée meſill, and maketh a man to bée fearefull and a coward, and of many euill manners.
            And when they ſurmount the other, they bée right gréeuous and damagious. And by hearbes, flowers, faſting, abſtinence, drinkes and medicines, they may bée aſſwaged.
            The flumes that bée white bée perillous, when they ſurmount the other cholers of the body, they doe great domage and hurt, for they engender goutes, and many other euill ſickneſſes that bée cold, and they hurt alſo the féete, the hands, the raines, the knées, the legs, and the téeth, and make the mouth and the breath ſtinking, and the noſe and the cares, and

cauſeth many other diſeaſes and ſickneſſes, and they may be aſſwaged by hearbs, flowres, rootes, drinckes, medicines, and alſo by vomiting.
            Alſo the yealow cholers bée perillous, for when they ſurmount the other cholers in a mans body, they aſſorbent the heart, and trauaile the braine, and maketh all the members féeble and ſoft, and taketh away the will and appetite from the body, that hée may neither eate nor drinck, and alſo they chaunge a mannes Cholers and maketh him to loſe his ſight and become blinde: and they may bée aſſwaged, as by hearbs, flowres, rootes, and by vomiting.
            The foure humours be of foure complections, and they haue the domination of the body foure times in a yéere.
            And each of them a quarter of a yéere. &c.
            It is to bée vnderſtoode, that in the yéere is twelue monethes, and in the twelue moneths is fiftie and two wéekes, and in the fiftie and two wéekes is thrée hundreth thréeſcore and fiue daies, and

in the thrée hundreth and lxv daies, doth containe eight thouſand, ſeauen hundreth and lx. houres.
            
               A farthing a day is i. d. ob. q. the wéeke.
               The month vij. pence.
               The yéexe vij. s. viij. d. q.
               A halfe penny a day is iij. d. ob. the wéeke.
               The month eightéene pence.
               The yéere fiftéene s. ij. d. ob.
            
            
               The diſpoſition of the firſt ſeaſon of the yeere, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Piſces.
               The firſt ſeaſon of the yéere that hath domination of the body of man, is thrée moonethes, and they be named theſe thrée ſignes, Capricorne, Aquarie, and Piſces.
               
               And theſe thrée ſignes haue power of fleumes of the body of man & woman, and they hée cold and moiſt, & they béegin to reigne the xxiiij. day of December, and dureth to the foure and twentie day of March.
               
            
            
               
               The diſpoſition of the ſecond part of the yeere, Aries, Taurus and Gemini.
               ¶ The ſecond part of the yéere is other thrée moneths, and theſe are their ſignes, Aries, Taurus & Gemini. And they haue power in the body of man, of the breaſt, and they bée hot and moiſt. And they béegin to raigne the foure and twentie day of March, & dureth vnto the foure & twentie day of Iune.
               
            
            
               The diſpoſition of the three ſeaſons of the yeere, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.
               ¶ The thrée ſeaſons of the yéere, are other thrée monethes, and theſe bée their ſignes, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. And they haue power in the body of man, of the yelow collers, and they bée hot and drie, and they béegin to raigne on the foure and twentie day of Iune, and dureth vnto the xxiiij. of September.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The diſcription of the fourth part of the yeere, Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius.
               
               THE fourth part of the péere bée other thrée moneths, and theſe bée their ſignes, Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius. And they bée cold and drie, and they béegin to raigne the xxiiii. day of September, and dureth vnto the xxiiii. day of December.
               
               And by the manner of theſe foure ſeaſons, euery man may kéepe him from all the contraries of meats, drincks, and clothing, and from all other contraries. And if a man will keepe him after the manner which is rehearſed in this booke, hée ſhall neuer haue infirmities of the body by the grace of God.
               Take Peliter of Spaine and chaw it in thy mouth, for it is good to ſpurge the head and the body. And eate Fenell ſéede and Comin ſéede, for each of theſe ſéedes deſtroy the flumes, that all thoſe euils in any mans body come off.
            
            
               
               Eaſt.
               Ignus inuentus & Aeſtas.
               The water red and thinne, the groſe male red and hard, the ſpittle thicke and clammie. The ſignes, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, is ingendred of cholerick, hot, and dry, and orientall, & the ſickneſſe be taken in theſe ſignes, it is great perill, vnleſſe he haue his medicine cold and moiſt, and his dyet of the ſame complection. Then bée may bée healed by the grace of God.
            
            
               Weſt.
               Are adoleſcentia ver.
               The water red and thick, the groſe male red and thin, the ſpittle thin and ſweete, the extremitiues out of courſe. The ſignes Gemini, Libra, and Aquaria, is ingendred of ſanguin hot and moyſt and Occidentall, the cure is cold and dry, with the dyet of the ſame complection.
               
                  Caſsia fiſtula in Aqua vite.
               
            
            
               
               North.
               Terra Senectus Autumnus.
               The water white and thin, the groſ
                     •
                   male black and thick, the ſpittle thick and ſower, the extrematiues vnneth ſeld.
               The ſignes Taurus, Virgo, & Capricorne, he is ingendred of Malancholy cold and dry Septentrionall, the cure hot & moiſt, with the diet of the ſame complection.
            
            
               South.
               Aqua ſenium & Hiems.
               The water white and thick, ſhe groſe matter white and thick. The ſpittle thin and ſwéet. The extrematiues féeble, the ſignes, Cancer, Scorpio, and Piſces, hée is engendred of Flumes, colde and moyſt, Meridionall, the cure hot, dry, and of the ſame complection, Trauit Aqua vitae, or in Potage.
            
            
               Heere hee ſheweth of all the diſmall or perillous dayes that commeth in the yeere.
               
                  
Maiſters of Aſtronomie and Phiſicke, that this craft firſt found, telleth the moſt perillons and the moſt dangerous daies in the yéere. In which if any man or woman bée let blood of wound or veine, they ſhall die within xxi. daies following. Or who ſo falleth in ſickneſſe in any of theſe daies, they ſhall neuer eſcape it till they be dead. And who ſo taketh any great iourny in any of theſe daies, to goe from home hée ſhall be in daunger to die or hée come home againe. And who ſo weddeth a wife in any of theſe dayes, haſtely they ſhall bée departed, or elſe they ſhall liue together with much ſorrow.
               And who ſo beginneth in any of theſe dayes any great worke, it ſhall neuer come to good end, and theſe are the dayes following.
            
            
               That is to ſay.
               ¶ In Ianuarie are eight daies, that is to ſay, the firſt, the ſecond, the fourth, the fift, the tenth, the fiftéenth, the ſeauentéenth, and the ninetéenth.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        In Februarie are thrée daies: the viii the x. and the xvii.
                        ii
                     
                     
                        In March are thrée daies, the xv. the xvi and the xix.
                        iii
                     
                     
                        In Aprill are two daies, the xv and the xxi.
                        iii
                     
                     
                        In May are thrée daies, the vii. xv. and the xx.
                        v
                     
                     
                        In Iune are two daies, the iiii. and the vii.
                        vi
                     
                     
                        In Iuly are two daies, the xv and the twentith.
                        vii
                     
                     
                        In Auguſt are two daies, the xix and the xx.
                        viii
                     
                     
                        In September are two daies, the ſixt and the ſeauenth.
                        ix
                     
                     
                        In October is one, the ſixt day.
                        x
                     
                     
                        In Nouember are two daies, the ſixt and the nintéenth.
                        xi
                     
                     
                        In December are thrée daies, the ſixt the vii and the xi. Et alii dicunt, the xv and the xvi.
                        xii
                     
                  
               
               And who ſo will learne the Canicular daies, which are daies of great daunger and perill, as Clarkes ſay, and they begin the xv. Kalend of Auguſt, and

dureth to the fourth Nonas of September, which ſeaſon is very perillous to take ſickeneſſe, and it is alſo perillous to take drinckes or medicines, or to let bloud, but if it bée great néede, and that it muſt bée after the middeſt of the day.
            
            
               Heere beginneth the diſtance betweene the ſignes.
               It is to bée vnderſtood that there is a circle in the Firmament that is called Zodiacke, & is deuided into twelue euen parts, and of thoſe parts bée called the xii. Signes in the Latine, and theſe be their names.
               
                  Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornia, Aquarius, and Piſces.
               
               Theſe twelue Signes are in complection like vnto the foure Elements, that is to ſay, the Fire, the Aire, the Water and the Earth: the Fire, is hotte and dry, his Element is likened vnto the Ram, the Lion, and the Shooter, for theſe bée hot & dry, alſo the Ayre is hot & moiſt, his Element is likened to the Children,

the Ballance and the water bearer, for they be hot and moyſt. The water is moyſt and cold, for to the water is likened the Crab, the Scorpion, and the Fiſh. The earth is dry and cold, to the Earth is likened the Bull, the Maid, and the Goate, for they be drie and cold.
               And euery one of the ſignes is deuided into thirtie euen parts, & theſe parts are called degrees, and euery degree is deuided into thrée ſcore euen parts, & theſe parts are called Minutes, and euery minute is deuided into thrée ſcore euen parts, and theſe parts bée called ſeconds, and ſo foorth to the thirds and fourthes.
               It is to bée vnderſtood, that there is ſeuen Planets, as Saturnus, Iupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, and Luna. Theſe bee the ſeauen moueable Starres.
               The aforeſayde twelue Signes taketh great power & might of the ſeauen Planets, & the ſeauen Planets taketh great power of the twelue ſignes, for the Planets be to the Signes as the ſoule to the body, & the ſignes to the Planets as the body to the ſoule. For like as the body

may doe nought without the Soule, no more may the Soule without the body, no more may a ſigne without the ſeauen Planets.
               
                  Saturnus is the higheſt, and next béeneath Saturnus is Iupiter, beneath Iupiter Mars, beneath Mars, Sol, beneath Sol, Venus, beneath Venus, Mercurius, béeneath Mercurius, Luna.
               
               The wiſe Philoſophers ſay, it is from the Earth to Luna, xv. M. vii. C. l. miles. From Luna to Mercurius, is xii. M. viii. C. xii. miles and a halfe.
               From Mercurius to Venus as many.
               From Venus to Sol is xxiii. M. iiii. C. and xxxviii. miles.
               From Sol to Mars is xv. M. vii. C. and fiue and twentie miles.
               From Mars to Iupiter is thrée ſcore and eight thouſand ſeauen hundred and xxi. miles.
               From Iupiter to Saturnus as many.
               From Saturnus to the Firmament, is vi ſcore M. iii. C. lxxxv. miles.
               The ſumme of all theſe miles is ſeauen ſcore and xviii. M. foure C. lxiii. miles.
            
            
               
               Heereafter followeth a coniunction of the change of the Moone.
               Héere is a rule of the chaunge of the Moone, when the Prime is on this letter A. the third daye béefore the Prime, the xix. houre ſhall be ye change of the Moone.
               And yée ſhall begin to tell your houres at midnight, for a daye naturall is from midnight to midnight. When the Prime is on this letter B. iii. daye, then it ſhall change the iiii. houre, that is to ſay, after midnight. When it changeth on this letter C. iiii day, then the viii houre.
               When it is on this letter D. iiii day, then the xx. houre. When it is on this letter E. iiii day, then the xviii houre. When it is on this letter F. iii. day, then the xvi houre. When it is on this letter G. iii. day, then the xvi. houre.
            
            
               The diſpoſition of the xij. Moneths vpon bloud letting.
               
                  Ianuarie.
                  
                     
IN the month of Ianuary, let thée not blood in the firſt day, for it is perillous, nor the ſecond day, nor the fifth day, nor the x. day, nor the xv. day, nor the xix. day, nor the xx. day, nor the xxv. day, but as often as thou wilt drinck good white wine faſting, and alſo take good héede of the dayes that be aboue written for they be perillous for to bléede on except the ſigne be right good for blood letting.
               
               
                  February.
                  In the month of February, eate no potage made of hocks or mallowes, for that is venim. And if thou haue néede to bléed on thy wreſt, or thy thomb, bléed not on the fourth day, nor on the vi. day, nor on the viii. day, but on ye xiii day, nor on the xvi. day, nor on ye xxviii day, but that the ſigne be very good, and thou maiſt chooſe.
               
               
                  March.
                  In the 
                        〈…〉
                      eate Figges, Reiſons, and 
                        〈…〉
                      and drinckes, and hot meates 
                        ••
                     d let thée blood on the right arme on the fifth day, or on the vii. daye, or on the xvii. day, for that is good

againſt all manner of Feuers, but beware bléede not the firſt day, nor the xv. day, nor the xvi. day, nor the xix. daye, nor the xxviij. day, & thou maiſt chooſe, & if thou doe, looke the ſigne be very good.
               
               
                  Aprill.
                  In the moneth of Aprill bléede on the left arme on the third daye, or on the xi. day, or on the xv. day, and thou ſhalt haue no great head ache, nor léeſe thy ſight of all that yéere, & vſe freſh and hot meates, but bléed not the vij day, nor the vitj. day, nor the x. day, nor the xx. day, for theſe dayes be not good for bléeding.
               
               
                  May.
                  In the moneth of May, riſe earely, and eate and drincke betime, vſe good meates and drincks, but eate neither of head nor foote while that laſt, and let thée blood on the firſt day, or on the eightéenth day, on which arme thou wilt, or an ye xxvij. day, or on the xxvitj. day, and it ſhall much help thée againſt all manner of euill, but beware that thou bléed not the third day, nor the ſixt day, nor the xxv. day.
               
               
                  
                  Iune.
                  In the moneth of Iune ſome Phiſitions ſay, that it is good euery day to drinck a quantitie 
                        〈◊〉
                      cold water faſting, and rule thée of thy meate and drink, and if thou haue néede bléed on the xxvitj day, for that is good, but beware that thou bléede not on the vij day, nor on the x day, nor on the xv. day, nor the xvi. day, nor the xx. day.
               
               
                  Iuly.
                  In the moneth of Iuly, kéepe thée from Lecherie, for then the braine and the humours are alwayes open, and bléede not in this mooneth, but if thou haue great néede, and then beware alway that thou bléed not on the xitj. day, nor on the xv. day, nor on the xix. day, nor on the xx. day, for it is dangerous.
               
               
                  Auguſt.
                  In the month of Auguſt eate no manner of woorts, nor any manner of hotte meates and drincks of Spicerie, nor bléed not the firſt day, nor the xx. day, nor the xxix. day, nor the xxx. daye. The other

daies thou maiſt bléed for great néede, if the ſigne be good for blood letting, but not elſe, and if thou loue to kéepe thy body in good health.
               
               
                  September.
                  In the month of September, all maner of fruit that is ripe and not infected is good for to eate, & bléed not the xvii. day nor on ye xviii. day, of the dropſie, phrenſie, palſie, nor of the falling euill, dread thée not of all that yéere, & if thou haue néede to bléed more, beware that thou bléed not the third day, nor the iiii day, nor the xvi day, nor the xxi. day, nor the xxii. day.
               
               
                  October.
                  In the month of October, drinck good and wholeſome wine, & bléed not but if great néede make thée, and looke that the ſigne be verie good, but yet beware that thou bléede not on the third day, nor the ſixt day, nor the xxiiii. day, and thou wilt doe well.
               
               
                  Nouember.
                  
                     
In the month of Nouember bléed not but for néede, for all the blood is gathered that time vpon the head veine, bath not but vent thée a little of graſing, for then all the humours be ouerquick to bléede, and if caſe be that thou haue great néede for to bléed, beware of the fift day, the vi. day, the xv, and the xix, day, the xxviii. day and the xxix.
               
               
                  December.
                  In the month of December bléed not but if thou haue great néede for the caſe, and bléede on the xxvi, day, for it is right good. And in caſe thou haue more néed to bléed, beware of the vii. day, the xv. days, the xvi. day, the xvii. day, and the xxii. day. and in this month come not nye the fire with thy ſhanks.
               
            
            
               For to vnderſtand & know the yeere that ſhall be plentious, & in great aboundance of goods.
               
                  In die Dominica. That is Sunday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuarie ſhall enter on the Sunday, that winter ſhall be cold

and moiſt, the Summer ſhall hée hot, and the time of Harueſt ſhall bée windie, and rainy, with great aboundance of corne, of wines and other graines, & of all garden fruits & hearbs, there ſhall bee little Oyle, abundance ſhalbée of all manner of fleſh, ſome great newes ſhall men heare ſpoken of Kings and Prelats of the Church, and alſo of great Princes, great warres and robberies ſhall bee made, and many yong people ſhall dye.
               
               
                  In die Luna. That is Munday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuarie ſhall enter on the Munday, the Winter ſhall bée peaceable enough, and the Summer ſhall bée very temperate. Then ſhall bée great flouds of water that ſhall breake out of their limits and bonds, and many ſhips vpon the Sea ſhall periſh, and in that yéere ſhall raigne diuers ſickneſſes, and changes of great Lords ſhall bée made, many women ſhall periſh in trauayling with Childe, many great Lords ſhall die. That yéere ſhall bée little graſſe and Muſtard ſéede, but there ſhall be plentie of

Corne and Wines and good cheap fleſh, but little Oyle.
               
               
                  In die Martis. That is Tueſday.
                  IN the yéere that Ianuarie ſhall enter on the Tueſday, the winter ſhall be changeable and not ſtedfaſt, for in the Prime, of truth it ſhall fréeſe, and that ſhall hurt ſore the Rye, the Vines, and the flowers, that Summer ſhall be drye, hot, & burning, inſomuch that the hearbs of the Gardens ſhall haue no power to come out of the ground.
                  All thinges ſhall be déere ſaue onely Corne, many men ſhall dye of the bloody flix, there ſhall be no tidings of Thunder, lightning, and tempeſt, but all fleſh ſhall be déere, many wines ſhall turne.
               
               
                  In die Mercurij. That is Wedneſday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuary ſhall enter on the Wedneſday, the Winter ſhall be

temperate, but in the ende there ſhall bée Snowes & Froſts, the prime time ſhall be rainie, great aboundance of all Corne, of Wine, of Fruits, of Hay 
                        〈◊〉
                      Graſſe, and generally of all good things. The Summer ſhall bée little cloudie, by the which thereof ſhall come great ſickneſſe. Poore labourers, as handy crafts and artificers ſhall gaine méetly well that yéere, many théeues there ſhalbe, by whom the mean
                        •
                      people ſhall be ſore pilled and diſcomfited, great warre, battaile and ſlaughter ſhall bée towards the middeſt of the yéere, by the which ſhall come great good to ſome men. In the end of the yéere ſhall bée diuers peſtilences, botches, and falling euils, eſpecially next the Sea.
               
               
                  In die Iouis. That is Thurſday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuarie ſhall enter on the Thurſday, the winter ſhall be long and moſt part drye, and the yéere ſhall bée very wholeſome. The Prime time ſhalbe very wholeſome, the Prime time ſhall bée very windie, the Summer ſhall be temperate

and harueſt ſhall be moſt part rainenie, ſo that the waters ſhall ſore breake out of their bounds, the Wheate and Wines ſhall bée good cheape, there ſhall be of Oates, Hay, Graſſe, and of fruites competently enough. Great warre and diuiſion ſhall bée béetwéene the Church and the Kings and Princes, and in the ende, the Princes ſhall haue victorie of their enterpriſes.
                  Women ſhall ſet themſelues much to lecherie, people ſhall bée well caſed of taxes and tallages.
               
               
                  In die Ʋeneris. That is Friday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuarie ſhall enter on the Friday, the winter ſhall bée long & dry, and the ſummer vnwholeſome, harueſt ſhall be dry, all corne ſhall bée déere, the vintage ſhall be good enough, & aboundaunce of Oyle, of fruit, of hey, of graſſe, and of Garden hearbes, the world ſhall bée ſore perſecuted with diuers ſickneſſes as ſore eies and of all Etiks, many yong children ſhall dye, great Thunder, Lightening and tempeſts ſhall bée, that ſhall

grieue ſore all the ground, there ſhall be Earthquakes, and good cheap cloth, poore people ſhall gaine little or nothing, many beaſts ſhall die for hunger, for the diuerſitie and maladie of the time.
               
               
                  In die Sabbati. That is Saterday.
                  In the yéere that Ianuary ſhall enter on the Saterday, the winter ſhall be temperate ſufficiently, and in the Prime time ſhall be Froſtes, the which ſhall deſtroy the Trées, the Vines, the Oyles, and the fruits, the Summer ſhall be méetely temperate, the harueſt time ſhall be drye, the Dates & other Corne ſhall be good cheap, all garden hearbs ſhall be cheap enough, and fleſh ſhall be good cheap, many olde people ſhall dye. Feuer tertians ſhall grieue ſore the world, and ſhall be ſicke through euill heate: and many murmurations, warres and murthers ſhall be done by one againſt the other, and neighbours againſt neighbours, and many other cauſes ſhall be oftentimes committed and done.
               
            
            
               
               Of the ſignification of Thunder on euery day in the weeke.
               If it Thunder on the Sunday, there will be a great death of Clarks & Iudges and alſo peruerſe people by ſignification.
               If on the Munday it chance to Thunder, many women ſhall dye then, and the corne will ſuffer Eclipſe, by ſignification.
               If it Thunder on the Tueſday, it béetokeneth great plentie of corne.
               If on the Wedneſday it chance to thunder, it betokeneth that yéere common women and light wenches, & fooliſh women ſhal die, & then ſhalbe great bloudſheding.
               It it Thunder on the Thurſday, then ſhall be great cheape and much plentie of Corne.
               If on the Friday it chance to thunder it béetokeneth that a great man ſhall bée ſlaine, and diuers other murthers, and other perils.
               If on Saterday it chance to thunder, it betokeneth that then ſhall bée a great generall peſtilence, plague, whereof many ſhall dye.
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſaying of Erra Pater to the Huſbandman.
               IF the day of Saint Paule be cleere,
               Then ſhall betide an happie yeere:
               If it doe chaunce to ſnow or raine,
               Then ſhall bee deare all kinde of graine.
               But if the winde then bee a loft,
               Warres ſhall vex this realme full oft:
               And if the cloudes make dark the Skie,
               Both Neate and Fowle this yeere ſhall dye.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            Heereafter followeth the Reignes of the Kings of England, ſince King William the Conquerour.
            KIng William Conquerour, began his reigne the xiiii. of October, in the yéere 1066. and dyed the ix. of September, the yéere 1087. and was buried at Cane in Normandie.
            K. William Rufus béegan his reigne the 9. day of September, in the yéere 1087.

               and died the firſt of Auguſt, in the yéere. 1100. and was buried at Wincheſter.
            K. Henry the firſt began his reigne the firſt day of Auguſt, in the yéere 1100 & died the ſecond of December, in the yéere 1135 and was buried at Redding.
            K. Stephen began his reigne the ſecond day of December, in the yéere 1135 and died the 25 day of October in the yéere 1154 and was buried at Feuerſham.
            K. Henry the ſecond began his reigne the xxv day of October in the yéere 1154 and died the vi day of Iuly, in the yéere 1189 and was buried at Font Euerard.
            K. Richard the firſt, béegan his reigne the vi. day of Iuly, in the yéere 1189, and died the vi day of Aprill, in ye yéere 1199 and was buried at Font Euerard.
            K. Iohn began his reigne the vi. day of Aprill 1199 and died the xix of October 1216 and was buried at Worceſter.
            K. Henry the third began his reigne the 19 of October 1216 died the 16. of Nouember 1272, buried at Weſtminſter.
            K. Edward the firſt began his reigne the xvi. of Nouember 1272. died the ſeauenth of Iuly 1307. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
               
               K. Edward the ſecond béegan his reigne the vii. of Iuly, 1307. dyed the xxv. of Ianuarie. 1326. buried at Gloceſter.
            
            
               K. Edward the third, béegan his reigne the xxv, of Ianuarie, 1326 dyed the xxi day of Iune, 1377. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            
               K. Richard the ſecond béegan his reigne the xxi. of Iune, 1377 died the xxix. of September, 1399. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            
               K. Henry the fourth began his reigne xxix. of September, 1399. dyed the xx. day of March, 1412. buried at Canterburie.
            
            
               K. Henry the fift béegan his reigne the xx. of March, 1412. dyed the 31 of Auguſt 1422. buried at Winſor.
            
            
               K. Henry the ſixt béegan his reigne the 31. of Auguſt, 1422. dyed the 4. of March 1460. buried at Winſor.
            
            
               K. Edward the fourth béegan his reigne the fourth of March, 1460. dyed the ix. of April, 1483 buried at Winſor.
            
            
               K. Edward the fiſt began his reigne the ix. of April, 1483. dyed the 15. day of Iune 1483.
            
               K. Richard the third béegan his reigne the 22 of Iune, 1483. dyed the 22. of Auguſt, 1485. buried at Leyceſter.
            
            
               
               K. Henry the ſeauenth began his reigne the 22. of Auguſt, 1485. dyed the 22. of April, 1509. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            
               K. Henry the eight began his reigne the 22. of April, 1509. died the 28. of Ianuary 1546. buried at Winſor.
            
            
               K. Edward the ſixt began his reigne the 28. of Ianuarie, in the yéere 1546. and died the vi day of Iuly, in the yéere 1553. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            Quéene Mary began her reigne the vi. day of Iuly, 1553. dyed the 17. of Nouember, 1558. buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            Quéene Elizabeth began her reigne the 17. day of Nouember, in the yéere of our Lord God 1558. Died the 24. of March 1602. Buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            King Iames began his reigne the 24. of March, 1602. To whom GOD graunt long to reigne. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A rule to know when the Termes begin and end, with their Returnes.
            
               Hillarie Terme beginneth the xxiij. of Ianuarie, and endeth the xij. or xiij day of February, & hath foure returnes: that is Oct. Hill. Qui. Hill. Cra. Pur. Octa. Pur.
            
            
               Eaſter Terme beginneth xvij daies. after Eaſter day, & endeth the munday her
                  •
                after the Aſcention day, & hath fiue returnes: that is, Qui. Paſ. Tre. Paſ. Men. Paſ. Qui. Paſ. Cra. Aſc.
            
            
               Trinitie Terme beginneth the Fryday next after Trinitie Sunday, & endeth the Wedneſday fortnight after, & hath foure returnes, that is, Cra. Tri. Octa. Tri. Qui. Tri. Tre. Tri.
            
            
               Michaelinas Terme beginneth the ix. or x day of October, & endeth the xxviij or xxix of Nouember, and hath viij. returnes: that is, Oct. Mi. Qui. Mi. Tres. Mi. Menſe Mi. Cra. Ani. Cra. Mar. Octa. Mar. Qui. Mar.
            
            Eight daies before any Terme begin the Erche. openeth, except Trinitie Terme, for then it openeth but foure daies before.
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   