
      
         
            
            
            
               A FAYTHFVLL
and moost Godlye treatyse concernyng
the most sacred Sacrament of the blessed
body and bloude of our sauioure Chryst,
cōpiled by Ihon Caluyne, a man of no lesse lernyng
and lytterature then Godly studye,
and example of liuyng. And translated
into Latin by Lacius a man of lyke
excellencie. And nowe last of all,
translated into Englyshe by a
faythfull brother, no lesse
desirous to profyt the
weake brotheres
then to exercise
the talent
of
the Lorde to his honoure and glorye.
In declaration whereof, he hath
set before this lytle booke an
Epistle to the reader much
more effectuous then in
the fyrst edicion.
            ☞ Whereunto the order that the
Churche and congregation of
Christ in Denmarke doth
vse at the receyuyng
of Baptisme, the
Supper of ye
Lorde, and Wedlocke:
is added.
            Myles Couerdale.
            
               Luke .xix. Chapter.
               ¶Be doyng tyll I come.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶To all them that professe the
christian name, the translatour wysheth mercy
from God the father through our onelye
aduocate & mediatour Iesu Christe,
whose spirite (the gyuer of all
godnesse) leade you in
to all gostlye
knowledge.
Amen.
*
            AS the authoure of thys lytle
boke moued wyth the desyre
to profyte as wel the rude and
vnlearned as the lettered and
professers of knowlege, wrote
it in his vulgare tongue: euen
so I (moste dearelye beloued bretherne) moued
also wyth the desyre to brofyte my naturall
countremen so much as shal lye in my litle power
haue thought it my bounden deuty to employe
my diligence to the translatyng therof.
            And bycause it hath pleased the lorde to giue
me more knowledge in the latyne tongue then
in the frence (wherin thys boke was fyrste
wrytten) I haue translated it after the Latine
copy, putting the faythful reader out of doubt
that I haue not in any poynte gone from the
true meanynge of the authoure, but haue thorowly
obserued the phrases of both tongues,
auoydynge in all that I myght the darke maner
of translatynge after the latine phrases, to
the intente the Englyshe reader myghte haue
the full vnderstandynge hereof wythout anye
knowledge of the latyne tongue And that the
Godly myndes of the studiouse readers may
be the more steated to reade the matter wyth

indifferent iudgement, I shal without dissimulacion
assure them that herein is no matter of
contencion at all. But cheritably wythout any
worde of reproche as well the ryght vse of the
Sacrament of the body and bloude of Christ,
as the abuses and errours concernynge the
same, are sette forth so playnelye that no man
(vnlesse he wyl wyllingly shutte vp the eyes of
his cōscience agaynst the manifest trouth) can
reade the boke thorowlye, but he shall easelye
perceyue what greate abuses haue these syxe
hundreth yeares ben, and are at thys presente
daye mayntened and defended as concernynge
the ministracion therof.
            Fyrste for that the popyshe churche haue
and do abuse it in offeryng it vp as an healthfull
sacrifyce for the redemption of the soules
of the congregatiō, for in theyr Cannon (why
the they cal the secretes of the masse) are these
wordes. Pro redemptione animarum ecclecietue.
That is to saye, for the redemption of the
soules of thy churche, where they holde opinion
and teach, that by offerynge vp thys sacrifice
(as they cal it) they applye to, or make partakers
of the passion of Christe, all them that
here or hyre suche masses as they haue inuented
dashed full of whysperynges, douckynges
and crossynges besydes the demure countenaūce
in theyr tourne and halfe tourne. I wyl
speake no more as concerninge theyr fonde inuencions
aboute the ministration of this most
sacred Sacrament. Lest I should therby be an
offence or stomblynge stocke to the weake brothers
whose consciences are not yet fullye satisfyed
as concernynge the true beleue of thys
holy mistery, I meane leste I shoulde gyue thē
occasion to do, as certeyne fonde talkers haue

of late dayes done and at thys presente daye
do inuent and applye to thys mooste holy Sacramente,
names of dispitie and reproche, as
to cal it Iake in the boxe, & rounde Roben, and
suche other not onely fonde but also blas phemouse
names, not onely voyed of al edificaciō
(whiche ought to be the ende of al our doinges
and sayinges) but very sclaūderouse also. For
thoughe the thynge beynge so tourned frome
the ryght vse as it is, be abhominable, so that
it is l
                  •
               afull for vs to speake vnreuerentlye of
it in the abuse: yet is it not mete for them that
professe charitie, nothinge to refrayne for conscience
sake. The cōscience I say of the weake
brothers not yet stronge in the trueth and so
muche the more for that many Godly mynded
persones (whiche by the persuasions of certeyne
discrete and modeste brothers, haue ben
made, of Romyshe Idolaters and diligent studentes
of duncicall dregges, disciples of greate
hope in the sincere and trewe euangelyke doctrine)
haue by the hearynge of these names of
reproch and dispitte, taken occasion to thynke
that the knowledge which those men dyd professe
(whiche woulde be so outragiouse as to
mocke and iest at the remembraunce of our redempcion)
coulde not procede of the spirite of
God. And haue throughe thys persuasion, retourned
to theyr olde leuen agayne, thynkyng
them to be the trew teachers of gods doctrine
whiche offende in the contrarye, makinge it so
diuine a thynge that it shoulde be of no lesse
importaūce then the whole Trinitie, the father
the sōne and holy gost, for so they affirme sayinge,
that for as muche as it is the bodye of
Christe, and that Christ is in al places at ones
with his father, and his father wyth hym and

the holy goste: it muste neades folowe that in
it is the whole trinitie, the father, the sonne
and the holy goste. For these are not, nor can
not be seperated.
            I wyll saye for these men that they haue the
zeale of god, but it is not accordinge to knowledge.
For as the Iewes (were from tyme to
tyme,Act. vii. taught and beleued that God dwelled in
the temple that Solomon buylded) coulde not
abyde to heare that God shoulde not dwell in
a temple made wyth mannes hande, nothynge
consyderyng that he is immensus and can not
be conteyned (for heauen is his seate, and the
earth his fote stole) euen so these men through
a fonde persuasion of the essenciall presence of
Christe in the Sacramente: can not abyde to
heare that the whole trinitie shoulde not be really
conteyned vnder a piece of breade, yea vnder
euery litle crombe therof. I speke not thys
as one puttinge no difference betwene that sacramentall
breade and oure comon breade, but
that I maye therby declare and open the great
blyndnesse of them that knowyng and confessyng
the immensurable nature of God, would
haue hym reallye and naturallye conteyned in
so small a thynge.
            Heauen is my feate (sayth he) and the earth
is my fote stole, and yet wyll they trusse hym
so shorte that they wyll brynge hym into alytle
pire wherin a man can not tourne his fyste.
            He fylleth all places, and is conteyned in
no place, and yet wyll they at theyr pleasure
place hym in the chalyce, he was neuer visible
to the mortall eye, and yet wyll they make him
appere at euerye knaues requeste that wyll do
as other men do, I meane paye theyr ordinarye
shote, and so doyinge he shall not onelye se

him but also eate him vp euerye morsell
I woulde the men woulde delygentlye peruse
the wordes of saynt Augustine in theyr legēde
on Corpus Christi daye, whiche are these taken
out of the. xxvi. treatyse vpon Iohan.S. August.
He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud
tarieth in me and I in hym. To eate that meat
therefore, and to drinke that drinke, is to tarye
in Christe and to haue Christe tariynge in vs.
And by this he that taryeth not in Chryste and
in whom Chryst tarieth not: no doubt he doth
not spiritually eate his fleshe, nor drynke hys
bloude, al thoughe he do carnallye, and visibly
crushe with his teeth the sacrament of y• body
and bloude of Chryste but he dothe rather eate
and drynke, to his damnacion, the sacrament
of so noble a thyng. Here is your transsubstanciacion
vtterlye denyed. For saynt Augustine
putteth a plaine difference betwene the sacrament
and the, thinge it selfe. Agayne the same
Angustine, in the same place addeth these wordes.
The sacrament of thys thinge, that is of
the vnitie of the body and bloude of Christe is
in some places prepared euerie day, in some other
places but certayne dayes as on the sundaye,
and is taken of the table of the Lorde, to
some persons, to life, to some other to destruction
but the thynge it selfe, in to all persones,Note.
to lyfe, and to destruction to no man, that may
be pertaker therof, What nedeth it to reherse
anye mo wytnesses, seynge these are sufflicyent,
eyther to proue saynte Augustine an heretyke,
other else to declare thys transsubstanciacion
to be bothe foolyshe and abominable.
            Both for that it trusse the together the diuinytie,
and inlargethe the humanytye, beyonde all
measure, thrutchyng vp into a corner ye
               arte

whiche no place can conteyne, and settynge at
libertie to be in all places, that whyche muste
nedes be in one place onely. Yf euery man wyl
folowe his conscience in this matter I doubte
not but they shal sone be persuaded how farre
wyde thys transsubstanciacion is frome the
trueth. But nowe take they holde of the wordes
of the Lorde at the fyrst institucion of this
mooste sacred Sacrament, whiche are these.
            Thys is my bodye, whiche shall be delyuered
for you. This is my bloude which shall be
shed for you & many into remission of synnes.
What natural, essencial, and real presēce they
buylde vpon these wordes, is abundantlye declared
in the Byshoppe of Wynchester and
docter Smythes bokes.
            I shall therefore mooste humblye desyre the
readare vtterlye to shake of all supersticious
                  •
               
perswacyous of olde v
                  •
               ages, geueynge hym
selfe wholy to y• teachyng of the spirite of god
who teacheth inwardlye in the herte, all them
that geue ouer them selues to hys teachynge
& informacion. And I for my part yelding me to
y• same spirite, shal in this case wryte y• thynge
onelye, whyche my conscience shall geue me to
be of the spirite of the lyuynge God, and my
trust is that the good spirite of god is my leadare.
As concernynge the vnderstandynge of
the wordes of Christe, you shall knowe that
the maner of teachyng is double, that is to say
by wordes and by signes.
            By wordes we teache when we declar
                  •
               
vnto the hearers, by wordes, the th
                  •
               nge that
we woulde they shoulde know. By signes we
teache when we do some thynge whethy the
beholders may gather our meaynyng: 
                  〈…〉
               
quiniꝰ superbꝰ dyd when he strake of the toppes

of the hyghest poppyes, declaringe therby
that his aduise was to haue the greatest rulers
beheaded. We teach also both by words & by
sygnes, when we adde vnto the wordes some
action to declare & as it were to expounde the
wordes withall.Act. xxi. As is mencioned in the Actes
of the apostles of a prophete whiche declared
vnto Paule the persecution he shoulde indure
at Hierusalem whyther he was goyng, and to
make the matter more playne, he toke Paules
gyrdle frō aboute hym and 
                  •
               yed hys feete with
all sayinge: the man whose gyrdle this is, shal
be thus boūden at Hierusalem. Euen so (good
christian brethren) our sauioure Christe, wyllynge
to declare to hys apostles, the wonderfull
paticipation that all faythfull christians
shoulde haue in hys bodye and bloude: toke
breade whyche is the chyefe, and in scripture
compted the onely foode of the bodye of man,
and when he had (after his accustomed maner)
gyuen thankes, he blessed, not crossynge the
breade wyth the thre hynder fyngers hauynge
the forefynger and the thombe faste ioyned to
gether. No he made no synge of the crosse at
all. For, to make the sygne of the crosse was in
those daies none other, then it is now to make
the sygne of a galowe tree. He blessed therfore
after the maner that the fathers the prophetes
& patriarkes vsed, that is, he innocated & called
vpon y• name of his father, desyring him toac
cōply she inuisibly in all hys faythfull dearlynges,
the thynge whych he intēded to declare vnto
them by y• vysible signe. Thē sayd he to his
apostles, take ye, eat ye, this is my body, which
shalbe delyvered for you. Not meanynge that
he had chaūged the nature of bread into the nature
of fleshe, makynge the bread that he helde

in hys hande hys naturall bodye, for then had
he geuen vnto them a mortall & corruptible bodye
to eate whych thynge is so moche vngodlye
that very nature abhorreth it. But he gaue
them the bread to eate, saynge: thys is my bodye,
which shalbe delyuered for you.No
                     •
                  . I became
man for none other purpose, but y• my bodye
shoulde be torne & rent for to satifye for youre
synnes, y• your soules might be fedde and haue
lyke participation therof, as your bodies haue
of this bread, and you (whych be my faythful)
are as this breade is, one bodye made of many
bodies, for euery litle graine wherof this bread
is made, is of hym selfe a bodye, and yet ioyned
to gether they are but one body. In like maner
you that beleue in me thoughe ye be many, yet
ioyned together by fayth ye are but one bodye
I am your head. This mistery can you not vnderstande
with out some visible signe whyche
may represent vnto you y• veritie therof, take
ye thys bread therfore and knowe for certentie
that like as it is one so are ye one if ye remaine
in faith. And as it nourisheth the body, so doth
my passion nouryshe the soule whyche hath no
lyfe but in me & by me. In lyke maner when he
had supped, he toke y• cuppe saying, take ye, &
drynke ye all of this, this is the cuppe of y• new
testament in my bloude, whych shalbe shed for
you and many into remissiō of sinnes. Do this
so ofte as you dryncke in my remembraunce,
An other signe to declare thys misterye by.
            Thys cuppe of wyne is but one body, and yet
is it made of many grapes, and so are you but
one bodye althoughe you be manye, so longe
as you be ioyned together by fayth. It comforteth
the herte and the lyuely spirites of the bodye,
and so doth my bloude shed on the crosse

comforte the soule. By thys action haue I declared
vnto you the misterie of the paticipation
you haue in me by fayth. Use you the same
that thys your delyueraunce by me may neuer
slippe out of your mynde. We haue eaten the
lambe whyche putteth vs in remembraunce of
the wonderfull delyueraūce out of the captiuitie
in Egypte, whyche was done more then a
thousande yeares paste. So shall you eat thys
bread and drynke this cuppe in remembruance
of your redemption and deliueraūce our of the
spiritual Egipte, and from the spiritual Pharao
the dyuell. And when you shalbe demaunded
what you meane, by this eatynge & drynkynge,
you shall saye. We where through the
synne and transgression of the fyrst man Adā,
made bonde mē and captynes to the dyuel, out
of whyche bondage we could by no meanes be
delyuered tyll it had pleased God the father to
sende hys onelye begotten sonne to take oure
nature vpon hym, that he myght dye and be an
acceptable sacryfyce to pacyfye the fathers
wrathe. Wherfore the night before he suffered
he declared vnto vs by these visyble sygnes,
what cōmunyon we haue in hym of all that euer
he deserued for vs. And then he cōmaūded
vs to vse the same bycause we shoulde be alwayes
put in remembraunce of that our redemption
and delyueraunce, none other wyse them
Moyses dyd to the Israelytes the nighte before
he dyd by the wonderfull myght of God,
brynge them out of the greate captiuytie wher
in they were holden in Egypt. The wordes of
saynt Paule to the corhinthians, do teach no
lesse them I haue here wrytten. For he sayeth,i. Corhin. xi.
so often as you eate thys breade and drynke
this cup, you shal declare the death of the lorde

tyll he come. And therfore who so euer eateth
of thys bread, or drynketh of thys cup vnworthely
doth eate and drynke hys owne dampnation.
Here is a playne declaration of the ende &
purpose of Christ when he instituted this most
sacred sacramēt. Forsoth to kepe in remēbrāce
hys mooste dolorouse death & preciouse bloude
moste plēteously shed vpō the crosse. And who
so euer eateth & drinketh it vnworthly (that is
to saye for any other purpose thē for the same
it was ordeined for) the same eateth & drinketh
hys owne dāpnation. I thynke not contrarie
but y• moste men wyl thynke this a straūge interpretation
of this place (for as moche as the
moste auncient (yea all) ye doctours that make
any mencion of this place, and Caluine hym
selfe in this boke whyche I haue translated)
do applye the vnworthynesse in receyuynge of
thys Sacrament, to the vnpenitent hert of the
persone whiche receyueth it. And in very dede
such one is farre vnworthy to receyue so worthy
a Sacrament for as much as he is not the
membre nor seruaunt of Christ, but a membre
of the deuyll and seruaunt to synne. And thys
interpretation is no lesse godly then fruitfull.
For therby are the membres of Christe put in
feare to presume to come to the table of the
lorde vnlesse they haue fyrst examined & found
them selues the trewe membres of Christe, indued
and adorned with perfyt faith, hope and
charitie. But yf we wyl go to the natyue sence
of the text: we shal perceyue, that in this place
Paule speaketh of the small regarde the Corhinthians
had to thys mooste sacred Sacrament,
not vsyng it wyth so much reuerence as
they ought to do. For he addeth these wordes.
Puttynge no difference of the Lordes body.

As he shoulde haue sayed esteamyng it nothing
better then the cōmune bread wherwyth
they fedde theyr bodyes. The phrase of speakyng
gyueth this interpretation, for yf I say.
This man was not worthely enterteyned. I
meane not that the partie whiche enterteyned
him was not worthye to enterteyne so noble a
man: but that he was not vsed as was beseamyng
for such a mā to be vsed. So that to receyue
the Sacramēt vnworthely, is to receyue
it otherwyse or for an other purpose then it
oughte to be receyned for, y• is after any other
forme or for any other purpose then y• wordes
of y• first institutiō do declare. For whē ye vse
of good thinges is altred frō y• purpose & ende
they were fyrste ordeyned for: then are they vnworthely
handled. Al they therfore whyche do
priuately receyue the Sacramēt, eyther to merite
them selues or other, other that do make it
a sacrifyce for the redemption of synne, or to
pacify goddes wrathe in any cōdition, or after
any other forme, or for any other purpose thē
is declared in the wordes of the fyrst institution:
do receyue it to theyr dampnation, putting
no difference of the Lordes bodye, but vsynge
it as a matter of marchaundyse, or occupacion
to get theyr lyuynge vpon. They onely receyue
it worthely, which receiue it as a most worthy
Sacrament and signe representynge vnto vs
the cōmunion and partipacion we haue in all
that euer Christe dyd or purchased for vs, by
taking our nature, & sufferyng therin al maner
of moste miserable afflicions, & finally, by hys
mooste cruel and dolorouse death. Therfore to
hoyse it ouer theyr heades, to daunce it ouer
the cuppe, to cary it in the stretes wyth a great
pompe and glorye, to bowe theyr knees and to

knocke theyr breastes before it, and to locke it
vp in a pire to haue it ready to serue at al houres,
all suche chapmen as shall cal for it: is but
a polytyke caste of the marchauntes whyche
displeye and set abrode to be sene suche marchaundyse
as they woulde faynest sel As they
do offende whiche neglecte and contemne thys
moste holy mistery, esteaming it no better then
the comon breade wherewyth ou
                  •
               e bodyes be
fedde: so do they also offende whiche honoure
it wyth diuine honoure, makynge it therby an
ydol of all other moste to be abhorred both for
that (as they vse it) it is a playne Antichriste,
spoylynge Christe of his victorye atchyued by
the ones offeryng of hym felfe for all: and al
                  •
               o
for that it pulleth the beleauers theron, from
the true adoracion of God the father, and maketh
them to ho
                  •
               our for the inuisible, immēse,
and eternall god, that visible, mensueable, and
corruptible breade & wyne. Yea (as they vse it)
it is not the communion of Christes body and
bloude at all, but a fonde inuencion of theyr
owne. For Christe dyd not make so manye
crossynges and blessinges and then eate it vp
all him selfe. But we must beleue that they recey
                  ••
               
it for vs and in all oure names.
            We must beleue that theyr receauynge of it is
the application of Christes merites to vs. We
must beleue that they can therby releue y• soules
in y• bytter paynes of purgatory. We must
beleue that oure beynge presente at this theyre
sacrifice (as they cal it) shal geue vs good spead
in all oure affayres, be they neuer so deuely she.
We must beleue that a priest, (beynge neu
                  ••
                so
vngodly in hys lyuinge, neuer so much subiect
vnto synne, neuer so much the deuels member)
is the ministre of God, and that hys prayer &

sacrifice in the masse is acceptable to God. In
fine, we must beleue that theire masses be of
strēgth to purchayse the assistence of god in all
dayngers, and a present remedy against plage,
penurye, and all diseases both of man & beast,
agaynst warres, robberyes and all incursions
of enemies both bodely and gostely. How can
these assertions stande wyth the cōmunion of
Christes body and bloude? dyd Christe shewe
the bread to his apostles and then eate it hym
selfe to certifye their consciences therby? Dyd
he byd any one of them, take bread and wyne &
shew them to the residewe of the faythfull so
ofte as they woulde cōmunicate hys body and
bloud: and then eate and dryncke all hym selfe
in stiede of all the faythfull that shoulde be present?
I thynke no man is so muche wythoute
shame ones to thynke it. But I knowe y• 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
of theyr erroure. They say that as Christ was
the hygh priest or bysshop, to ministre vnto his
apostles the communion of his body & bloude,
whych he dyd in dead offer on the crosse to his
father: so dyd he ordayne hys apostles and in
them all that shoulde succede them: priestes to
offer vp the selfe same (saye they) to applie the
sacrifice done by Chryste wyth the merites of
the same, to thē that are present ther at, or that
shall by any meanes haue it done for them. Oh
blynde bussardes. Where are youre spirituall
eyes become? Dyd Christe (beynge the hyght
priest) distribute the bread to his apostles, to y•
intent that they, & all other theyr successoures
                  •
               
should shew the bread and wyne to the people,
and thē eate and drynke all them selues? A mā
that hathe so moche gostely knowledge as the
grayne of a mustarde seed, woulde not faile to
saye that Christ ment rather that the Apostles
and priestes shoulde distribute the breade and

wyne amonge the faythfull people, wyssynge
them to certifye them selues thereby that they
are partakers of the body and bloud of Christ.
For what sayth the text? So ofte as you shall
do thys: ye shall do it in the remembraunce of
me. But what was it that they shoulde do in
the remembraunce of hym? For soeth diuide
bread and wyne amongeste them. The priuate
receynynge of the breade and wyne therfore:
can by no meanes stande wyth the institucion
of Christe: whiche was, that accordynge to his
example, we shoulde by the diuidynge of bread
and wyne amongeste vs: certifye oure selues
that we are all partakers wyth Christe in hys
redempcion through the raūsome that he payd
for vs on the crosse. Howe standeth thys with
our heareynge of masse (to the intent to spede
the better thereby) when we go aboute oure
worldely businesses, be they honeste or vnhonest,
godly or vngodly? Forsoeth (I suppose)
euen as much as the carying of bread in mans
pourse (in the nyghte tyme, or in a tempest) ser
               
                  •
               eth
to kepe hym from blastynge wyth euyll
ayres. So that I dare be bolde to affirme, that
this heareynge of masse is no better then me
                  •
               e
supersticion, and the masse it selfe, so farre frō
the i
                  •
               stitucion of Christe: that it seameth not
to be any parte of the cōmemoracion of Christes
passion: But a mere inuention of man,

                  ••
               epte into the churche by the subtyll suggestion
of our moste cruell and maliciouse enemye
the deuyll, who hath alwayes endeuoured to
poysone all the holsome foode of mans soule,
as it appeareth ryghte well by the great abuse
that thys moste sacred Sacramente is grouen
vnto. Thys was and ought to be so necessary
a foode to the soule: that without it no christian

can 
                  •
               arie in Christ, nother haue Christ tary
ynge in him, wherby it is playne that without
thys foode no soule, hath any lyffe in it. For
Christe is the lyfe that is in the christian soule.
No lesse necessarye therfore is thys foode to
the soules of the cōgregacion: thē sinewes
be to the bodye to holde the ioynetes togyther.
Our aduersarye therefore coulde in no case be
quiet tyll he had poysoned thys so necessarye
foode, corruptinge therin the vertue & strength
to vnitte and knytte the christians to Christe
theyr heade, makynge it of force to draw them
quytte from hym, by puttyng theyr confidence
in it, trustyng to redeame theyr synnes by ofte
offeryng vp therof, in so much that they fel to
foundynge of Abbayes, chauntreis, and anniuersaries:
for the saluacion of theyr soules, for
so was it alwayes specifyed and condicioned
in the wrytynges made betwene the founders
of suche abbayes, chauntries, and anniuersaryes:
and the receyuers of the yerelye rentes,
gyuen to that vse. Yea rather abuse
            And in thys miserable estate hath it continued
euen these .vi. hundreth yeres, poysonynge the
soules of them that shoulde haue bene fedde
therby. But here must I beware that our enemye
do not poysone these wordes of myne also,
causeynge men to vnderstande me as one
that woulde deny it to be possible for any man
to tarye in Christe or to haue Christe taryinge
in hym vnlesse he receyue these visible sacramentes
or signes breade and wyne. No doubte
(christian reader) the belefe & truste in Christe,
is the mea
                  •
               e wherby Christ taryeth in vs and
we in hym. But thys beliefe and trust are established
and confirmed by the vse of these visi
               
                  •
               le
signes. As thys beliefe and truste therfore,

are necessarye to the abydynge in Chryst: so is
the vse of these holye Sacramentes also, for
that it is the establyshment and confirmyng of
the sayd beleue and trust. To all them therfore
to whom this beleue and trust are necessarie:
are these sacred Sacramentes also necessary.
Where vpon I conclude that all Christians
which are of age and discresion to deserne the
fayth in Chryst: ought also to vse these moost
holy Sacramentes to establyshe and confyrme
thys fayth withall. And Chryst knowyng the
weakenes of manne, and howe hard it was to
beate into his head the vnderstandyng of the
hygh mystery of the perticipation and communion
that all faythfull shoulde haue in hys merites:
vsed these visible signes, that we myght
in them (euen with oure senses) perceyue this
wonderful distribucion of the body and bloud
of Chryst amonge his faythfull, whyche oure
grosse nature coulde no more compasse wythout
these visible sygnes, then the carnall and
fleshly Iewes coulde when Chryst tolde them
of the eatyng of his flesh and drynkyng of his
bloud by beleuyng in hym. To helpe our wekenes therfor, it pleased the almyghtie wysdome
of the Lorde, to declare vnto vs by our senses,
the thyng that ye same senses caused the Iewes
to abhorre. The maner I saye of oure perticipation
and communion in Chryst and all that
euer he deserued for vs. For euen as we se that
we beyng many are partakers of one loofe of
breade, by eatynge therof, and of one cuppe of
wyne by drynkyng thereof: so are we certified
by that participation, that we (beyng manye)
beleuynge in Chryst: are by that belefe, made
partakers of Chryste, and wyth Chryste in al
that is his, none otherwyse then all the membres

of one bodye be partakers of all ioyes
and pleasures that chaunce to the heade. For
as the lofe wherof we eate is made of manye
graynes: and the Cuppe of wyne wherof we
drynke is made of manye grapes, and yet is
but one Cuppe of wyne, and the lofe but one
lofe: euen so are we that beleue in Christe, but
one bodye wyth hym and he oure heade, notwythstandyng
we be manye in numbre, and
of diuerse nacions, estates and condicions.
            For as in the body be diuers mēbers seruynge
to diuers vses:i. Corhin. xi
                     •
                  . so are there in the congregacion
of Christe (whyche Paule calleth the bodye
of Christe) diuers estates. Some Apostles,
some preachers, and some teachers.
            And as in the bodye is no membre wher vnto
is not appoynted hys peculiare and necessarye
office: So in the congregacion of Christ
is there none estate or condicion but it is profitable,
yea necessarye to the other. Thys is
a greate misterye (sayeth Paule) the misterye
I saye of Christe and hys congregacion, for
it is hys bodye,Thesalo. v. of hys fleshe and of hys bones.
Not that the congregacion or churche
is that naturall bodye that dyed on the crosse,
nor we (the members of the same churche)
the fleshe and bones of the same: But for
that it was that congregacion, it was we (the
membres of thys churche) that caused Christe
to take oure nature vpon hym, that therein
he myghte satisfye for oure synnes, makynge
vs partakers wyth hym in thys satisfaction,
and so are we hys bodye and membres,
that is to saye, hys bodye and membres
were, and are the pryce wherewyth we were
redeamed out of the captiuitie and thrawledome
that we were in▪ Thys misterye

is greate, and farre aboue the beastelye mans
capacitie. But yf we wyll be geuen to the spirite:
the spirite shall minister vnto vs abundauntly,
the vnderstandinge therof. For it is
a comon phrace or maner of speakynge amongeste
vs when anye hath bestowed his money
vpon any kynde of marchaundyse, we saye,
Lo, here is my .xx.li. or here are his hundreth
markes, showynge forth the wares that were
bought wyth my .xx.li. or his hūdreth markes,
so that here the thynge boughte bearethe the
name of the price. In lyke maner doth Paule
call the cōgregacion redeamed by Chistes bodye:
his verie bodie, his fleshe and his bones,
because it is the machaūdice that was bought
with his bodie his fleshe and his bones. The
mooste sacred sacramentes, also of the bodye
and bloud of Christ: are called his body and
bloude, because they declare vnto vs, what
the bodie and bloude of Christ be vnto vs, none
other wyse then I call thys boke the suppet
of the Lorde, because it declareth the supper
of the lorde, so that here thou mayste se (gentle
readar) wherin thou hast bene so farte and
so longe deceyued. Forsoeth in that thou haste
not knowne nor consydered the causes why
these moste holy sacramentes beare the names
of that they represēt, shew or declare vnto vs▪
But haste grosselye persuaded thy selfe with
the carnall and fleshly Iewes, y• Christe spake
carnallye myndynge to tourne the substaunc
                  •
               
of the breade and wyne, into the substance o
                  •
               
his body and bloude: when he sayed vnto hi
                  •
               
disciples, thys is my bodye. But doubtless
                  •
               
(good christian brother) oure mooste cruel ene
                  •
               mye,
hath in thys poynt vttered euen the grea
                  •
               test
parte of his maliciouse practyse. He hat
                  •
               
               
not faylled alwayes to beate into oure heades
the omnipotencie of God, who coulde by his
worde make al thynges of nought, his veritie,
whyche wyll not suffer hym to leaue oughte
vndone that he sayeth is or shall be done, and
then his wordes at his laste supper. Thys is
my hody &c. Here laboureth he wyth toeth and
nayle (as they saye) to kepe vs in the playne
letter that we measure not these wordes by
the scriptures of lyke phrace.Note the subtyltie of the deuyll. The veritie it
selfe (sayeth he) hath spoken it, wherfore it can
not be otherwise. The onely almyghtye which
created all thynges by his worde, hath sayed
it: it is not therfore impossible that it shoulde
be so. Thou arte a christian man and hast professed
to beleaue all the wordes of Christe to
be trewe, though thy reasone can not comprehende
the maner howe. And wylte thou wyth
the carnal and fleshly Iewes doubt in the perfourmance
of the wordes that thy Sauioure
shall speake? He sayed that a vyrgyne shoulde
brynge forth a chylde: and wylte not thou beleaue
it bycause thou canste not by reasone be
persuaded that it is possible for a vyrgyne to
brynge sorth a chylde? what coulde the obstinate
Iewes do more, then blyndely and obstinately
saye: Howe can thys man gyue vs hys
fleshe to eate and hys bloude to drynke? And
wylte thou be as obstinate as they and thynke
it impossible for hym to gyue the his fleshe (yea
hys very naturall fleshe) and bloude vnder the
fourme of br
                  •
               ade and wyne? Oh subtylle serpent.
Oh crafty dissembler. Nowe chaungeste
thou thy selfe into an angell of lyghte. Thou

                  •
               adest the Iewes abhorre Christes wordes
bycause the law (whych they professed) taught
them that it was abominable to eate the rawe

fleshe or drynke the bloude of any beast, muche
more of a man. And bycause they shoulde not
consyder and vnderstande the spiritual eating
of his dodye and drynkynge of his bloude by
fayth: thou puttest them in mynde of the corruptible
Manna that the fathers dyd eate in
wyldernesse. And that, notwythstandyng, that
breade came from heauen: yet was it not of
suche lyuelye force that it myghte preserue the
eaters therof from death. Yea thou heldeste
them in opinion that it was not possible for
Christe to gyue them his fleshe to eate and his
bloude to drynke, after suche sorte that theyr
stomakes myght awaye wyth all. Wherfore
they sayed. Howe can this felowe gyue vs his
fleshe to eate and his bloude to drynke. But
here thou commest vnto vs with the contrary.
Thou byddest vs beleaue that he was able to
chaunge breade and wyne into his fleshe and
bloude that we myght therby awaye wyth the
deuouryng therof Thus thou playest on both
handes, wyth them bycause they shoulde not
loke for any spirituall eatynge or drynkyng of
Christes fleshe and bloude. And wyth vs, that
we shoulde not regarde the spirituall eatynge
and drynkynge, but that we shoulde moste regarde
the fleshely deuourynge of the bread and
wyne. So that neyther the Iewes nother we
                  •
               
can come to the trewe eating of Christes fleshe
and drynkyng of his bloud by vnfayned fayth
in hym and his merities. Here mayeste thou
playnely se (most dearely beloued in the lorde)
by what meanes our gostely enemy hath spoyled
vs of the vse of these mooste preciouse Iewelles,
the sacramentes of Christ
                  •
               s body and
bloude: and howe he laboureth daylye in hys
members (the wycked papistes) to wyth holde

from vs the knowledge of the spiritual eating
and drynkynge of Christe: whiche begynneth
nowe to spreade the worlde ouer all. Lette vs
runne therfore, vnto oure present and onelye
succour in thys greate daunger. To Christe I
saye let vs runne, moste humbly besekyng him
oure (Sauiour and redeamer) plenteouslye to
poure out, of his spirite of knowledge vpon
vs all, that we maye daylye more and more,
fynde out the hydde and secrete abhominacions,
to the vtter extirpacion and rowtyng out
of the same. And in the meane tyme let vs pray
to gyther that it may please the Lorde to augment
the nūbre of his faythful tournynge
Saules in to Paules that the harde
hertes, may be molified by hearing
the persecutours preach
Christ whom they persecuted.
The spirite of
truth be wyth
you al. So
be it.
            
               It is the spirite that quyckeneth, the
fleshe profiteth nothynge
at all. 
               Iohn .svi.
            
         
         
            
            FOr as moche as the most holye supper of
our lorde Iesu Christ hath of longe tyme
ben lapped vp in manyfold and great errours
and euen of late dayes wrapped in
many opinions and contentions, nothynge so
quiet as was besemyng: no meruayle thoughe
certayue weake conscienced persones, can not
wel determyne what thynge they ought chyflye
to folowe, but do, wyth indeferente and
suspense mynde, loke whan the seruauntes of
God settinge all contention a parte shall agree
amonge them selues, and brynge the matter
to some concorde and vnitie. And seynge that
such kynde of doubte hath no smal incommoditye
annexed, and that it is a thyngee mooste
dayngerouse, to haue no certayne determinacion
of that mistrye, the knowledge wherof is
so necessarye to our saluation: I haue thought
it a thynge moste profytable, bryeflye to spake
of the chiefe sume of the matter and yet playnlye
to declare what thynge we oughte chyeflye
to sticke vnto therin. More ouer, certayne honeste
men perceyuynge the matter to require
no lesse: desyred me earnestly to take it in hande
whose requeste I coulde by no meanes denye
vnlesse I wolde haue bene slake in doynge my
dutye. And that the difficultie therof may the
more easely be opened it is neadfull to declare
what order we intende to folowe herein.
            Fyrst I shall declare for what cause, and to
what ende, the Lorde hath instituted this most
holye sacramente. Then what 
                  •
               ruite we take
therof, and herein I wyll declare howe the bodye
of Chryst
                  •
                is geuen vs in it.
            Thyrdlye, what is the ryght vse therof.
Forthlye, I shall reherse the erroures and superslicions
wherby it hath ben defaced, and so

wyll I declare, howe the seruauntes of God
ought to differ from the papistes.
            Finallye, I wyll declare the originall of
that contencion, whiche hath ben so ernestlye
mayntayned euen of the same men whyche in
our time, haue applied al theyr studye to bring
the gospel to lyght agayne, to replenish againe
the congregatiō, and to restore the syncere and
pure doctryne. As concernynge the Fyrste
            When it pleased the almyghty oure God
by baptisme, to chose vs into the cōgregation,
that is to saye into his house whyche he wyll
nouryshe and defende: and that he hath receyued
vs, not onely as houshold seruauntes, but
also as his chyldren: it behoueth hym (yf he
wyl playe the parte of a good father) to bringe
vs vp, ministrynge vnto vs all thynges necessarye
to foode and clothynge.
            But as concernynge the thinges that pertayne
to the educacion of the bodye, bycause
they be common to all men, so that as well the
euyl persones as y• good be partakers therof:
they are not to be taken as for thynges appertaynyng
to his houshould onely. No doubt, in
that he feadeth and defendeth our bodies, and
whiles we be partakers of al those good thinges
which he most plēteously and liberally geueth
vs, is declared a great tokē of his father
               
                  •
               y
goodnes towarde vs. But in lyke maner as
the lyfe wherin he hath regenerate vs, is spi
               
                  •
               ituall:
so is it neadfull that the meate wherwith
we should be susteyned & strēgthed, be al
               
                  •
               o
spiritual. For we muste vnderstande, y• we
are not called to possesse the celestiall inheri
               
                  •
               aunce,
in tyme to come onely: but y• throughe

                  •
               ope we are in maner set in possession therof

                  •
               l ready. So y• he hath not onely promised vs

lyfe, but delyueringe vs from death, he hath al
ready ledde vs into it in very dede. And thys
thinge opteyned we, whē he begate vs a newe
wyth the sede of immortalitie, y• is to saye his
worde, whiche through the holy goste he hath
prynted & fastened in our hertes. That we ther
fore may defende & susteyne this lyfe, we must
not seke y• caducal & corriptible meates, wherwith
the bealy is fed: but we must prouide for
our soules much better & more excellent foode.
And the whole scripture witnesseth, y• the selfe
same wordes, wherby the lorde hath begotten
vs a new, is y• spiritual bread wherby our soules
are susteined & fedde: the reasone is this, by
cause in it, Christ our onely life is giuē & ministred
vnto vs. For when god would that al abundance
of lyfe, shoulde remayne in Christ to
the intent y• by hym, he myght make vs partakars
therof: he ordayned the worde also, wherby
Christ & all his mercyes myght be ministred
vnto vs. Thys sentence therfore is infallibly
true, that our soules are fed & nourished, wyth
none other foode then Iesu Christ.Not y• visible signes but y• thynges sign
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  d. Wherfore
the heauenly father being careful for our educacion,
gaue vs none other foode: yea rather
he committed thys vnto vs, singularly.
            And for as muche as it is sufficient ynoughe
for the recreacion and sustenaunce of our soules,
he wyll
                  •
               d vs to content oure selues therewith,
and that our soules shoulde rest t
                  •
               gether
therin: bycause we maye by no meanes be with
out that foode, whyche beynge taken awaye,
none other can be founde. Nowe do we perceyue
after what sort Christe is y• onely foode
wherwyth our soules be sedd
                  •••
               ut bycause he
is distributed vnto vs by the worde of y• lorde
as by the instrument appoynted for the same

purpose: he is named breade and wyne.
And that whyche is spoken of the worde, appertayneth
also to the sacrament of the supper,
wherby the Lorde leadeth vs vnto the partakyng
of Christ. For because we be so weake
and feble, that we can not (wyth vnfayned
trust of mynde) receyue hym, when he is offred
vnto vs in the bare preachyng of the doctrine:
the father of mercye wyllyng to accommodate
hym selfe vnto our infimitie therin,Our infirmitie was cause of y• sacramēt. hath ioyned
vnto the worde a signe to be sene with the
eyes, whereby he myght represent vnto vs the
very substance of his promesses, that al doubt
and wauerynge taken awaye, we myght be cō
               fyrmed
and strengthened in hym.
            Seynge therfore thys misterye is hyghe
and harde to attayne to: and that we can not
by witte comprehende, or by studye vnderstāde
howe the bodye and bloude of Christe maye be
communicate vnto vs: and that we be so rude
and ignoraunt, that we vnderstande not euen
the verye leaste of the diuine matters: it was
neadefull to declare and open thys misterye
after suche sorte as the abilitie of oure wytte
myght awaye wyth all.
            And for that cause dyd the Lorde institute the
supper▪ that he myght print in our consciences
those promesses wherwyth he hath in the gospell
promysed, to make vs partakers of hys
bodye and bloude: and that he myght establysh
vs in thys perswasion, our spiritual lyfe to be
remaynynge in hym, that we, receyuyng so noble
a pledge, maye conceyue a sure hope of saluation.
Forthermore, that we should be exercised
in acknowledgynge his great goodnes towardes
vs,Note 
                     〈◊〉
                   what ende the supper was instituted. & in celebratyng and settyng forth
of the same wyth all la
                  •
               de and prayse. Thyrdly,

that we should be prouoked to imbrace holynesse
and innoncencie,The vse of y• Sacrament. for as much as we acknowledge
oure selues to be the members of
Christe, and that aboue all other, we set forth
and maynteyne frendshyp and brotherly concorde,
wherof we haue an especial cōmaundement.
When we haue wel and diligently marked
these thre causes (to whyche no doubte the
Lorde had respecte when he instituted the supper)
an entrye shall be opened vnto vs that we
maye the better vnderstande what fruyte we
receyue therby, and by what meane we maye
vse it a ryght. We muste therfore nowe come
vnto the seconde parte, that we maye declare
what holsome fruyte the supper of the Lorde
bryngeth vnto vs: so we wyl vnderstande and
gather the same. And that shall we know whē
we wyll digentlye perpende oure owne greate
lacke which if succurreth. No remedy we must
neades be vehementlye troubled and vexed in
mynde, so often as we consyder what we are
our selues, and when we examyne al that is in
vs. For there is not one of vs that can fynde
so muche as one lytle crombe of iustice in hym
selfe:Of our selfe, we haue none other thynge but sinne. but contrarye wyse, we are defyled wyth
so many vices and wycked dedes, stouffed full
of so greate a multitude of synnes, that there
neadeth none other accuser then our owne conscience:
nother neadeth it to seke for any other
iudge to gyue sentence agaynste vs. Wherof
it foloweth, that the yre of God is styred agaynste
vs, and that none of vs can be able to
escape the iudgement of eternall death.
            And vnlesse we wyll be verye dreamars and
blockeheades no remedy we shal, through this
horrible cogitacion, be ve
                  •
               ed and troubled, as
it were wyth a continuall hel fyre. For we can

not remember the iudgmente of God, but incōtinent
oure owne damnation is before oure
else. We are therfore al redy swalowed vp by
the deuouring sincke of death, were it not that
almightie God delyuereth vs. And what hope
of resurrection may we haue whē we cōsyder
oure owne fleshe, so rotton and full of all corruption?
And therfore whether we consyder
body or soule, nothynge can be more miserable
then we are, so longe as we shall consyder but
oure selues onely: and whylse we perceyue so
great miseries, no remedye we must neades be
miserably tormēted, and affected with extreme
heauynesse. That the heauenly father therfore
myght succure thys oure calamitie, he gaue vnto
vs the supper, as a glasse wherin we myght
beholde Christe crucifyed and raysed agayne.
Crucified, that our sinnes might be forgynen.
Raysed agayne, that we delyuered from corruption
and deathe, myghte be restored to the
heauenly immortalitie.Folowe thys guyde. Thys singular consolacion
take we of the lordes supper, that it directeth
and leadeth vs vnto the crosse and resurrection
of Christe: that we maye knowe
for certentye, that we (although we be wycked
and vncleane) be acknowledged and receyued
of the lorde, yea and taken for iust: and that by
hym we are restored to lyfe notwithstandynge
that we be hedged in Wtin al kindnes of death:
and that we be replenished wyth all kynde of
felicitye, notwythstandyng that we be miserable
and ful of calamitie. Or to make the thyng
more playne. When there is no goodnesse at
all remaynyng in vs, neyther any one thynge,
of those thynges whiche shoulde helpe to the
op
                  •
               aynynge of saluacion: the supper doth abundauntly
wytnesse vnto vs, that we haue

               
                  •
               ptayned all thinges profitable and holsome,
in that we be partakers of the death and passion
of Chist, Wherfore we maye affirme, that
whiles the lorde admitteth vs in to the felowshyppe
of the goodes and richesses of Christe,
he opene
                  •
               h the treasorye of hys mercyes. Let
vs remember therefore that in the supper is
geuen vnto vs,The carnall ate can not see these thynges in this glasse. as it were a glasse, wherin we
may beholde Christe, crucifyed, to delyuer vs
from death and dampnacion and reysed vp agayne
to iustifye vs, and gyue vs lyfe euerlastyng
And all be it that the same mer
                  •
               cye is geuen
vnto vs in the Gospel: yet, for that in the
supper, we haue more certentie and fuller frui
               
                  •
               yon,
we can do no lesse but acknowledge that
we receyue thys profyte therof.
            But for bycause the merytes of Christe
appertayne nothynge vnto vs, vnlesse he him
selfe be ou
                  ••
               s before: it is mooste expedyente
that in the Supper he be geuen vnto vs, that
those thynges whereof we haue spoken, may
in verye dede,Not y• naturall substancd as 
                     •••
                  pysters do fa
                     ••
                  e. be perfourmed in vs. And therfore
haue I vsed to saye. That Christe is the
mattire and substaunce of the Sacramentes
and that the mercies and benefytes which we
gette by him, are the efficacie and strength therof.
To cōclude, the hole strength and energye
of the supper consisteth in this thinge, to confirme
the reconciliacion wyth God, made by
the death and passion of Christe. To certifye
vs that our soules be washed in his bloude, 
                  〈◊〉
               
that we be made iust throughe his obedience.
And 
                  •
               o conclude. To prynt surely in our myndes,
that hope of saluacion which we haue in
all those thynges that he hath done for vs.
            Upon this must we necessarilye conclude,
that there is a substance annexed vnto this vertue:

otherwyse shoulde we haue no stydfastnesse
or certentie therin, we must therfore conclude,
that in the supper are geuē vnto vs two
thynges,As we receiue hym so ys he geuē vnto vs. y• is spiritually that is to saye Christ, as fountayne,
origyn and mattier of all good thynges: and
the fruite and efficacie of his death and passion,
whiche thynge, euen the verie wordes y•
be spokē in the supper do a bundaūtly declare
For when he bedde vs eate his body & drynke
his bloude: he addeth, that his body was geuē
for vs and his bloude shedde for the remission
of oure synnes, wherin he doth fyrste declare
that his bodye, and bloud are not simply with
out any other consideracion, communicate vnto
vs: but that we must also cōsider the fruite
that cōmeth vnto vs by his death and passion.
In fine. Howe maye we be able to come to the
fru
                  •
               cion of so excedynge good thynges, onlesse
we be partakers of the bodye and bloude of
him that hath produced these thynges, and gyuen
them vnto vs.
            Nowe entre we into that question, whiche
hath bene so greatly tossed both in tyme paste
and in these oure dayes also: howe those wordes
are to be vnderstande, wherin Christe calleth
his bodye breade, and hys bloude wyne.
Whiche wordes maye easely be opened, yf we
kepe in memorye those principles whyche I
haue before set forth: that is to saye, that all
the fruite we seke for in the supper, is brought
to noughte, onlesse Christe be gyuen vnto vs
therin, as the foundacion and substance of all
the whole matter. And yf we ones graunt this
thynge, then no doubt we shall graūt also, that
there is gyuen vnto vs nought els but an vnprofitable
& vayne Sacramēt▪ yf we deny that
in it is gyuē vnto vs the very participacion of

Christ: whiche thynge were execrable & shame
full blasphemye. Forthermore, yf the maner of
the communion with Christ be suche that we
be partakers of all the mercies and benifites
which he gate for vs by his death: then are we
not partakers wt the spirite onely but wt y• mā
               boode
also: wherin he perfourmed perfit obedience
to God the father, to the intent he mighte
paye oure det es. Althoughe, to saye the truth
the one can not be wythoute the other. For
whē he geueth him selfe vnto vs, he doth it to
the intent we shoulde possese him whole. And
therfore, as I haue sayde, that his spirite is
oure life: euen so doth he his owne mouth declare
that hys fleshe is oure foode,The mouthe of the soule (y• receiueth this fode) is fayth. and his
bloude oure verye drynke. Yf this be not spoken
in vayne, no remedy oure life must neades
consiste in him, and oure soules be nourished
wyth hys fleshe and bloude, as wyth theyr
proper and peculyar foode. Of that thynge
haue we testimony in y• supper, whē it is sayd
of the breade that we should take it and eate it
and that it is his bodye: and of the cuppe, that
we drynke it and that it is hys bloude here are
the bodye and bloude named, to the intent we
should learne to seke the substāce of our spirituall
lyfe therin. Now yf any man woulde demande
of me whether the breade be the bodye
of Christ, & the wyne his bloud: therto woulde
I answer, that the breade and wy
                  •
               e are visib
                  •
               l
signes, representynge vnto vs the bodye &
bloude of Christe, and that they be called the
body and bloud bycause they be as it were instrumētes
wherby the lorde Iesu Christ distributeth
them vnto vs. This forme of speaking
agreeth very well wyth the thynge
            For not wythstandynge that oureeyes, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
nor oure wyttes can not comprehende the communion
that wee haue in the bodye of Christe
yet is it there openlye shewed before oure eyes.
We haue, in a lyke thynge, an example verye
fytte for the purpose. When the lorde woulde
that his spirite should appeare in the baptisme
of Christe, he shewed him vnder the shape of a
doue▪ Iohn the Baptyste recytyng that hystorye
sayeth that he sawe the holye Gost descen
dynge. But yf we marke it well, we shal fynde
that he sawe nought els but a Doue. For the
substance of the holy Gooste is muisible.
            But for that he knewe that vision to be no
vayne figure, but the mooste sure token of the
presēce of the holy goost: he doubted nothyng
at all to affirme that he sawe him: because he
was represented vnto him vnder soche sort as
he was able to abyde. Euen so must we say as
concernynge the communion that we haue in
the bodye and bloude of Christe. It is a spirituall
misterye, whyche can neyther be sene
wyth the eyes, nother comprehended with the
wytte. Therfore, as the weakenes of oure nature
requireth, it is set forth wyth visible figures
and signes: but yet vnder such sort that
it is not a bare and simple figure, but ioyned
vnto his verite and substance. The bread therfore
is not vnworthylye called the bodye: for
as moch as it doth not onelye r
                  •
               present it vnto
vs, but also brynge vnto vs the same
thynge. I can be ryght well contente therfore▪
to graunt: that the name of the body of Christ
be transferred vnto the bread because it is the
sacrament and fygure therof.
            But thys one thynge wyll I adde.The substāce of a sacramēt is y• free mercie ther
                     •
                  n p
                     ••
                  
                  mised. That the
sacrametes of the Lord oughte by no meanes
to be separate frome his substance and verytye

And yet is it not onely mete, but also very
necess
                  •
               ry: so to set them a sunder, that they
be not confoūded. But to deuide them so, that
the one shoulde be made perfyt without the other
is moste vnsemley. Whē we therfore, do
beholde the visible signe: we muste consider
what it representeth, and who gaue it vs. For
the bread is geuen to the intent that it shoulde
be y• figure of the bodye of Christ▪ & we are cō
               maunded
to eate it. It is geuen I say, of God
the certayne & vnchaungeable veritie. Yf so be
y• God can neyther disceyue nor lye: it foloweth
y• he doth in verye dede performe, and fulfyll,
al that he doth there signifye. No remedy
therfore,It is fayth y• mouth of the soule, that receyueth this body & bloud we must neades vnfaynedlye receyue
the bodye and bloude of Christe in his supper
for as muche as the Lorde offereth vnto vs
herin, the cōmunion for them both. For what
shoulde this meane, that we should eate bread
& drynke wyne, to the intēt that they shoud declare
vnto vs that hys fleshe is oure meate
and bys bloude oure drynke, yf he letteynge
the spirituall veritye passe, shoulde gyue vs
nought elles but breade and wyne? had he not
then instituted thys misterye faynedlye and in
vayne? And as we saye in the Frenche tonge,
vnder disceyuable signes? And therfore muste
we neades graunte, that yf the representation
whyche the Lorde gyueth in the supper be no
sayned thynge,Only the faitheful receiue this substāce. that then the inwarde substaunce
of the Sacramente is annexed to the
visible signes: and that in lyke maner as the
breade is distributed in the hande, so is the body
of Christ cōmunicate vnto vs, to the entēt
that we shoulde be partakers thereof. And
doubtlesse yf there were no more but thys one
thynge, yet oughte it to satisfye vs aboundantlye,

for as muche as we vnderstande that
in the supper. Christ gyueth vnto vs the very
substaunce of hys bodye and bloude: that we
maye wyth full tyghte possesse hym, and in
possessynge hym, be called into the societie of
al hys good thynges. For in that we possesse
hym, all the treasures and heauenlye goodes,
whyche be secretelye layed vp in hym, are set
out vnto vs, to the intent that they shoulde be
oures, and that we shoulde enioye them wyth
hym. Brefely therfore to defyne the profyte of
the supper: we maye saye y• in it Iesus Christ
is offered vnto vs: that we may possesse hym,
hym selfe, and in hym aboundaunce and plentye
of all the mercyes and benefytes that the
mynde can desyre. Whiche thynge is an exceadynge
great helpe vnto vs in stablishynge our
consciences in that truste whyche we ought to
haue in hym. An other vtilitie is, that by it we
are more steared and admonished to acknowledge
the benefytes which we haue and do day
lye receyue of the Lorde Iesu Christe that we
maye gyue vnto hym honoure and glorye: and
that (as mete is) we celebrate hys moste holye
name wyth continuall prayses. For by nature
we are very negligent, and in remembraūce of
the goodnes of our god, neyther do we thynke
there on at any tyme, onlesse he do awake our
slougyshnesse and prouoke vs to our dutye.
            And wyth sharper prickes cā we not be pricked,
then in that he compelleth vs (as it were)
to se wyth oure eyes, and to handle wyth oure
handes, yea openly to knowe and perceyue, the
greatnesse of the inestimable benefyt in that he
feadeth, and refresheth vs with his owne proper
substance, which thing he would should be
declared & made open vnto vs, in y• he byddeth

vs declare his death tyll he come. If so be that
it be a thing so necessary to saluation, not to be
vnmindful of the mercies & benefites that god
hath shewed vnto vs, but rather diligently to
call them a gaine to memorie, and to extolle thē
greatly to other men, that we maye by mutual
admoniciōs be stered vp: we se therin a singulare
cōmoditie of the supper,Use this commoditie. whiche calleth vs
back frō the vice of vnthankfulnes, & suffreth
vs not to forget y• great benefite which Christ
shewed vs whan he died for our sakes: but it
bryngeth vs to this passe, that wee geue thankes
vnto him, and do (as it were) with an open
testimonie, confesse how moch we are bounde
vnto him. The thrid kynd of vtiliti
                  •
                consisteth
in this thing, that we be therby more vehemētlie
stered vp, to sanctimonie and puritie of lyfe
and are with more force of persuasions, dryuē
chieflye and before all other, to kepe charitie &
frēdship amōg ourselues. For, seing that we be
made the members of Christe, beynge gra
                  •
               ted
into his bodye, and are ioyned to gether with
him, as with oure head: it is but mete, that we
chiefly be facioned after his puritie, & 
                  •
               nnocencie,
& that ther be especially such cōcord among
vs, as ought to be among the membres of one
bodye. Although to haue y• true vnderstādyng
of this vtilite, we ought not to thinke, that the
lorde doth only exhorte and stere vs vp, other
inflame vs with an external signe. For this is
the chiefe thynge that he with his spirite worketh
intierlye in vs,God worketh by his sacramentes as the Geometriciā doth by his de
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  stracion. to adde force and efficacye
as his ordinaunce whiche he hath appoynted
as it were an instrument seruynge hym to this
purpose, that he might accomplysh and finishe
his worke in vs, therfore, because the power
of the holy goste is coupled with the sacramentes,

whan they be receyued so as they oughte
to be: we ought to hope and truste, that they
be an helpe vnto vs that we maye go forward
in holynesse of lyfe and especyally in charitie.
            Nowe muste we come to the thyrde of the
chiefe partes whyche we haue purposed in the
begynnynge of thys lytle boke, that is to saye
to the ryght vse, that we maye reuerentlye obserue
the institution of the Lorde. For who
so euer cometh vnto thys sacrament, wyth a
certayne comtempte, negligentlye or wythout
regarde, nothynge carefull to holde hys purpose,
and to perseuer in that where in the Lorde
hath called hym: he dothe frowardlye abuse
it, and in abusynge fylthyly contaminate it.
            But to contaminate and pollute the thynge
that god hath so holyly consecrated, is a great
and intollerable sacriledge. Neyther is it in
vayne that Paule declareth so greuouse and
cruell dampnation to all them that receyue it
vnworthelye. For yf there be nothinge, either
in heauen, eyther in earh, that is more worthy
then the bodye and bloude of the Lord: it is no
smal faute to dispice it,Note what it is to receyue a Sacrament vnworthyly. and to receyue it wythout
consyderation, and to come thyther not
well and diligentlye prepared. Forthermore,
he dothe aduertise vs to proue our selues, that
we maye vse it euen as the thynge requyreth.
Yf so be that we vnderstande what probation
that oughte to be: we shall also perceyue
what vse that is whych we loke for, but great
and wyse circumspection muste be had in this
thynge. For as we can not be to diligent in examinynge
our selues, as the Lorde hath commaunded:
euen so dyd the sophihical doctours
(whyl
                  •
               e they requyred I canne not tell what
kinde of probation,These, loode the consciences of men. and diligēce in examinyng

of a mans selfe, suche as neuer man coulde be
able to performe, holde the miserable consciences
to muche pe
                  •
               plexe, casting them into wonderfull
daungerouse anxietie, yea rather into
horrible tormentes. And to be delyuered from
these inrollynges of perturbacions, we muste
(as I haue sayde before) reduce all thynges to
the institution of the Lorde, as to the rule,
whiche yf we folowe, wee shall neyther slyde
nor erre. And folowynge it we ought to consyder
whether we fele in our selues vnfayned
repentaunce and fayth. Whyche two are so
ioyned betwene them selues, that it is not possible
that the one can by any meanes con
                  •
               yste
wythout the other. For yf we do suppose that
our lyfe remayneth in Christe: then muste wee
acknowledge that in our selues we are deade.
            Yf we seke oure force and strength in hym:
then must we vnderstande that we destituted
of all strength, do faynte. Yf we put all oure
felicitie in his mercy: we must neades perceiue
howe great our misery is, whē that is a way.
Yf our quietnesse & tranquilite be reposed in
him: thē must we feele nought els in our selues
but vnquietnes, troublesome eares, and solicitudes.
And such affection can not be in vs but
it wil ingender in vs a cartayne displeasaunce
of our whole lyfe, besydes the care
                  •
               ulnes and
feare, & at the laste, the loue & desire of iustice.
For he that knoweth the filthines of his sinne
and the m
                  •
               serie of his estate whilse he is exiled
from God, is so gr
                  •
               a
                  •
               ly a bashed, that he is cō
               strayned,
to be out of conceyt with him selfe
to condemne hym selfe, and for very dolour of
hert to weepe and syghe. To these thynges, is
the iudgement of. God obiected incon
                  •
               mente,
whiche thrutcheth the conscience of the synner

in wonderfull straites, whan he perceiueth y•
he can by no meanes escape, and that there is
no place of defence remayning. Whan we acknowledginge
oure owne misery after suche
sorte are able to taste of the goodnesse of God
then do wee desire to directe all the order of
oure lyfe vnto his wyll, that (abiectinge the
thynges whiche we folowed before (we maye
in him be made a new creature. Yf wee, therfore
wyll haue that communyon, whiche is be
seming for vs to haue, the communion of the
mooste holye supper of the Lorde: Let vs
with a frime cōfidence of mynde take Christe
for our iustice,He y• trusteth not in Christ only, hath no parte wt him. lyfe and health: let vs embrace
his promesses supposynge them be to certayne
and cōstant: let vs renounce al succours to the
contrarie, whiche striue therwith, and all confidence
of the same: that we distrustynge oure
selues and al other creatures maye be quiet in
him onelie, and content oure selues with his
onely mercie which thing bicause it can not be
done, vnlesse we know how moche neade we
haue of helpe and succure: no remedy we must
neades be moste sharpely pricked and digged
as it were wt a goade, through that fealing of
our misery: that we as mē half
                  •
                famished, may
desprously loke for him. For howe fonde a
thynge were it to seke for meate wythout any
maner of appetit: And to gette an appetite to
meate, the nexte way is to haue an emptye stomake,
but in suche takynge that it maye admitte
meate Of this it foloweth y• it behoueth
our soules to be hungry, and seruentlye to desyre
meate, that they maye in the supper of the
Lorde fynde theyr nu
                  •
               rimente. Forthermore,
it is to be noted that we can not desyre Christe
vnlesse we do aspire to y• iustice of god: which

consisteth in the denyall of oure selues,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and
the obedience that ought to be giuē vnto hym.
For it can by no meanes agree, that we should
be of the bodye of Christ. 
                  〈◊〉
                uyng in the meane

                  〈◊〉
                f
                  •
               lthily, volt
                  •
               ptuously, and without 
                  •
               ule
Sc
                  ••
               ge that in Christe is nought elles but all
puritye, contin
                  •
               nce, gentl
                  •
               nesse, sobrietie, veritye,
humblenesse and other lyke vertu
                  •
               s: it behoueth
vs (yf we wyll be membres of his body)
to be cleare frō al voluptuousnesse & riotte
from arrogancy, intempetance, vanitie, pryde,
and other vices. For we can not mingle those
wyth him wythout great shame and reproche.
It behoueth vs all waye to rem
                  •
               mbre, that
there is no more concorde betwene him and iniquitie,
then is betwene lyght and darkenesse.
The ima
                     •
                  e of repentaunce. Lo by what meanes wee maye come to perfyt
repentaunce: by appoyntynge our iourney so,
that oure lyfe be fashioned after the example
of Christe. But, although thys thynge be commune
to all partes of the lyfe: yet take they
place chieflye in charitye: which in thys Sacrament
is singulerlye commended vnto vs.
            By reason whereof, it is also called the bonde
therof. For as the bread, whyche for the vse of
all men, is there sanc
                  •
               ifyed, is made of man
                  ••
               
grayn
                  •
               s, so compacte to gyther that one can
not be seperate and discerned from the other:
euen after the same rate oughte wee to be ioyned
togyther wyth the indissoluble bonde of
frendshyppe. And so do we all receyue one bodye
of Christ, to the ende we may be his m
                  •
               mbres.Discorde destroyethe that concorde hath buylded.
But yf we be full of discordes and di
                  •
               
               cencions::
we do as muche as in vs lyeth, teare
Christ and poule hym in sunder neyther shall
we be gyltye of smaller sacrilege, then yf we
had done the thynge in dede, Let vs not therfore

bee bolde to come thyther, yf anye hatred
or euyll wyll towardes any man, and chiefly a
christiā and ioyned to the vnitie of the church
                  •
               
do remayne in vs. We muste also (for the kepyng
and folowyng of the order of the Lorde)
brynge wyth vs an other affection: that is to
saye, that we confesse wyth mouth and declare
in verye dede howe muche we are bounde to
our Sauiour: and that we may gyue thankes
vnto hym: not onelye that wee maye gyue
glorye to hys name, but that we maye also instructe
one an other, and that our neyghbours
maye, through oure example, learne what they
ought to do.
            But for that there can no man be founde,
that hath so profited in fayth and sanctitie of
lyfe, but that he lacketh yet verye muche: it
were daunger leste verye many godlye consciences
shoulde be troubled wyth those wordes
that I haue spoken, vnlesse I would retourne
myttigatynge those preceptes whiche I haueBeleue & dispeare n
                     •
                  t
gyuen of fayth and repentaunce.
            For that kynde of teachynge is very daungerouse,
wherin some men, leauynge the perfyte
truste and repentaunce of the mynde, wyl
that all men whyche be not indued wyth such
thynges, be excluded. For so shoulde all men,
be excluded, not one man excepted.
            And to proue that thynge to be trew, who
can boste that he hath no poynte of diffidence
in hym? and that he is depraued wyth no spot
of mynde, or wyth no kynde of weakenesse?A necessarie prayer
Certes the chyldren of God haue suche fayth
that it is neadful for thē alwaies to pray vnto
the lorde that he be present and helpe theyr incredulitie.
For thys disease is so faste rooted
in vs, that we can by no meanes be healed, before

we be delyuered out of the boūdes of this
body. Yea the holinesse of our life is such, that
we muste neades praye dayly to gette remission
of synnes, and grace to amende.
            And, although some be more imperfyte then
some, yet is there no men but he falleth in many
thynges. And therfore, yf that integr
                  •
               tye
of fayth and lyfe be requyred, wherein wanteth
no
                  •
               hynge at all: the supper shoulde not be
onely vnprofitable vnto all men,So the Diuel would haue it but also very
hurtful, which thinge, no doubt, is most wyde
from the mynde & purpose of the Lorde which
gaue vnto his congregacion, nothynge more
wholesome then that. When we therfore, shal
fele in oure selues a fayth not yet perfyte, and
shall not be indued wyth so pure a conscience
but that it accuse vs of many vices: that ought
not to let vs for comynge to the Lordes sacred
table: so be that we, voyed of al hypocri
                  •
               y and
simulation, do in y• weakenesse trust for health
in Christ, wyllyng to directe our lyfe after the
rule of y• gospell. But namely I say that there
be none Hypocrisy:This hypocriis daughter 
                     •
                  o c
                     •
                  re shryfte. bicause very many do disceyue
thē selues wyth vayne flat crynges, persuaring them selues that it is sufficient if they
condemne theyr vices although
                  •
                th
                  •
               y do nourishe
the same: or els it sufficeth if they absteine
frō them for a tyme and intende to retourne to
the same agayne incontinent. But the true repentaunce
is firme and constant. And therfore
it bryngeth to passe that wee stryue agaynste
the euyll that wee oure selues carye wyth vs,
nor for a fewe dayes or monethes but through
all the tyme of oure lyfe: wythout any maner
intermission. When we fel
                  •
                that vices do s
                  •
               
displease vs, and that the vnf
                  •
               in
                  •
               d hatred for
th
                  •
               m protedyng from the feare of god, is graffed

in vs, and that we be also led wyth the desyre
to lyue well and holylye: wee are apte and
mete to receiue the supper of y• Lord: although
there be yet remayning in vs very many fragmentes
of infirmities. Yea vnlesse we were
weake,None hath made of medicine but the sicke subiect to diffidence, & vnperfecte lyfe:
the sacramente were vnprofitable for vs, and
the institution therof had not ben necessarye.
Seynge therfore it is the remedye wherwyth
God would succure our weaknes, strēghthen
oure faythe, increase our charite and set vs forwarde
in sanctitie of lyfe: we oughte so moche
the rather to vse it, how moch more greuously
we feele our selues oppressed wyth the magnytude
of y• disease. Moch lesse ought it to be an
impedimēt vnto vs. For if we do lay for excuse
that we be yet weake in fayth, and not of lyfe
perfyte ynoughe, to the intente we maye with
drawe oure selu
                  •
               s frome the vse of the supper
it were euen lyke as yf a man would abstayne
from physyke because he were sycke.
            The weaknesse therfore of fayth & the vyces
of our lyfe ought to admonishe vs to come
to the supper, as to the chyefe remedye, that
they myght bee amended and corrected.
            So that we come not, voyde of all faythe and
repentance. Wherof the fyrst is hyd in ye mind
and therfore our conscience must beare vs witnesse
before God. The later is declared in action
and worke: and therfore it is requisyte y•
it appeare in our lyfe.
            As concernynge the tyme of celebratynge
the supper, it may not bee apoynted and prescribed
vnto all men. For there is no man but
he shall sometyme haue suche pryuate impedyment
                  •
               s,
as maye excuse a man thoughe he abstayne.
Besydes that wee haue no precepte.

wherby all men be compelled to vse it so ofte
as it maye be offered vn
                  •
               o them, but yet yf we
haue respecte vnto the ende where vnto the
Lorde leadeth vs:Once in aye
                     •
                  e is to lit
                     •
                  e of conscience. we shall knowe that the vse
therof oughte to be muche more common thn
it is commonlye amonge many men. For, loke
how moch more we be 
                  ••
               pressed wt weakenes
so moch the more often ought wee to be exercy
sed in it, because it maye and ought to bee profytable
vnto vs, both for the confirmacyon of
our fayth, and also for the settynge for warde
of the holynesse of lyfe. Wherfore in all congr
                  •
               gacyōs
wel ordered, ought to be such custō
that the supper be celebrate so ofte as maye be
and so much as y• people shalbe able to receyue
And euerye priuate persone ought, so much as
in hym lyeth, to be ready to receyue it so often
as it shall be celebrate in a common assemble:
vnlesse he be by verye vrgent causes constrayned
to absteyne. For, all be it, that the tyme is
not assigned nor the daye expressed by any precepte
or cōmaundement: yet ought this thinge
to suffice, that wee knowe it to be the Lordes
wyl we should vse this Sacramēt of y• times.
Otherwyse we knowe not the profite that comethThese be the suggestiōs of the deuill
vnto vs therby. The excuses that some
men lay, are voyed and vayne. Some say they
are not worthye: and by that pretexte they absteyne
all the yere. Other do not onelye consyder
howe vnworthy they be: But they do also
laye for them, that they can not communicate
wyth suche as they see come thyther vnprepared.
Also, other suppose that the ofte vse of it
is superfluous: neyther do they thynke that it
ought to be so often iterated and repeted, after
that we haue once receyued Christe. I aske of
those fyrste, whyche laye for them selues theyr

owne vnworthynesse: howe theyr conscience
can susteyne so greate miserye more then an
yere, & dare not call vpō the lorde accordyngly.
For they wyl graunt it to be a poynte of rashnesse,
to call vpon god as a father, vnlesse wee
be the membres of Christ. Whyche thynge
can not be done vnlesse the substaunce and veritie
of the supper be fulfylled in vs.
            And yf wee haue the veritie it self▪ we are
wyth muche better reason, mete to receyue the
signe.
            Wherby we perteyue, that they whyche
woulde exempte them selues from the supper
as vnworthye, do robbe them selues of that
great commoditie of inuocatyng and prayinge
to god. But I woulde not cōpell them whose
consciences be troubled and feared by anye religion,
to the intente they shoulde intermingle
them selues rashlye: But rather I counsayle
them to tarye for a season, vntyll the lorde shal
voultsafe to delyuer them from that anxietie.
In lyke maner yf there be anye other cause I
do not deny but it is lawfull to deferre.
            I do onelye purpose to declare, that no man
ought to continewe longe in thys thynge that
he maye absteyne for vnworthynesse.
            For so is the congregacion robbed of the communion:Christ is 
                     〈…〉
                   health.
wherin all oure health consisteth.
            Let hym rather indeuoure to fyghte agaynste
all the impedimentes wyche the deuyl casteth
agaynste hym, leste he be excluded frō so greate
a good thynge, and consequently robbed of all
the benefytes to gyther.
            The other mens reasone is more aparaunt:
bycause they vse this reasone. That is to say,
yf it be not leaful to eate commune bread with
them that name them selues brethrens, and

dooe, yet neuerthelesse▪ lyue fylthyly and lycen
cioussye: moche lesse that breade, whych is consecrated
for this intent, that it maye represent
and geue vnto vs the bodye of the Lorde.
            But it is no harde thynge to make answere to
these also, that it perteyneth not to euery priuate
person, to iudge and decerne, who ought
to be admit
                  •
               ed, and who to bee depelled: but
to the whole congregacion, other else the shepe
he
                  •
               de and elders, whose helpe he oughte to
vse in the orderyng and gouernyng of the congregacion.
For sayncte Paule cōmaundeth vs
not to examyne other, but oure selues
            It is our dutie, to admonish them that lyue viciouslye:
and if they wyll not here vs to make
relacion to the shepeherde: that he maye finishe
the matter by the authoritie of y• congregaciō.
But we maye not so wythdrawe oure selueswe may not do iuel for a good intent.
frome the cōpanie and assemble of the wycked
that we forsake the communion of the congregacion.
Bysydes these thynges, it shall ofte
tymes chaunce, that the crimes be not so magnifest,
that it maye beleaful to procede to excō
               municacion.
For, although the shepeherde shal
in his mynde iudge any man to be vnworthy:
yet may he not pronounce him to be such a one
or prohibite hym the supper: vnlesse he haue cō
               uicted
hym by the iugemente of the congregacion,
whyche thynge whan it chaunceth, there
remayneth none other remedie, but that we desyre
god that he wyll delyuer his church from
al offences: in this meane tyme whylse we loke
for the daye of indgement, wherin the chaffe
shall be seuered from the good grayne. The
thyrde, haue no kynde at all of the lyklinesse of
the truthe. For this spirituall bread is not gyuen
vnto vs, to the intēt we should be glutted

incontinent, but rather, that tastyng the swetnesse
therof,A good thyng can not be to often vsed. we shoulde hunger the more after
it, and vse it as often as it shoulde be profered
vnto vs. This is the thing that I haue expoū
               ded
before: that Iesus Christ is neuer so communicate
vnto vs (so longe as we be in thys
mortall lyffe) that oure soules maye be saciate
with hym, but that he maye be an acustomed
nouryshement vnto them.
            To come to the fourth parte. Whan the
deuyll perceyued that the lorde lefte to the congregacion,
nothyng more profitable than thys
sacramēt: he dyd (after his accustomed maner)
employe hym selfe (euen incontine
                  •
               t vpon the
fyrst institucion) to cōtaminate it with diuersSathans olde practiese.
errours and supersticions, to y• intēt he might
corrupte and distroy the fruite therof: neither
dide he sease to labour hys purpos, vntyll he
had put away the institucion of the lorde, and
tourned it into a lye and vanite. It pertaineth
not to my purpose to assygne in what tyme euery
disceyte and erroure had hys begynnyyg.
It shall be sufficient for me articularly to note
the erroures y• the deuyl hath inuented, which
we muste beware of yf we wyll haue the supper
of the Lorde vncorrupted. Fyrst therfore
whā the lorde gaue the supper vnto vs, to the
intent it shoulde be distributed among vs, that
it might represēt vnto vs the cōmunion which
we haue in his bodye, and also that we myght
be partakers of that sacrifice, whyche he offered
vnto his father, to purge oure sinnes: men
haue on the contrarie, by theyr owne wyttes
commented, that it is a sacrifyce wherby we
obtayne of god remission of sinnes. Whyche
thynge is detestable sacr
                  •
               lege, and not to bee
suffered by any meanes. For vnlesse we acknoledge,

and beleue stedfastlye that the death of
the lorde Iesu Christe is the onely sacrifice,
wherby he reconciled vs to god the father, puttynge
away al the sinnes wherof we were giltye
in hys iudgement: we ouerthrowe and distroye
hys force and efficacie. Unlesse we graūt
that Christe is the onely pryest by whose inte
                  •
               cession
we are comen agayne into fauour with
his fath
                  •
               r: we robbe hym of hys honoure, and
do him great iniurie. Seing therfore, that, that
opinion whiche fayneth that the supper of the
lorde is a sacrifice wherby we gette & obtayn
                  •
               
remission of synnes, fyghteth agaynste the
same, it muste be taken awaye & condemned as
diuyllyshe. That it repugneth is most. certaine
For how cā these thynges agree? That Christ
in dyinge, offered sacrifice to y• father: wherby
once for all he optayned pardon and remission
of all oure sinnes: & that we muste sacrifyce agayne
daylye, that we may obtayne that thing
whyche is to be sowght in hys onely death?
            Thys erroure was not at the higheste incontinentEuerye pope put to his por
                  
                     •
                  ion
vpon the begynnyng, but increasynge by
lytle and lytle, it was at length brought to this
point. It is manifest y• the fathers of olde time
called the supper a sacrifice. But they showe a
reason why, because the death of Christ is represented
there in. Theyr saying therfore, is to
this purpose, that because the supper is the memorie
of that onlye sacrifice, wherin we ought
vtterlye to content oure selues, therfore is that
name attributed. Neyther can I blame the custome
of the olde congregacion, because they
did in theyr gesture & riete figurate a certaine
ymage of a sacrifice, wt the same cerimonies in
maner, that were in vse vnder y• olde law: this
one thynge excepted, y• in steade of a 
                  •
               east, they

vsed bread for theyr sacr
                  •
               fice. Whyche thinge
for that it pricketh to nere the Iewyshe marke
and is not agreable to the institution of the
Lorde, I do not alowe it.
            For in the olde testament (the tyme of figures)
the lorde instituted such ceremonies, to be
obserued, vntyll that sacrifyce were celebrated
in the fleshe of his moste deare beloued sonne,
whyche was the truth of them all.
            Seynge therfore, all thys is finished, there remayneth
no more but that we vse the communion
therof. It is therfore superfluous, to declare
that thynge, wyth figures. Therfore, by
the instruction of Christ, we are not commaū
               ded
to offer or sacrifyce:Then is the masse the popes sacrifice. but to take and eate
the thinge that is al ready offered and sacrificed.
And although the aūcientes, dyd somwhat
offende in that obseruation: yet was not the
impietie so great as that which dyd afterward
crepe in. For the thynge that was proper and
peculiar to the death of Christe, was vtterlye
transposed to the masse: that it myght satisfye
to god for our offences, & that we myght be reconcyled
by it. Besydes these thynges, that office
whyche was Christes, was attributed vnto
them which called them selues priestes that
they myghte sacrifyce vnto god, and that they
myght praye before hym wyth theyr sacrifices
to optayne pardone and remission of oure sinnes.
I wyl not dissēble in these soluciōs which
the enemyes of y• truth do brynge in this matter.
That the masse is no newe sacrifyce,The Diuels solusion. but
the applicacyon of that onelye sacrifyce wherof
I haue spoken. Althoughe they go aboute
to couer theyr abhominacion wyth some maner
colour: Yet doth it manifestlye apeare to
be a mere cauillacion. For it is not onely sayd

that the sacrifice of Christe is but one: but also
that it oughte not to be iterate, s
                  •
               ynge that
the force and efficacie therof is perpetual. It is
not sayd that Christe was ones offered vp to
the father, that other shoulde afterwarde v
                  •
               e
the same oblacion: that they myght applye vnto
vs the force of his intercessyon: but that he
is entred into the sanctuarye of heauen, and
that he apperethe there to the intente he may
make the father mercyfull vnto vs, throughe
hys intercession. As concernynge the applycacyon
of the merites of his death, that we
may feele the fruite therof: that is done, not after
suche sort as they of the popyshe churche
thynke it to be done: but when we receyue the
tydynges of the Gospell,The heareing of the gospell applieth Christes merites vnto vs. euen such as the ministers
whom God hath ordeyned as embasatours,
dooe in theyr preachynge proteste: yea
such as he hath sealed wyth sacramentes as
wyth seales. All, aswel teachers as pastours
haue alowed this opinion of the commone people
wherin they supposed, that mā to deserue
mercye and iustifcacion (euen for the workes
sake) which woulde heare or bye a masse.
            But I saye, that yf we wyll take any profyte
of the supper, we muste bring thether nothing
of our owne, to the intent to deserue the thing
that we loke for: but that we muste onelye receyue
wyth fayth, the mercye that is in it offered
vnto vs.Measure al y• is spoken of y• sacrament: by this sentence. And yet doth not that mercye remayne
in the sacramēt: but as it commeth frō
the crosse of Christ, euen so it sendeth vs back
agayne to the same. Nothyng therfore, is so
contrary to the true vnderstanding of the supper,
as to make therof a sacrifice. For it wyll
not fuffer vs to acknowledge the deathe of
Christe to be the onely sacrifice, whiche shall

continewe for euer. These thynges well vnderstande,
it shall be euident, that al those masses
wherin is no suche communion of the supper
as the Lorde instituted, are nought else but verie
abominacyon. For the Lorde dyd not ordayne
that the prist only should seuerally satisfie
him selfe after he had fynished his sacrifice:
but his wyl was y• this sacramēt shoulde
be distributed in an open assēble, like vnto the
first supper which he celebrated with his apostles.
But after y• this detestable opinion was
inuented, this vnhappie custome proceded out
of it as out of an hell mouthe, wherin the people
contenting them selues with being present
at the action, as though they should therby optayne
some great merite, do in the meane time
abstaine from the cōmunion: because the prest
bosteth that he offereth sacrifice for all and
chieflie for them that be present. I let passe the
disceytes and illucions wherin▪ is so moche
vnseamelynesse, that they are not to be spoken
of: as to attribute to eueri little saynt his appropriate
masse: and to transferre vnto 
                  •
               atte
and wyll (as we saye in the French prouerbe)
the thynge that is spoken of the supper of the
lord. Also to make marchaūdise therof. With
the other puddell of filthynesses which haue
spronge of thys name sacrifice. An other errowre
foloweth whych the deuyll hath sowen
to the intente to corrupte thys hyghe mistcrie
that is to saye, in that he commented the trāssubstanciacion
of the bread into the bodyeand
of the wyne into the bloude of Christ,Herin resteth y• whole mattier. after
the wordes should be pronounsed wyth the
intente to consecrate.
            Fyrst that cōment hath no foundacion at al
in the scripture, neyther hath it any testemonie

of the olde congregation: and therfore can it
by no meanes agree or stande with the wordes
of the lorde. Is not suche an interpretacion to
violent and to muche wrasted? To saye, that
when Christ shewynge bread, calleth it his bodye,
the substance of the bread is cōs
                  •
               med, and
that the bodye of Christe succedeth in the place
thereof? But it neadeth not to call the matter
into question, seinge that the bryght & splendiferouse
veritie is of it selfe able to confute so
absurde a vanitie. I let passe infinite testimonyes
both of the scripture and of the fathers
also, wherin the sacramente is called breade. I
saye this onely, that the nature of the Sacramēt
requireth: that the material bread remayne
for the visible signe of the body For it is a generall
rule amonge y• sacramētes: that the signes
whiche we se in them, ought to haue some
similitude wyth the spirituall thinge that they
represent. As we are therfore in baptisme, certifyed
that oure soules be inwardlye washed,
whē the water, y• washeth the fylth of the body,
is powred vpō vs to declare y• same thing:
euen so must there neades be in the supper materiall
breade, that it may be declared vnto vs
that the bodye of Christe is oure foode. For
what declaracyon were it, yf the qualitie wytnes
shoulde represent vnto vs that body. We
knowe therfore manifestlye, that vnlesse the
substance of bread do there remayne, al the representacion,
whiche the lorde (wyllynge to accommodate
hym selfe to oure infirmitie) gaue
vnto vs: doth vtterly decaye and peryshe.
            For the wordes which the lorde spake soūde
no lesse then yf one woulde saye.Let ne what these wordes this is my body, do signifi. In lyke maner
as mans body is nouryshed and susteyned
wyth bread: so is my fleshe the spiritual foode

wherwyth the soules be quyckened. Besydes
these thynges. For what purpose doth Paule
propone that similitude? as one lofe is made
of many graynes, mingled and ioyned to gether
one wyth an other: euen so wee (for as
muche as we take parte al of one bread) ought
to be faste ioyned togyther one with an other.
And yf the whytnesse onelye shoulde remayne
wythout the substance, were it not a thyng to
be laughed at to here a man speake as Paule
doth? Wherfore wythout any doubtyng at al
I conclude that thys transsubstanciacion is
the deuylles interpretation, to depraue y• truth
of the supper.
            Many dotynge castes haue folowed of this
lye: & woulde God they had not ben more then
doting castes, & that they had not ben also horrible
abhominaciōs. For mē (imagining, I can
not tell what maner of placelye presence) haue
taught y• bothe the diuinity & the humanitye of
Christ are fastned vnto y• whitenes, nothinge
cōsyderyng what incōueniēses folowed vpon
the same. Although the olde doctours of Sorbone
haue reasoned very subtllly,Oxforde and Cambridg be not all voyde of thes doctoures. how the body
& bloud be ioyned with the signes: yet can it
not be denyed, but that in the popyshe church,
was receyued both of high and lowe, and is at
this day with fyre, sworde, murder, & al kynde
of tormentes cruelly defended and holden, this
opinion: that Christe is conteyned vnder these
signes and that we ought to seke hym there.
            Whiche opinion yf they wyll maynteyne: no
remedy they must also graūt, that the bodye of
Christ (as a thinge infinite) is conteyned in no
place, other elles that it is in diuers places at
once. And in the affirmynge hereof, they come
at length to this passe, that it differeth nothing

at all frome a fantasticall apparicion. To appoyn
                  •
               e
therfore suche kynde of presence inclosed
in a place,Mar
                     •
                  ians here
                     ••
                  ie. wherein the bodye of Christe
shoulde be included in, or as they saye locallye
ioyned to the signe
                  •
                is not onelye a thynge foly
she, but also an execrable errour diminishing
the glory of Christ
                  •
                vtterly destroying al that
ought to be bel
                  •
               ued as cōcerninge his humane
nature. For y• scripture teacheth in euery place
that lyke as in earth Christ toke our humanitie,
euen so, he pluckynge the same out of thys
mortall estate, and yet nothynge chaungynge
the na
                  •
               ure therof, caryed it vp into heauē. And
for thys cause oughte we when we speake of
the humanitie of Christ, to consider two thinges.
The fyrste, that we diminishe nothinge of
the veritie of his nature. The other, that we
derogate nothynge of his glorious estate. And
to do thys thynge in his kynde, we muste lefte
vp our myndes into heauen, that we may seke
out redeamer there. For yf we wyll caste hym
frome vs vnder the corruptible Elementes of
thys worlde:Breade and wyne are corruptible. we shall both destroye those thinges
whiche the scriptures do wytnes as concerning
his humane nature: and also bringe to
nought his moste glorious ascension. But bycause
many mē haue abundantly handled this
matter: I had rather let it passe then to wade,
further therin. My mynde was to note, by the
waye, thys thynge onely. That to thynke that
Christ is shutte vp vnder the bread and wine,
other els to ioyne thē so togither, y• our mynde
cleaue fast there and is not erected into heauē:
is a diuelyshe dottage, whyche thynge I shall
also toutche in an other place. And when thys
peruerse opinion was once receyued, it ingendred
many other supersticions. Fyrst that carnall

adoracion, which is none other thyng but
mere idolatry. For yf a man woulde prostrate
him selfe before the breade, and honour Christ
there, as yf he were there presente, conteyned
therin: were not that the setting vp of an idole
in steade of the Sacrament? For we were not
cōmaunded to honour, but to eate. We ought
not therfore so rashely to attempt that thinge.
Forthermore thys was an obseruation in the
olde congregacion, to admonishe the people before
the supper shoulde be celebrated, that they
lyfte vp theyr hertes, to the intent they shoulde
vnderstande, that they oughte not to styke in
the visible signe,Understande this cōiunction aright. yf they would honour Christ
a right. But we shal not long contende as cō
               cernynge
thys article: yf the presence and coniunction
of the veritie wyth the signe be well
vnderstande: wherof I haue all readye spoken
and wyl hereafter declare at large. Out of the
same fountayne are sprongen the residewe of
the supersticiouse ceremonies: as to carye the
Sacramēt thorow the stretes once in the yere▪
as it were in a pompe, an other season to set
vp a taberancle for it, and to kepe it al the yere
longe shutte vp in a pire or case, that the people
maye giue hede there vnto as vnto god, which
shynges bycause they are all not onely inuented
by mans wytie without the worde of god,
but also playne repugnante to the institucion
of the supper: they ought of all Christians vtterly
to be reiected.
            I haue declared whēse thys calamity of the
papisticall churche, that the people doth all the
yeare longe absteyne from the communion of
the supper, had hys begynnynge: bycause it is
counted as a sacrifice whyche one man muste
offer vp in the name of the whole multitude.

But although we maye vse it but once euerye
yere, yet it is then miserably pulled in sunder, &
as it were torne in pieces. For where as the sacrament
of the bloude ought to be distributed
to the people, as it apeareth by the expresse cō
               maundement
of the Lorde: they decree that the
people ought to be cōtented with the one halfe
parte.Yea and that is half marde in ye dressinge. So are the miserable christians, by most
wycked gyle robbed of the benefyte that God
gaue thē neither is it any smal benefyt to haue
the cōmunion of the bloude of the lorde to nouryshe
vs wyth all: and it is to muche crueltye
to take that thynge violently from them vnto
whom it belongeth of ryght.
            Wherin we maye easelye perceyue, wyth
what foole hardinesse and frowardnesse the
pope hath exercised tyranny agaynst the cōgregacion
of God, after tyme that he onely helde
the impery, when the lorde had cōmaunded his
disciples to eate the breade that was sanctifyed
in his body: and then comynge to the cuppe
he sayed not onely drynke ye, but he added exprestely,
al. Woulde we haue a thynge spoken
more openly? he byddeth vs eate the breade vsynge
no vniuersall worde therin. But of the
cuppe he byddeth vs all drynke. Whense cometh
thys difference: but that he entended ther
by to preuent thys malyce and subtyl crafte of
the dyuell? Neuerthelesse, the pope is of suche
arrogancye and pryde: that he dare be bolde
to cōmaunde to the contrarye: loke that ye do
not all drynke. And that he maye declare hym
selfe to be wyser then God:The pope seeeth yt Christe▪ sawe not he sayth it is right
and agreable to reasone, that the priestes haue
some prerogatyue more then the people, to the
ende that the dignitie of a priest should be honoured.
As though the Lorde had not bene of

discrecion nor had consyde
                  •
               ed after what sort
the one ought to be knowne from the other.
Besydes thys he obiecteth the daungers that
myght befal yf the cuppe shoulde be gyuen cō
               monly
vnto al mē. Some drope forsoth, might
chaunce to be shedde as though the Lorde hadnot
forsene that thynge.
            Doth he not laye negligence to the Lordes
charge, that sayth he cōfoūdeth the order that
he shoulde obserue, and that he hath caste hys
people into thys daunger wythout any maner
of reasone? And that they maye declare that
there ensue
                  •
               h no great incōmoditie vpon thys
chaunge, they saye that the whole is cōprehended
vnder one kynde, bicause the body can not
be separated from the bloude. As thoughe the
lorde had disc
                  •
               uered thē, the one frō the other.
For yf the one part maye be lefte as superfluous:
it had bene folyshe and vayne for both to
be distinctly, & seuerally gyuen vnto vs. But
some of the popes bande, perceyuyng that this
so greate abhominacion coulde not otherwyse
be defēded then impudentlye, went aboute to
couer it by some other meanes. They say,Thē he spake not to oure pristes. that
when Christe instituted this Sacramente, he
spake vnto his apostles onelye whō he had as
then promoted to the order of priesthode. But
what answer wyl they make to Paule, which
sayeth, that he hath taught the christen people
the thing that he learned of the lorde, that euery
one should eate of the bread & drynke of the
cuppe? But who hath reueyled vnto these men
that Christe gaue the supper vnto his apostles
as vnto priestes? The wordes soūde to the cō
               trarye
in that he doth afterwarde cōmaunde,
that they folowing his example, shoulde do the
same. He prescribeth therfore a rule whiche he

woulde shoulde continewe in his churche for
euer. And thys rule was in the auncient tyme
obserued: vnto suche time as Antichrist ruling
alone, auaunced him selfe, and stretched vp his
hornes agaynste God vertitie, to the intent to
destroy it vtterly. We se therfore that it is intollerable
frowardnes, so to deuide and teare
this Sacramēt y• those partes should be disceuered
which god hath ioyned. That I may cō
               clude
the more briefely: I wyll comprehende in
one chapter, the thynge that elles myghte haue
ben deuided. That is to saye, y• the deuil, hath
(without any doctrine of the supper) brought
in thys maner of celebratyng,And yet must all 
                     •
                  e holie. setting vp in the
steade of the doctrine, ceremonies, some fylthy
some vnprofitable, some also noysome & daungerouse:
whereof haue ensued verye manye
euylles. In so much y• the masse which is vsed
in y• popish church in steade of the supper, if I
shoulde define it a righte, is none other thinge,
then a mere apishe emulation & disguised masking.
I cal it an apishe emulacion, bicause that
like as apes do play the wātons in imitatyng,
rudely & without reason, the workes of men:
euē so do they imitate the Lordes holy supper
in suche wyse, y• with theyr prepesterous inuē
               tions,
they corrupte the hole truth therof. And
to declare this to be true, is not thys the chiefe
thynge hat the Lorde lefte with vs, that we
shoude celebrate this mistery with perfyte and
true vnderstandyng?Then is it y• doctrine that nourisheth. where vpon it foloweth
that the substance therof cōsisteth in doctrine.
            And that once taken awaye, there remayneth
noughte els but a ceremonye, coulde and
without vertue or strength. Not onely scriptures
are wytnesses of this thyng, but also the
popes owne lawes: wherein there is a sētence

alleged, in whiche Augustine asketh what other
thynge baptisme shoulde bee wythout the
worde, then a corruptible Element. Wy
                  •
               h the
worde, as he addeth incontinent, not in that it
is pronunced, but bicause it is vnderstande &c.
Wherby he declareth that the sacramentes do
take theyr force and energy of the word of the
lorde: when it is preached after suche sorte as
it maye be vnderstanded. The residewe, is not
worthy the name of a sacramente. But in the
masse, it is so farre vnlyke that any doctrine
should be intelligibly harde, that cōtrary wyse
al the whole mistery is thought to be prophaned
vnlesse all thinges be sayd and done priuily
& couertly to the intent nothing may be perceyued
or vnderstande. So, that theyr cōsecration
differeth nothinge frō a kynde of inchaūtmēt.
For after the maner of an inchaūter, they
thynke that wyth whysperynges & diuers gestures,
they brynge Christe out of heauen into
theyr handes: Whereby we perceyue, that the
masse so ordeined,The true definicion of the masse. is rather a manifest and opē
prophanacion of the supper, then the obseruation
therof: and that the peculier and chief substance
of the supper wanteth: which consisteth
in thys thynge, that the mistery be truely opened
to the people, and the promesses rehersed
wyth open voyce: not that the priest: wyth out
other reason or vnderstandyng, shoulde stylly
whysper out an hummyng that can not be vnderstande.
I call it a play or maskyng, bycause
there is nought els sene but the folyshnes and
gestures of players, which thinges woulde become
a playe muche better then the sacred supper
of the lorde. No doubt, the sacrifices of the
olde testament were celebrated with diuers ornamentes
& ceremonies. But bicause they had

a good significacion, and were all ordeyned to
instructe and exersice the people in godlynesse:
they were far vnlike vnto these, which serue
for none other purpose at all, but that wythout
any maner profite they maye occupye and
holde suspense, the mynd of the people. To cō
               clude,
because these masse mōgers (yf I maye
so call them) do allege thys example of the olde
testamēt, for the defence of their ceremonies, it
shal be good to note what difference is betwen
that whyche they do, and that whych was by
god commaunded to the Iewysshe people.
            For yf I laye for me this one thyng, what
so euer was then doone was founded on the
commaundement of God: and that theyr foolyshe
tryfles hane none other foundacion than
on mans inuencion: were not there a great difference?
But I haue thynges to disproue thē
wyth, that be moch greater then these be. For
it was not for naught that the lord prescribed
such a forme for a tyme, to the intent that at y•
length it should haue an ende and be abrogate
No doubt because he had not as then declared
hys doctrine so playnly, he woulde so moche
y• rather y• his people shold be exercised in figuers:
that the thynge whych wanted in that testament,
myght be repared in the other. But
sense that Christ apeared in the fleshe: loke by
howe moche more the doctrine is lyghtened, so
moch more are the figures diminished. Seyng
therfore we haue the bodye▪ we must leaue the
shadowes. For yf we wyll replenisshe the abolyshed
cerimonies: we shal patche agayne that
vaile▪ that Christ brake in sonder by his death
and so shall we obscure and darken the lyght
of the Gospel. Thus do we perceyue, that this
multitude of cerimones, whych is sene in the

masse, is the forme of the Iewyshe law, vtterly
contrarie to the christiā relygyon. I am not
of that mind that I would disproue al cerimonies,
whyche do serue to honestie and a publyke
order, wherby the more reuerence is geuen
to the sacrament: so that they do well agree to
the purpose,Honest ceremonies ar not to be despised and be sober. But that immensurable
laborynthe, maye by no meanes be sufferred:
for as moche as it hath ingendred infite
supersticiōs, & made the people as it were am
                  •
               
               sed
wyth out any maner edificacion. By thys
it may easily be perceyued wherin those, vnto
whom god hath opened the vnderstandyng of
his truthe, oughte to deffer from the papistes▪
First, thei shal be out of doubt y• it is abominable
sacreledge, to compt y• masse as a sacrifice,
wherby remission of synnes may be obtayned
other to repu
                  •
               e y• priest for a mediatoure, whiche
may applie the merites of Christes passion
vnto thē y• bye masses, or be presēt at y• doyng
of them, or do wyth deuocion worshippe them.
But they shal rather beleue that the death and
passion of Christe,Thē ar masse pense loste. is the only sacryfice wherby
the ire of god is pacified, and perpetuall iustice
gotē vnto vs. And by sydes these thynges
that the lorde Iesus is entered into the celestial
sāctuarie: that he may there show him selfe for
vs, and by the vertue of his sacrifice, praye for
vs. But yet they shal esealy graūt, that the fruite
of his death is communicate vnto vs in the
supper, not bi the merite of the worke, but for
the promesses that are made vnto vs therin, so
that we imbrace them wyth fa
                  •
               th. Forthermore
they ought in no case to graunte that the bread
is transsubstanciated (as they say) into the bodye
of Chryst, or the wyne into bloud: but they
must in that thyng constantly beleue, that the

visible sygnes do retayne his substaunce, that
hey may represent vnto vs, that spiritual veritie
wherof I haue spoken before. Thyrdlye▪
although they ought to be surely persuaded wt 
themselues that the lorde doth in veri dede geue
the same thyng that he doth represent: and
so that wee do vnfaynedlye receyue the bodye
and bloude of Christe:Lerne to seke Christe. yet shal they not seke if
as included vnder y• breade, or fastned (as they
say) locally vnto the visible sygne: moche lesse
oughte they to hono
                  •
               re the sacrament, but to
stretch vp the minde into heauē, that they may
there receyue and honour Christe.
            Hense shal it come to passe that they shall
dispice and condemne for ydolatrye, all those
supersticiouse cerimonies, as well of the carying
forth of the sacramēt in pōpe & ꝓcessiōs, as
of the buyldyng vp of those tabernacles wherin
it is set forth to be honoured. For the promesses
of the lorde stretch no farther, then to y•
vse whych he cōmitted vnto vs. Forthermore
they shal iudge the instituciō of the lorde to beviolated
and broken, in that the people is robbed
of the one parte of the sacrament: and that
it is necessarie, that bothe partes be wholy dystributed,
yf it shoulde be obserued aryght, In
fyne, they shal suppose, that it is not onely superfluouse
but also dayngerouse, and that it
becometh not the chrystian religyon, to vse so
many cerimonies, takē of the Iewes, more thā
the symplicitie wherin the apostles instructed
vs. They shal also iudge that it is euen of an
vngodly frowardnesse, so to celebrate the supper
with gestures▪ and maskers mouinges, that
no doctrine at al may there be herde, but is rather
buryed, as though it were a certeyne kind
of magycall arte. To conclude at the laste, wee

must now come to the last of the chiefe partes.
That is to saye,Yet by thys was y• trueth tried out. to that contencion whyche in
oure tyme is steared in this matter, whiche for
as much as no doubt it was of the deuils stearyng
vpon to let, or rather to breake the course
of the Gospell, I woulde wyshe it to be forgoten
for euer: much lesse can I be delyted in the
rehersynge of the same.
            But bycause I do perceyue very many godly
myndes: which know not whyther to turne
them selues: I wyll briefely say the thyng that
I shall thynke necessarye to declare howe they
maye delyuer them selues.
            Fyrste I desyre and beseche al faythfull persones
euen for the names sake of the lyuynge
God, that they be not greatly offended, bicause
thys controuersy is moued amonge them that
were the chiefe capiteynes, in restorynge and
brynging in agayne of the doctrine of the gospel.
For it is no new thinge for the lorde to suffer
his seruaūtes to be ignorant in some thinges:
and suffer them to contende amonge them
selues: not that he woulde suffer them to erre
continuallye, but for a tyme:The apostles varyed in some thinges to the intente he
myght make them more humble. And no doubt
yf all thynges had chaunced prosperoussye to
thys daye, and had flowed accordynge to oure
wyll, perchaunce men woulde haue forgotten
them selues: other els the mercy of god shoulde
not haue ben so muche knowen as it ought to
be. And therfore the lordes wyll was to take awaye
from men aloccasyon of gloriynge: that
glory myght be gyuen vnto hym onely.
            Forthermore, yf we consyder wyth howe
greate darkenesse the worlde was beset, when
they whiche moued this controuersy, beganne
to leade vs backe againe to the light of the veritie:

in dede we wyll merueyle nothynge at all
though they knewe no
                  •
                all thynges euen from
the begynnynge. It is rather a notable miracle
of god, that they, in so litle space of time, were
so illumined, that they them selues myghte escape
& leade other out of that synke of errours
wherin we had ben so longe tyme drowned.
            But there is no better waye, then to reherse
the matter it selfe euen as it was done. For
therby it shal apeare, that there is not so much
matter of offence in thys behalfe, as is cōmonlye
supposed to be.
            When Luther beganne to teache, he handeled
the matter of the supper so, that as concernynge
the corporall presence of Christe, he
seamed to leaue it suche, as all men dyd then
conceyue. For condemnynge transsubstanciaon,
he sayed that the breade was the bodye of
Christe, bycause it was ioyned togyther wyth
hym. Besydes thys, he added certeyne harde
and grosse similitudes. But that he dyd by cō
               pulsion,
bycause he coulde not otherwyse declare
his mynde. For it is an harde thynge to
expounde so harde a matter: and not to vse
some thynges, not all of the fittest for the purpose.
After this dyd zuinglius, and Ecolampadius
begynne to growe. Whyche when they
consydered the gyle and disceyt that the deuyll
bad brought in, inestablishing that carnall presence:
whyche had ben taught and beleued. v
                  •
               .
hundreth yeres before: they supposed it wyckednesse
to dissemble a matter of so greate importaunce.
And chiefely bycause there was annxed
vnto thys erro
                  •
               te,To honoure a creature as God is idolatry. an e
                  •
               ecrable ydolatrye,
that Christe shoulde be worshypped as included
vnder a piece of breade. But bycause it
was verye harde, to pull backe thys opinion,

whiche had ben longe & deaplie roted in the hertes
of men, they applyed all the force of there
wytte, to impugne the same, teachynge that
it was a most grose and absurde 
                  •
               rroure not
to acknowledge those thinges whiche be throughout
the whole scripture, testified of the ascencion
of Chryste. That he, in the nature of
man, is receiued in to heauē, and that he shal tari
                  •
               
there vntyll he descende to iudge the world.
But whylse they were very moche bente vnto
this purpose: they omited to declare what presence
of Chryste in the supper we ought to beleue,
& what communiō of his body and bloud
is ther receiued. In so moch y• Luther suposed
thē willing to leaue nought else but y• bare signes
voyde of y• spiritual substāce. And therfor
he began to resyst opēly: in so moch y• he declared
thē worthy to be cōpted for heretikes. And
after the cōtēciō wared ones hotte, in ꝓgresse
of tyme it was so increased & inflamed, y• it
was to fiersely stered to & fro, about a: 
                  •
               v. yers
to gether, duringe whiche tyme, neyther partie
would, wt indifferēt and quyete mynde here other.
For althoughe they did once conferre betwene
thē selues: yet was there so great ali
                  •
               nacion
of myndes, y• they departed the purpose
not brought to passe. For when they shoulde
haue come to some cōcorde, they recoyled more
and more: myndyng nought els but to defende
theyr opinion and to confute the contrary, we
perceyue therfore in what thing Luther erred
and also wherin zinglius and Ecolampadius
dyd erre: It was Luthers duetie: at the beginnyng
to admonish that it was not his purpose
to stablyshe suche a locall presence as the papistes
do dreame. Also, to proteste y• he soughte
not in thys place,Learne here the truth. to haue the Sacrament honoured

as God. Thyrdlye to absteyne from
those rude similitudes, most hard to be vnderstanded:
or els to vse them moderatlye, and to
interprete them so, that they myghte not haue
ben cause of any offence. To conclude, sence
that contention was moued, he passed al measure
both in declarynge his opinion, and also
in rebukynge other, wyth to much
                  •
                rigoure of
wordes. For whē he should haue expoūded his
mynde so, that it myght haue ben receyued: accordynge
to his accustomed vehemency, to the
intent to impugne them that helde the contrarye,
he vsed incredible fourmes of speakynge:
whiche coulde not well be suffered of them
whose mindes were but sklenderly appoynted
to gyue credence to him. The other also, offended
in that they did sticke so styefely in the impugnynge
of that supersticiouse and fantasticall
opinion of the papistes, as concernyng the
placely presence and the adoratiō that folowed
thereof, employinge their diligence to the rooting
out of vices, rather thē to the establishing
of y• thing which was profitable to be knowē.
            For notwythstanding that they denyed not
the veritie: yet dyd not they teache it openly as
was beseamyng. This do I vnderstande, that
whylse they gaue them selues studiouslye and
diligentlye, to affirme that the bread and wy
                  •
               e
were called the body & bloud of Christ bicause
they be ye signes therof: they thought not that
they ought in the meane time to do this thinge
also, to adde to that they are the signes after
such sorte that the veritie is neuerthelesse ioyned
vnto thē.This veritie is the 
                     •
                  remercie promised therin. Neyther dyd they declare y• they
wente not about to deface the true cōmunion,
which the lorde gyueth vs in his body & bloud.
            Of truth neyther of them was vnworthy

blame, for as muche as they dyd not susteyne
to here one an other, that all affection layed aparte,
they myght folowe the veritie, on which
syde so euer it shoulde appeare. But yet ought
not we therefore, to lette passe oure duetie towardes
them, least we forget the mercyes and
benefytes whiche God gaue vnto them, and
distributed vnto vs by their hādes For onlesse
we be vnthankefull, and vnmyndeful of those
thynges which we owe vnto them: absteyning
from all reproche and euyll report, we shall easyly
forgeue these and moche greater thynges.
To conclude, seyng that we knowe they were
both of Godly conuersacion and excellent doctrine,
and that they also whiche at this daye
be on lyue, be no lesse: we oughte neyther to
speake nor iudge of them, otherwyse thē with
greate modestie and reuerence.
            And chieflye because it hath pleased oure lorde
God so, that after he had by this meanes instructed
them to humilitie, he made an ende of
thys vnlucky contencion, or at the leste qualifyed
it for the tyme, so that in the meane seasō
it myght be fynished. This haue I spoken because
ther is as yet no order published, wherin
that concorde is appoynted: whiche thynge
were verye nessarie. But thys thynge shall be
when God wyll that all they whyche shoulde
set an order in these thynges,Hys wyll bee doene. do agre in one.
In the meane tyme thys ought to suffice you
that there be a brotherlye frenshyppe and con
               
                  •
               unction
betwene the congregacion: as belongeth
to the Christian communion. Wyth one
voyce therfore we wyl confesse, that when we
do accordynge to the institution of the Lorde
receyu
                  •
                the Sacrament with fayth, we are vndoubtedlye
made partakers of the substaunce

of the body and bloude of Christe Howe thys
thynge shoulde be done, some men can better
define and more playnly expounde, then other.
But thys thynge is chiefely to be remembred,
that we exclude all carnall imagination, & that
the mynde ought to be erected into heauē, and
that we thynke not our Lorde Iesu Christe to
be so vyle that he may be conteyned in corruptible
elementes. Agayne, leste the force of thys
most sacred mistery, shoulde be diminished, we
must thynke that it is wrought by the secrete
and wonderful power of God:
and that his spirite is the bonde
of thys partaking: whiche
is for that cause called
spirituall.
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶The order that the churche
and cōgregacion of Christe in Denmarke, and
in many places, coūtreis and cities in Germany
doth vse, not onelye at the holy
supper of the Lorde, but also
at the ministration of the
blessed Sacrament of
Baptisme and
holy Wedlocke.
            TO all that hunger and thyrst the glorye
of God & wealth of theyr neyghbours,
be grace mercye and peace from the same euerlastyng
God our moste deare father in heauen
thorow our Lorde and onely Sauiour Iesus
Christe. It were to me a singuler comfort (my
ryght deare and intierly beloued brethren, and
systers in Iesu Christe) yf I myghte be wyth
you my selfe continuallye, & comunicate vnto
you some part of that litle talēt, which I haue
receiued of the Lorde my God for your sakes,
and all the lawefull wayes that I coulde deuyse,
I haue sought thys greate whyle, to opteyne
licēce of the hygher powers for the same
purpose. But it wyl not be. Wherfore though
I be hyndred and kepte from you by all the
meanes that Sathan & his membres can imagen,
yet shall ye haue my poore herte, yet wyll
I not ceasse to wyshe you good, yet wyll I do
the beste for you that I can, although it be but
wyth my pen. In token wherof, I haue set
forth vnto you the order and maner that many
whiche haue receyued Goddes worde vnfaynedly,
do vse not onely at the mooste h
                  •
               lye
supper of our Lorde, but also at the ministracion

of the blessed Sacramente of Baptisme,
and when anye couple of persones are ioyned
into holy wedlocke. And thys haue I done, to
the intent, that when ye haue spyed and do se,
that thys order is agreable vnto Gods worde
not varying frō the moste wholsome doctrine
therof. Ye maye wyshe in your hertes to haue
Goddes truth prospere lykewyse amonge you
in the realme of Englande: And praye vnfaynedly
wyth me and all other synners, that the
father of mercy and God of all comforte wyll

                  •
               o lyghten and illuminate the hertes of oure
rulers, that they maye folowe the earnest monicion
of the seconde Psalme, and be no more
wythout vnderstādyng, but be wyse by times
and embrace the sonne of God, whyle he offreth
him selfe vnto them And not only to suffre
the worde of God to haue the vpper hande
aboue all other doctrines, but also them selues
to laye to theyr handes in abolishyng the blasphemous
and dampnable abuses that are here
(as yet▪ suffred about the forsayed thre principles
of Christes religion, wherfore deare brethren,
whē ye compare this order vnder wrytten
(whiche is the doctrine of Goddes worde,
and practise of the primatyue churche) to the
vayne ceremonyes vsed here yet (after the
churche of Rome) lyfte vp your hertes to almightye
God and beseche hym, that for Christes

                  •
               ake 
                  〈◊〉
                wyll once graunte, that these thre
(his holy Supper, holy Baptisme, holy wed
               
                  •
               ocke)
maye be truelye and sincerelye ministred
and practised also amonge vs. To the
glory of his blessed name 
                  •
               nd
encrease of his kyngdom
for euer. Amen.
            
               
               ¶The order taken for the due ministration
of the holy Supper
of the Lorde.
               FOr thy better instruction thou shalte
fyrste vnderstande, that the blessed Sacrament
of the bodye and bloude of the Lorde
(the worthy memoriall of oure redempcion) is
at no tyme denyed to any christen man (where
gods worde is truely preached) yf he lawfully
require it. And as none dothe minister it saue
the priest which is the officer appointed therto.
So is it not ministred, but whē there be other
present to receyue it as well as the pryeste.
               Now bicause that where gods worde is truely
preached, mē do se the fruite of the sayd holy
Sacrament, therfore resort they the oftener
to the same holy supper of the lorde and delyte
the more therin. But specially to se what a nū
                  bre
come to it on the sōdaye, & how reuerently,
it woulde do ones hert good. And bicause they
may the more fruitfully be partakers thereof,
therfore on the saterday whē the preachyng is
done (euery daye they haue a sermon) all suche
as are appoynted in them selues to be partakers
of the Lordes supper come (one after an
other) to the priest: of whō they learne, not onely
what the Sacrament is & the right vse therof,
but also they beynge repentaunt and sorye
for theyr synnes, & professing amendement, receyue
there gods promises for theyr absolucion,
to the singulare comforte of theyr conscience:
& are exhorted by the priest, to do agaynste
the morow, as the holy Apostle Paule biddeth
them: that is euen to trye, examen, and proue
them selues, whether they cā be cōtent vnfaynedlye
in theyr hertes, to take better holde on

the kyngdome of God, then they haue done in
tymes paste, to be more stedfaste in fayth and
hope towarde god & hys promyses, to bemore
feruent in prayer and loue towarde God, and
for hys sake to shewe vnfayned soue towarde
euery man, to forgeue hertely as they wolde
be forgeuen, to mortyfie theyr fleshe dalie more
and more by reasonable abstynence and godly
exercises of the spirite and vertuous occupacion
of the bodye, to bee glad in distrybutynge
the workes of mercy to the poore &c.
               And whē the pryest, preacher, or curate for al
is on thynge) hathe geuen euerye one, thys or
suche a lyke exortation, and enioyued ech one
hys penaūce accordyng to his estate as subiectes
to be true & obediēt to their rule
                     •
                  s seruātes
to be faithful and diligent in waytyng on their
masters conmaundement, children to honour
and ob
                     •
                  ie their parentes▪ and to lerne vertue
whyle they be yonge, housholders to kepe their
houses in the feare of God, & so forth) whē the
priest (I saye) hath enioyned them thus to lyue
and to increase in the same wel doynge, he commytteth
them to God and to the worde of hys
grace, And so they departe.
               ¶On the sondaye in the mornyng (at .vi.
of the clocke in Sōmer, and at .vii. in winter)
the bell ryngeth, and the people, prepare them
selues to the churche, so that sone after the bel
hath ronge the seco
                     •
                  de tyme, the churche is almost
full of men, women and chyldren, Then
a lytle a fore the houre is expired, they rynge y•
bell the thirde tyme, whiche ceasseth not tyl the
houre stryke: And at the quere dore besyde the
table of the Lorde, stande two good sober synginge
men, whyche (commenly a quarter of an

houre a fore the sermon) beginne a psalme and
all the people bothe olde and yonge wyth one
voyce do synge wyth them, after such a fashiō
that euery note answereth to a syllabe, and euery
sillabe to one note commenly and no mo:
so that a man maye wel vnderstand what the
                     •
                  
                  synge.
But fyrst for the moste parte they syng
the Pater noster in theyr mother tonge, & then
the Psalmes, some tyme mo, some tyme fewer
accordyng as the tyme requireth, but al in ther
owne language. Now whan the clocke smyteth
(which is comēly .vii. in Sōmer. but .viii.
in wynter) the superattendaūt or chiefe curate
commeth in to the pulpyt, and fryste of all, he
wysheth vnto his audience and to hym selfe▪
grace merye and peace from God the father
through his blessed sone Iesus Christe oure
sauiour: And to the intent that theyr hertes
maye be opened to the true vnderstandynge
of the gospel, which he is aboute to preach vnto
them, he exhorteth them to call for helpe to
the holye Goost. So after that the two foresayde
men (or at the least one of them) hath orderly
begonne, all the thurch folowethe, and
synge with one voyce vnto the holy Gost this
songe, Ueni sancte spiritus &c. or suche an other
lyke it, in thyr mother tonge.
               ¶Thē the preacher taketh the gospell of that
presente sondaye (or some other place of the
scripture, that he is appoynted to declare) and
expoundethe it clearely by the other manifeste
places of the byble, noetynge in it suche lessones,
such consolacions, and such ensamples
as are for the edyfienge of his audience.
               ¶Comenlye at the latter ende of the sermon,
he maketh a prery shorte rehearsal of it by the

way of exhortacyon to the people, or prayer
towarde God. And then requireth he them to
confesse and knowledge theyr sinnes vnto
God wyth him, euery man in hys owne conscience,
and to saye suche or lyke wordes in hys
herte, as I haue plurallye expressed in the generall
confession, that I humblye offered to
the Kynges mooste honorable counsayll for
the edyfyenge. Anno. M. D. xxxix. Whan the
prieste hathe prayed for all estates, and made
this or suche a lyke confession in their name, he
prayeth God to be mercifull to them, to blesse
them to shewe the lyghte of hys countenaunce
ouer them, and to haue mercye on them.
            
            
               ¶Then gyueth he them thys or
soche a lyke absolucion,
and sayeth.
               TO all them that repent and are sory for
theyr synnes, detestinge and abhorring
theyr olde wycked lyfe. Yf they be hongry and
thirste for Gods mercye in Christe, beleuynge
surelye to haue forgyuenesse onelye by hym,
purposinge to for sake all abhomynacyon of
lyuynge, and from hense forthe to lyue in the
feare of God and vnfaynedly to kepe his commaundementes:
To all suche (by the vertue of
Goddes worde and commission of the same)
I pronounce and warraunt fre remyssion and
cleane forgeuenes of all theyr synnes. To the
other that wyll not repente▪ but styll harden
theyr hertes agaynst Goddes trueth, continually
abydynge in the blyndnesse of false doctrine
& fylthynes of wi
                     •
                  ked lyuyng, hauing no
purpose nor mynde to come to r
                     •
                  pentaūce: To
all suche (by the vertue of the same worde and
commission therof) do I pornounce damnacyon

and the terrible wrath of god, vntyll they
amende.
               ¶So after that he hath wyshed the peace of
God vnto hys audyence, he commeth downe
Then all the congregacyon and church in maner
afore sayde, do synge the Crede or beleue
in theyr owne mother tonge. And whan that
is done, the curate or els his coadiutour, standeth
vp afore the table of the lorde, and requyreth
all such as are appoynted then to be partakers
therof, to be well ware what they do,
and to make a iuste accompt with them selues
after what maner they haue proued and tried
theyr owne consciences, whether it be done vnfaynedly
& in an earnest maner & whether they
be at one with al men, and so forth. Yf it be so
in dede, he geueth God thākes for it. Yf no, he
praieth thē right gētly, yt they wyll thinke no
shame to absēt thē selues frō this holy supper
tyl ye recōciliacion be made, lest they come to it
vnworthely. And thē geueth he thē this exhortacion,
or els another such lyke:
            
            
               ¶An Exhortation at the supper
of the Lorde.
               DEare frendes, we are all baptised into
the death of oure Lorde Iesu Christe:
wherfore after holy Baptysme: we muste all
the dayes of our lyfe, fyght and stryue in continuall
battayle & warre agaynst synne, death
and the deuyl, & so beare about with vs in our
bodies the passion and death of our Lorde Iesu,
and we proue by experience, that the enemies
whom we haue to do withal, are neyther
weake, nor feable, but mighty and valiant, to
whose power mē are naturally subdued so yt
vpō earth there is none so mighty, as to resist

thys power of darkenesse throughe hys owne
strength, so feable and weake is all oure abilitie
in comparison thereof. For the whyche
cause God the father through Christ his deare
sonne hath ordeined another power and kingdome,
in the whiche is ryghtuousnes and lyfe:
and through his death and bloude hath he delyuered
vs and brought vs frō synne to ryghtuousnes,
from death to lyfe, from the deuyll
to God, & hath included the kyngdome of hys
grace in the preaching, beleuyng and folowing
of his worde: which beinge begonne in the holy
christentie, shal go forth vntyll the last daye:
that we whiche receyue, beleue, and do after
the same worde (by the merites of Christe our
reconciler and Sauiour) shoulde be and continew
for euer his deare chyldrē, & heyres of the
kingdom of grace, that is to say, of euerlasting
saluaciō, for as much as we through such faith
do eate cōtinually his flesh & drinke his bloud,
that is to saye, abyde in hym, and he in vs.
               ¶To the intent now that this so great goodnesse
declared by the worde of God, myghte
dayly amonge vs be practised, distributed and
exhibited, therfore hath the gracious and merciful
Lorde Iesus Christ instituted and ordeined
a remembraunce of thys his wonderfull
worke, and cōmaunded, that we at his supper
in the Sacrament, shoulde eate his very body
and drynke his very bloude. Wherby the hertes
of al suche are faythful beleuers and feare
God, myghte be assured of thys same grace of
God, and euerlastyng saluacion: And also that
in the holy cōgregacion and churche his glorious
remembraunce myghte 
                     〈◊〉
                   kepte, that is to
say, to giue him thākes & prai
                     •
                  e, to sing, 
                     •
                  peake

preache, & reade therof, to exhorte & cōforte one
another among them selues. And finally wyth
all faythfulnesse one to shewe towarde another
suche loue and fauour, as we oure selues
haue receiued of our deare lorde Iesus Christ.
¶And for as muche as we nowe are hapened
in these later dayes, in the whyche thys so precious
treasure is vnhalowed and wyckedlye
abused. Thys holy Sacrament shall (for the
necessarye causes nowe rehersed) be to vs also
a testimonye of thys presente tyme before
god and the worlde, that we do vtterly both in
worde and dede, refuse and forsake all the dis
                  
                     •
                  eatfulnesse
of the papistrie, and that we fayth
fully wyth all our hertes submitte oure selues
vnder the gospel of Iesus Christe.
               ¶Wherfore ye dearely beloued in the Lorde,
for as muche as thys matter is so wayghtye,
euen Gods owne institution and ordinaunce,
yea, and his cōmaūdemēt also that we shoulde
do it. And lykewyse seynge the necessite which
shoulde cause vs to accomplishe the same, is so
great, specially on our behalfe towardes God
(to whom we owe a longe Deo gratias and
thankes) we ought in no wyse to refrayne our
selues from it, neyther suffer oure selues to
be kepte backe there frō: but oftymes wyth repētant
hertes to seke this our soules medicine
& cōfort of our cōsciēce: beleuinge what Christ
sayth to vs herin, & doing as 
                     •
                  e cōmaūdeth vs
               ¶And as for those that seke no suche repentant
hertes fayth and comfort herein, but lyue
in open blasphemy, continuynge in synne and
wycked lyfe. They shall knowe, that they are
vnworthy of thys holy supper, and shal be excomunicate,
tyll they amende.
               
                  ¶But to the intent that the vnrepētant may
thorow the grace of god be lightened, and that
we our selues may frutefully enioye this supper
to the amēdmēt of our liues, & also that all
Chrystendome generally maye be the beter and
be edified. Therfore let vs hertelye make our
prayer to god the father of al mercye: beleuyng
assuredly, that he wyl graciously here vs thorow
our Lord Iesus Christ, who cōmaunded
vs to praye, and promised vs, saynge: Aske
and ye shall haue: seke, & ye shall fynd: knocke▪
and it shalbe opened to you.
               ¶Wherfore in consideracion of the same conmaundement
and promes, lyft vp your hertes
and saye thus wyth me in youre prayer.
               O Lord god our father in heauē we thy miserable
childrē
vpon earth beseche the that thou
wyll mercifully loke on vs & lend vs thy grace
¶That thy holy name maye be sanctifyed among
vs and in all the world thorow the pure
and syncere teachynge of thy worde, & through
ernest charite in our daylye lyuynge, and oure
conuersacion. Se
                     •
                  lude thou graciously al fals
doctrine and euell lyuinge, wherby thy worthi
name myght be blasphemed and slaundred.
               ¶O let thy kyngdome come and be greate.
All synfull, blynd people and suche as are holden
captyue of the deuell in hys kyngdome▪
those bryng thou to the knowledge of the true
fayth in Iesus Christe thy sonne.
               ¶Strength vs Lorde wyth thy spiryte to
do and to suffre thy wil both in life and death
in well and woo, that our wyll maye all waye
be broken, offred vp and mortified.
               ¶And geue vs oure dayly bread: Preserue
vs from couetous desire and carefulnes of the

bealy, that of the we may be assured to haue abundaunce
of al good thynges.
               ¶Forgeue vs oure trespace, as we forgeue
them whyche offende vs: that oure hert maye
haue a sure and glad conscience, and that wee
neuer feare nor be afrayed for any synne.
               ¶Leade vs not into tentacyon but helpe vs
through thy spirite to subdue the flesh, to despise
the worlde with his vanities, and to ouercome
the deuel wyth all hys craftie assaultes.
And finally delyuer thou vs frō all euell, both
bodely and gostly, temporal & eternall. Amen.
               ¶They that ernestly, desyre al thys, let them
say: Amē beleuyng without any doubte, y• it is
graūted & hearde in heauē according as Christ
ꝓmised vs, saying, whē ye pray, beleue assuredly
y• ye shal haue it & it shal come to passe. Amē.
            
            
               ¶Then reherseth he the wordes of the holye
supper out of thre Euāgelistes, Mathewe,
Marke and Luke, and
also out of S. Paule
Cor. xi. saying.
               THe lorde Iesus the same night wherin
he was betrayed toke bread, & gyuynge
thākes brake it & sayed: Take ye & eate, this is
my body, whiche shall be gyuen for you. Thys
do in the remembraunce of me. In lyke maner
when supper was done, he toke the cuppe also
saying. This cup is the new testamēt in my
bloud. As of
                     •
                  e as ye drinke this do it in remembraūc
                     •
                  
of me. This done, the whole churche in
maner aboue sayd, do syng a psalme or two of
thākes gyuing for this blessed Sacramēt. And
in the meane saeson, they y• are appoynted thē
to suppe with the Lorde, and come soberly and
wyth greate reuerence one after another) the

men fyrste and then the women) to the table
of the Lorde: where they knelynge (one I
saye after another) receyue at the hande of one
of the priest
                     •
                  s, the Sacramente in fourme of
breade. And then goeth he wyth lyke reuerence
to the other ende of the table, and at the hande
of an other of the priestes (which stādeth there
ready for the same purpose) he kn
                     •
                  leth downe
and receyueth it also in the fourme of wyne,
and all the other folowe reuerently, and do the
same. Yf one of the priestes or both be disposed
lykewise as thē to suppe with the lorde, he
kneleth downe, & his companion 
                     •
                  erueth hym.
And euen so doth he also to his felowe in lyke
maner and reuerence.
               ¶Yf the cōmunicantes and they that receyue
then the Sacramente be many, they synge the
moe Psalmes of thankes gyuyng: elles synge
they the fewer.
               ¶When thys holy supper is done, & the partakers
therof y• were appointed therto serued,
one of the ministers stādeth vp, & exhorteth the
people to gyue earnest thankes to God, wyth
thys or suche a lyke prayer.
               ¶O almyghty God, moste mercifull father,
thou that openest thy gracious hande, wherby
al thinges lyuyng haue theyr foode in due season,
we gyue honoure, prayse and thankes vnto
the for all thy benefites both gostly and bodely,
which thou hast rychely poured vpon vs
wythout any of our deseruynge: but specially
we thanke the for thys worthy memoriall of
our redemption wherin thou haste nouryshed
and fedde our soules with the body and bloud
of thy deare sonne our Sauiour Iesus Christ
blessed for euer. Amen.
               
                  
                  ¶An other.
                  
                     O Lorde Iesu Christe oure redeme
                        •
                     , honour
and prayse be all waye geuen vnto
the for feady
                        •
                     g our soules wt this spiritual
and heauenly foode. And we besech the for thy
tender mertye, that as thou hast geuē it vs for
a sacramente of continuall thankfulnesse, of
daylye remembraūce and of charitable vnyte.
Euēso most merciful sauiour, lend vs al way
thy grace, to be thankful vnto the for it, and
not onely by it to be continually (myndeful of
our redēption purchaced thorow thy death &
bludsheding) but also in cōsideraciō therof to
increace in loue towarde the, and al mankynd
for thy sake.
               
               
                  An other.
                  
                     O Lorde God allmyghtye, we thanke the
wyth all oure hertes that thou hast fed
our soules wyth the bodye and bloude of thy
moste deare sonne. And we besech the vnfay
nedly, so to illuminate our mindes wyth thy
holye spirite, that we maye dailye increace in
strenght of faythe to the, in assurednesse of hope
in thy promyses, and feruentnesse of loue
towarde the and our neyghbours, to the glory
and prayse of thy holy name. Amen.
                  ¶Thus the priest concludeth and endeth the
office of this present misterie, and blesseth the
peopell rehearsyng these wordes of scripture.
Numer
                        •
                      .vi.
                  ¶The Lord blesse you and preserue you: the
Lorde shewe his face to you and haue mercye
on you: the Lorde turne his contenaunce vnto
you▪ & geue you peace. Amen.
                  And so they departe
               
            
            
               
               ¶The order taken for the due ministracion
of the blessed Sacrament
of Baptisme.
               ON the sondaye at one of the clocke after
none, they haue a sermon of an
houre longe, wyth lyke ryngyng and singynge
of Psalmes afore in theyr mother tonge, as
they had in the mornynge, to the whiche preachynge
the people come as thycke, as they dyd
then. And as they signe a Psalme for grace to
the holy goost in the mornyng, so do they here
also and at euerye sermon, where or when so
euer it be made. And lyke as in the mornynge
when the sermon is done, the preacher exhorteth
them to cōfesse theyr synnes wyth hym in
theyr hertes, and there vpon doth absolue thē
by the power of Goddes
                     •
                   worde: so dothe he
here also in lyke maner, and in euery sermon.
Then synge they a lyke songe of thankesgyuynge
as they dyd in the mornyng, and as they

                     •
                  e accustomed to do after euery preachynge.
               ¶In the meane season whyle thys psalme of
thankes gyuyng is songe (or 
                     •
                  ls afore) the font
is prepared, the mydwyfe is the
                     ••
                   present with
the childe: or no mydwifes, yf there be no chyldrē
to be christened (as there be comonly) wyth
a fayre company of honest sobre women. And
when the psalme is songe out, the ministre beynge
theyr ready at the font, readeth a lecture
of the Bible: And when he hath declared it cō
                  pendiously
to the edifiynge of the congregacion,
he exhorteth them, that for asmuche as all
men are cōceyued and borne in synne, and that
seynge it is vnpossible for a man to come into
the kyngdome of God, excepte he be borne a
newe and regenerate: they wyll shewe and declare

theyr Godly 
                     •
                  oue, and call vpon God the
father thorow Iesus Christ and in his name,
that he wyll mercifullye baptyse that chylde,
(or those chyldren) wyth the holy goste, and receyue
hym (or them) to grace.
               ¶Upō the same exhortacion, they make their
hertye prayer besechynge God to haue mercye
on the chylde, and then addeth he thys or suche
a lyke peticion in theyr name, sayinge.
               ¶O almyghty God whiche in cōmaundynge
vs to praye, hast assured vs, that we beleuyng
stedfastly in thy pro
                     ••
                  es, shall haue all that we
desyre, specially concernynge the soule, wherin
we seke thy glory & wealth of out neyghbours
Our humble peticion to the (O most deare father)
is, that for asmuche as this chylde is not
wythout originall synne, thou wylt consyder
thyne owne mercy, and (accordyng to thy promes)
sende thys chylde thy good spirite, that
in thy syght it be not cōpted amonge the chyldren
of wrath but of lyght, & grace, & become a
membre of the vndefiled churche spoused to
Christ thy deare sonne in fayth and loue, vnfayned,
by the meanes of y• same Iesus Chirst
our Lorde. Amen.
               
                  ¶An other.
                  
                     O Almyghty eternall God, & moste merciful
father. For asmuche as the iuste lyueth
by fayth, & vnpossible it is any man wtout
beliefe to please the, we beseche the y• thou wyl
                        •
                     
graūt to this childe the gyfte of fayth, wherin
thou wylt seale and assure his hert in the holy
gost, according to the promes of thy sōne, that
the inward regeneracion of the spirite may be
truely represented by the outwarde baptysme:
and that the childe may be buried with hym in

death, and be raysed vp by hym frome deathe
againe. To the prayse of thy glory and edifyinge
of hys neghboure. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Somtyme also the priest readeth this
parcell of the .x. Chapter of
S. Markes gospel, saieng:
               ANd they brought lytle chyldren to hym
that he should touch thē, And his disciples
rebuked those that broughte them. But
whan Iesus saw it, he was displeased, & sayed
vnto them: Suffer litle chyldren to come to me
and forbidde them not, for of suche is the kingdome
of god. Uerely I saye vnto you: who so
euer receaueth not the kyngdome of God as a
chyld, shal not entre therin. And he toke thē vp
in his armes, & put his handes vpon them, and
blessed them.
               ¶Then the godfather yf it be a manchilde (or
the godmother yf it be a womāchilde) holding
the chylde in his armes, commeth and standeth
by the prieste, who asketh hym on the childes
behalfe, yf he forsake the deuel & al his workes
he saith yea, and vpon the priestes interrogaciō
he cōfesseth his fayth in the face of the church.
So the priest taketh the childe in his left hāde
and wt his righthande he poureth water on his
head, calling him by his name (as he did afore)
and baptisynge him in the name of the father,
and of the sonne, a
                     •
                  d of the holy gooste
               ¶Fynally, the ministre committeth the chyldren
to the prayers of the congregaciō, & exhorteth
the godfathers and godmothers most ernestly,
to se that the children be brought vp and
instruct in Christen knowledge & vertue, to the
glory of God & edifieng of the comen wealth.
               ¶Then synge they a psalme eyther that concerneth

some thankes geuynge to God for his
worde or els some necessary peticion.
               And so they depart.
               ¶Now in lyke maner as thou seist thys blessed
sacrament ministred on the sonday, euē so
wyth lyke reuerence do they vse it at the same
houre on those wyke dayes, that the congregaciō
(wt the authoritie of their head rulers hath
appointed to that vse: And yf the children in ye
meane time be in any daūger, thē ye mydwifes
baptise thē. And as the congregacion and multytude
of people is greate at the ministracion
of holy baptysme on the sōday, so is it also on
the other appoynted dayes, though they be
worke dayes. Wherby it is to be noted, that ye
instituciō and ordinaunce of God is in greate
reputaciō amonge them: for as it is ministred
reuerently, so is it heard with greate deuocion
and feruentnes: And though there be alwaye
some vnthankefull lyuers ye
                     •
                   the flocke of
Christe be euer bringinge forth good fruites, &
folowe the worde of lyfe in theyr cōuersacion:
            
            
               ¶The ordre taken for the due ministracyon
of holy wedloke.
               AS toutching Gods holy institucion of
mariage, thou shalte vnderstande, that
preuye cōtractes are auoyded asmuche as may
be: And yonge folkes are so well broughte vp
in the feare of God and instructe in the knowledge
of his worde, that they wel not lightly be
entyced to rūne on heade, and mary without y•
honest consent of theyr parentes and tutours.
Agayne, the fathers and mothers whych haue
yong folkes apte to mariage, are circumspecte
not suffringe theyr sonnes and daughters to,
go longe beyonde theyr tyme vnmaryed: but

both for the auoydynge of vncleanly cōuersacyon
in theyr children, & also for theyr owne discharge,
they prouyde them honeste mariages
mete for them. Which thynge to do, they are
not only in the dayly sermons that they heare,
but also by the olde Godly practises of suche
holy men as was Abraham Isaac &c. N
                     •
                  ther
do the two yong persones come together after
a lyght or vndy
                     •
                  cret maner, but euen at theyr
handfastynge (whan the knot of holy wedolke
is fyrst 
                     ••
                  yt) ther are present the father and
mother of the partyes or els (yf they be dead or
absen
                     •
                  ) theyr nyest kynsfolkes and tutours,
and so is also some honest discrete preacher or
curate of theirs: who to the edifienge of them,
maketh a Godly collacion out of Gods worde
for thyr en
                     •
                  āple, lerninge & cōfort in holy wedlocke.
So whan the time approcheth that they
shalbe maried openly in the face of the church,
the curate in the presence of the whole congregacion
geueth warninge certeyne dayes afore,
and requyreth that yf anye man knowe some
lauful impediment to hindre the sayd mariage
he wyll notifie it at his monicion. Yf no hinderaunce
be made, then at the day appointed, the
brydgrome hauynge a company of honest men
with him, and lyke wy
                     •
                  e the bride hauinge an
hones
                     •
                   company of women wyth her, come to
the sermon in the mornyng (whych as I sayd
afore, is euery deye at .vii. of the clocke in Sō
                  mer,
and at .viii. in wynter) and after that the
preaching is done & the sacrament ministred in
maner afore saide, they come both before the
preacher: and in the meane tyme, the whole
churche in their mother tōge, do sing the, Cvi.
psalme. Beati omnes qui timent dominū. &c.
               
                  ¶Then the preacher speaketh to them both
by name, and asketh them sayinge: N and N,
are ye mynded to lyue togyther in holye wedlocke,
and to testify and cōfirme the same purpose
here in the presence of the cōgregagicion?
They answer, yea, then (sayth he) I take you
all here that stande by, to wyines, requirynge
you to recorde the same, and to remēbre it, and
sayeth moreouer: Yf there be any mā here that
knoweth lawfull impediment by Gods worde
that these two persones may not procede togither
in maryage, let hym speke nowe. So yf
there be none to make impedimente, then the
preacher sayth: For asmuch as here appeareth
no hynderaunce to the contrarye, but that ye
maye go forth togyther in holye wedlocke, I
praye God establyshe the thynge that he hath
wrought in you. Seynge also that both your
consentes are knyt in holy wedloke, and ye cō
                  fesse
the same here openlye before God and the
world. I declare and pronounce you to be maryed
togither. In y• name of the father & of the
sonne, & of the holy goste. And in so sayinge he
ioyneth their hādes togither, & addeth moreouer:
let no man therfore seperate thē a sundrr,
whō god hath coupled togither. This done, he
erhorteth thē to remēbre, how y• god hath ioythe
                     •
                  
in holy mariage, & according to ye cōmaūdement
of god, to loue one an other, & so to kepe
their houshold, & to bring vp their childrē whē
God sendeth thē, in the feare of god that theyr
whole liuing may redounde to the glory of his
holy name, and edifiyng of the com
                     •
                  n wealth.
            
            
               ¶Then rehearseth he this (or suche another)
prayer in the name of the whole
churche and congreg
                     •
                  cion.
               
                  
                  O Almighty God, father of heauen: for
as muche as it hath pleased the to call
these new maryed folkes vnto holy wedlocke,
lyke as at the begynnynge thou sawest it not
good for a mā to be alone, for the which cause
thou m
                     •
                  deste hym an helper lyke to hym selfe,
and so ordeynedest that they two should be as
one persone: we beseche the, y• vnto these newe
maryed folkes thou wylt graunt thy holy spirite,
whereby they lyuynge in holye wedlocke,
maye styll truste in thy goodnes, ouercome all
temptation, & leade an honest godly lyfe to the
edifying of euery mā. Blesse them also tha
                     •
                   in
the fruite of theyr bodye they maye prayse the
and so brynge vp the same, y• it maye be to thy
glory and profyt of the comon wealth. Amen.
               Then the churche syngeth a Psalme of
thākes gyuyng, and so departeth.
            
            
               ¶The conclusion of this lytle boke.
               THou seest nowe what order is kepte in
the ministracion and vse of the forsayd
thre holy ordinaunces of God: cōcernynge the
whyche, I wrytte here nothyng of had I wist
nor of vncertentie, but euen as I knowe, & as
I haue not onely sene with myne eyes & heard
wyth myne eares, but bene present also longe
and many a day at the execution, practise & experience
therof, whiche thinge as I wryte to
gyue al good hertes occasion of feruent prayer
to God, that he wyll graūt his worde to grow
lykwyse amonge vs: euen so in the vertue of
Gods holy name, and for that precious bloud
sake of his most deare sonne, I admonish and
exhorte al subiectes to be pacient to auoyed all
kynde of sedicion, to cōmitte the refourmation
of all errours, supersticions, ceremonies,

vayne tradicions, wicked lawes & vniuste statutes
of men. Euen vnto God the authour of
peace, & to the workynge of his spirite in those
princes and rules, whome he hath called to office
for the same purpose: lette no mā be slacke
in his duetie, but gyue god that, whiche is his,
and to the king the thing y• belōgeth vnto hym
acordynge as Christe cōmaundeth Math .xxii.
as saynt Paule exhorteth. Roma .xii.
               ¶This I saye, to stoppe the mouthes, and
the blasphemous tonges of suche as wyll not
ceasse to rayle on me and to slaunder me (yea
euen to the kynges maiestie) as though I were
a peruerter of comon order, or toke vpō me to
chaunge the lawes: and to make new statutes.
Naye ye vngodly hypocrites, not so, but as I
am sure that there is heauy dampnacion layed
vp for al such subiectes as rebel or make sedicion
against theyr Prince, or disobeye the least
cōmaūdement of god in theyr soueraygne, euē
so I am assured, that there is no lesse dampnacion
prepared for those rulers or heades, that
make vniuste lawes & cruell statutes to maynteyne
theyr owne lustes and opresse the poore.
I reporte me to the .x. chapiter of Esaye the .ii.
and .iii. of Micheas, and to the later ende of
the .v. chapter of the prophet Hieremy. Let all
rulers threfore beware, that they make no actes
of parliament nor statutes agaynste gods
worde, and let al subiectes learne of S. Pete
                     •
                  
(i. Pe .ii. to be obedient. &c. And not onely that
but yf they be cōmaunded any thynge, then let
them learne of the same S. Peter (Act .iiii.)
to obeye god more then mē. In the meane time
tyll gods blessed worde onely be ruler amonge
vs, & tyl all wicked inuentions of men be abolished,

let those y• feare god vnfaynedly be feruent
in theyr prayers, & increace in all thākfulnesse
& veriuous lyuyng towarde God & men.
Let no mā, womā, nor chylde of god be flacke
in his deutie: but let fayth increace in strength
let hope be euermore and more assured of gods
promises, let charitie alway loue God and her
neighbour, and leaue no good worke vndone,
that may be to gods glory & mans profyt. And
thē shal we be knowen, not onely readers and
hearers of the truth, but true disciples of the
same. And though we can not atteyne to the
perfec
                     •
                  nesse of that comon wealth whiche I
spake of afore (where Gods ordinaunces are
so reuerētly ministred, the poore so richely pro
uided for & youth so vertuous
                     •
                  y broughte vp)
neuertheles we doinge our best, and begginge
strēgth of god to do more then we cā do of our
selues, shall not onelye be alowed & accepted in
his sight, but also haue the cōtinuall assistence
of his holy spirite: wherby we sufficinetly harnessed
and armed agaynste all temptacions of
synne, hel, the deuyl, & our owne fleshe, shall, as
wel haue the vpper hande of them, as we haue
(thorow the onelye power of God) ouercome
many sturdy wyndes and tempestes of aduersitie
in tyme paste, and as we hope to escape
these present troubles by the helpe of Iesus
Christ, whose name be blessed for euer. Amen.
            
            
               ¶A litle complaynte with a short exhortacion
made vnto all them, that are no dissemblers wt 
gods worde, but vnfaynedly lyue there after.
               LYke as God (accordyng
                     •
                   to his moste
blessed nature) euer louyng, gracious,
mercyfull & true, both alwaye sende 
                     •
                  is worde
afore he pl
                     •
                  ge the worlde, and gyue
                     •
                  h vs warnyng

afore the destruction come, wyllynge vs
to cōuerte vnto him to forsake our owne euyll
wayes, & to lay hande on eternal lyfe. Euen so
cōtrary wise the deuyl, the father of falsheade
and lyes, en
                     •
                  ying mans saluaciō, casteth euer
one bone or other in the way, to hindre the glory
of God, to stoppe his worde, to kepe backe
his truth, least thorow the stedfast beleauinge
& folowing therof, his owne kyngdom shoulde
be minished, gods amplified & encreased▪ Somtime
to hynder the gospell of the glorye of the
great god, he steareth vp tirāny & cruelnes, and
mo
                     •
                  eth some rulers or great mē of the worlde
to take part agaynst it, to persecute it, to trouble
& vere thē whō god hath called vnto it. Ensāple
wherof ye se in Pharao, in king Achab,
in Antiochus, in Herode, & in those greate prelates
that shewed their hote charitie vpon our
Sauiour Christ, & his Apostles. The deuyl also
to set vp his kyngdome the better, getteth
him chaplens for his owne 
                     •
                  oeth, such as were
Baals prophetes .iii. Regū .xxii. that they may
euer eyther in confessions or otherwise, moue
kynges & princes to take parte agaynste theyr
owne saluacion, & to trouble such as tel thē no
dreames, nor fātasies, but euen the very word
of god. As the prophete Mych
                     •
                  as dyd. Somtime,
I saye, least the truth shoulde be beleued,
the deuyll as he is the father of all lyes: so getteth
he false wytnesses to testify euen agaynst
Christ, & against poore Steuē & Paule his seruaūtes,
yea & to preache, that theyr doctrine is
naught, sedicious, newe learning, and heresy,
Mat .xxvii. Mat .i. Aetu .vii .xxi▪ ii. y• they wyll
destroy good workes. Ro .iii. y• they wyll kepe
no holy daye. Mat .xii. Iohn .v. that they wyll

not fast. Mat .ix. Mar .ii. Luc .v. Thus (I say)
is the deuyl euer about to ouerthrow Christes
kyngdome, & to set vp his owne. And bycause
his lyinge chaplens shoulde the better fyght agaynste
Christ, he teacheth them to go crattely
to worke, to lye & spare not, to cal the disciples
of Christ newe felwes, to saye, that they care
neyther for fasting nor praying, for almes dede
nor for good worke, yea make the worlde beleue
(sayth the deuyll) y• they care neyther, for
one cerimonye nor other, for one sacramēt nor
other. Such lying lessons doth the deuyl teach
his scholers, & not onely this, but also to wrest
and wrynge the scripture frō the manifest vnderstanding
of it, of the which iuglyng cast he
hath gyuen thē an ensāple in the .iiii. of Mat
and .iiii. of Luke. Who now cōsidering this
greate decaye of godlynes, that the deuyl hath
brought into the worlde (partly thorow the tyrāny
that he hath steared vp in great mē, partly
thorowe the false wytnes bearyng of hypocrites
and lyinge teachers) hathe no cause to
mourne in this behalfe? Who wyl not be sory
to se Gods holy worde thus persecuted, thus
exiled, thus cruelly reported, thus belyed?
               Neuerthelesse al thys euyll doth not the deuyll
thynke sufficient, he can not here withall
be cōtent, but he entreth in also amonge them
that professe the name of Christe, y• are called
brethren & disciples, that pretende to loue and
fauour his truth: And amonge them, loke who
is mete for his purpose, moste inconstant, and
leas
                     •
                   regardeth Christes worde in his herte, of
hym he maketh eyther an whoremonger, and
disceyuer of his neyghbour, or a folower of other
vyces of his owne carnal lustes, robbyng

him vtterly of that moste holy, moste stedfaste
and lyuynge fayth that Chryst taught, & also
of those worthy fruites of y• spirite of god repētance
& workes of light, whiche y• scripture
speaketh of. By the meanes wherof, & because
he bareth the name of a Chrysten brother, ther
fore euen as he behaueth hym selfe nowe, and
as he lyueth, so must we be reputed of the vngodly
and such lyuers must we be called. Yf he
be a breaker of peace, a maker of sediciō, a drō
                  karde,
a false byer and seller, a folower of fylthy
lustes, a brynger vp of s
                     •
                  ctes (as God euer
suffrethe them to be disceaued that wyl not abyde
the ordre of hys worde) Then muste we
also be called breakers of comē ordre, raylers.
makers of insurrectiō, droūkardes, false dealers
wyth oure neyghboures, Heretikes, folowers
of a fleshlye and carnall lyberte: Yea
though all oure teachynge, wrytynge, talking
and lyuing be to the cōtrary. Yet beare we the
blame, so blynd is thys wyckede world in iudgement,
& so vnthankfull in theyr lyuynge are
a great nombre of them that are called Chrysten
men (as I vnderstand) on the other syde.
               ¶Wherfore to you dearlye beloued in God,
electe and chosen to an hye vocacion in Iesus
Christ (euē to be flesh of his flesh & bone of his
bones, to be citezens wyth the sayntes and of
the housholde of God) to you I make this my
mo
                     •
                  e afore rehearced, trusting, that though nether
the world, nor those false brethren (which
because they were not of vs, are gone frome
among vs .i. Ihoā .ii. & are fallen in loue wyth
this world after the ēsāple of Demas .ii. Ti .ii
though nether of them both (I saie) wyll harkē
to y• voyce of God, whyle it is called. To daye

but styll harden theyr hertes agaynste Godds
trueth My trust is (as I sayd afore) that ye
wyl hold your hand styl on the plough, that ye
wyll walke honestly now whyle the mercy of
God lendeth you day light. Ye know that our
Lord sayd The night shal come, in the whych
no man shalbe able to worke. Ye se howe oure
aduersarye the deuel goeth aboute lyke a roaryng
Lyon, sekyng whom he may deuoure Ye
se what a nōbre of great men on the one syde,
haue gyrded theyr sw
                     •
                  rdes aboute them and
stande euen in complete harnesse, to fyght agaynst
the manifest worde of God: Yea what
swering, what blasphemyng of gods name,
what pryde, what excesse, what fylthynes of
bodye and ydylnesse, is vsed, practised & daylye
maynteined in theyr houses: Ye se, howe they
can not abide the hearing of gods worde, but
blast and blowe agaynste it, persecute it, as
much as in them lyeth. On the other side, ye se
what a nōbre of hypocrites, Antichristes, false
prophetes and flatterrynge chaplens are not
onely aboute greate. men, but euery where, in
maner, roare and crye and stampe agaynst our
Lordes doctrine kepe the peoble stil in blynesse
and fedde them wyth draffe & dregges in stead
of Gods word. Thyrdly, ye se what a nomber
here be in the worlde, whyche pretendynge to
loue Gods worde, by theyr outwarde hearyng
readyng, and talkynge of it, lyue cleane contrary
agaynste it, brynge not forth the worthye
frutes of repentaunce, are as greate swea
                     •
                  ers
as fylthy, as ydle, as couetous, as disceatfull
in bargaining, as vnapt to al good workes, as
they were afore they knew the trueth: And by
this meanes is it come to passe y• thorow such

vnchristē lyuing, the good word of god is more
supprest thē other thorow y• crueltye of tyraū
                  tes,
or flattering lyes of hipocrites. All whiche
thresortes of enem
                     •
                  es, bicause they are not of
vs, but wtout, therfore wyll I haue the lesse to
do wt the. But of you (dearely beloued) I wyll
be bolde to exhorte you, for the tēder mercy of
god, y• (in cōsidera
                     •
                  ion of the premesses) ye wyl
walke godly & worthely in this wicked worlde
cōtinuing (as I truste ye do) in stead fastnes of
the christē fayth, in feruētnes of loue towarde
god, & toward your very enemies for his sake,
in lokyng assuredly for his promises, beyng pacient
& ioyful in trouble, earnest in prayer at al
times, ready into true obediēce, to kepe al good
ordre, to be e
                     •
                  ercised in al good workes, euerye
mā according to the state y• god hath called him
vnto. As many of you as are called to office &
comō au
                     •
                  horitie, to beare rule, or to giue iudgemēt
in causes of the comō wealth, be diligent
in your office. Romit. xii punish the euyl & maynteyne
the good .i. Pet .ii. Roma .xiii. Actepte no
persone in iudg
                     •
                  ment, alowe no false accusa
                  
                     •
                  n,
shedde no innocent bloude, Exod .xxiii. and
heare the small as wel as the great. D
                     •
                  utr
                     •
                   .i.
               ¶As manye of you as are called to the office
of preaching, folow the apostles coūsayle: take
hede vnto your selues, & to all the f
                     •
                  ocke, in the
which the holy goste hath appointed you to be
ouersears, to feade the cōgregacion of god &c.
Act .xx. Fead Christes flocke which is amonge
you, and take the ouersyghte of them, not as
though ye were cōpelled, but willyngly not for
the desyre of fylthy lucre but of a god mynde:
not as Lordes ouer the paryshes, but to be an
ensample vnto the flocke .i. P
                     •
                  tri .V. To caste

alway vngodly & olde wyuysh fables, to be vnto
them y• beleue, an ensāple, in theyr worde, in
cōuersaciō, in loue, in spirite, in fayth, in purenesse:
To gyue attēdaūce vnto readynge to exhortacion,
to doctrine .i. Timo .iiii. Studye to
shew your selues to god, laudable workemen,
which neade not to be ashamed .ii. Timo .ii. All
other estates amonge you I hertely exhort & require,
euery one to do theyr duty. As subiectes
to be obediēt & true to theyr princes and higher
powers. Ro .xiii. i Pet .ii. Tit .iii. Men to loue
theyr wiues hertely, as they are taught .i. Pet.
iii. i. Thessal .iiii. Ephe .v. wyues so to behaue
thē selues, as it becōmeth womē that professe
godlynes thorow good workes .i. Tim .ii. that
theyr chaist cōuersaciō may wynne the wicked
i. Pet.iii. Men to deale gently wyth theyr seruauntes.
Ephe .vi. Colo .iii. to brynge vp theyr
childrē in the nurtoure & doctrine of the Lorde.
Ephe .vi. Deut .iiii. Seruaūtes to be faithful,
true & obediē
                  
                     •
                   to theyr maisters. Ephe .vi. Col
.iii. i. Pet .ii. that they may do worshyppe to the
worde of God in all thinges .i. Tim .vi. Tit .ii.
               ¶And yf we thus behaue oure selues, euerye
one in his calling, thē shal it come to passe, that
euē they which now blaspheme vs as euyl doers,
shal at last be ashamed of theyr parte, & cō
                  uert
from theyr owne euyl wayes, to the true
fayth & lyuing, which is taught in the word of
god. To whō for his infinite grace and gyftes
therof, be honour & prayse nowe & euer. Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            Set forth by Myles Couerdale.
            
               Non possums que audiuimus, et vidimu
                     •
                  
non loqui.
                Act
                     •
                   .iii▪
               
            
            
         
      
   