
      
         
            
            
            ¶SERMONS
of M. Iohn Caluine,
vpon the▪ X. Commandementes
of the Lawe, geuen of
God by Moſes, otherwiſe
called the Decalogue.
            Gathered word for word, preſently
at his Sermons, when he
preached on Deuteronomie, without
adding vnto, or diminishing
from them any thing afterward.
            Tranſlated out of Frenche
into English, by I. H.
            ¶Imprinted at London,
for Iohn Hariſon.
1579.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Right excellent and Honourable
Lorde, the Lorde Robert Dudley, Earle of
Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the moſt Noble
Order of the Garter, Maiſter of the Queenes Maieſties
horſes, and one of her Graces moſt Honourable priuie Councell,
Iohn Harmar wisheth all godlie felicitie, continuance of
health, increaſe of Honour, and Graces eternall.
            
               
                  OCcaſioned, Right
Honourable, to conſider
certeine of M. Caluins
Sermons in the Frenche
tongue, vpon the lawe of
God and his heſtes, and
finding them (though gathered
and ſet forth by others,
yet) aunſwerable to their makers labour,
to bee godlie, learned, and profitable, I was the
bolder to aduenture the deliuerance of them into
our mother language, and moſt bolde to preſent
your Honour therewith: the beginning of ſmall
abilitie, ſuch as they bee, yet due to your Lordſhippe,
vnto whom I owe all thankfulneſſe and
humble duetie. Your Honours good procurement
of her Maieſties gratious fauour, whereby I
firſt became a Scholer in Wincheſter Colledge,
afterward to bee remoued to the New Colledge
of Oxford, whereof at this preſent I am a poore
member, I could neuer ſince forget, or burie ſo
good a benefite in ſuch great obliuion. Some ſignification

therefore of a gratefull minde is herein
ſought, together with the profit of many the ſimpler
ſorte, which the rather may be atteined to, by
your Lordſhippes honourable name, fauourable
countenance, and protection, which being vouchſafed,
will be ſufficientlieable to counteruaile the
contrarie endeuours of ſuch euill diſpoſed perſons
as ſeeke euen vnder the colour of greateſt truth, to
pull out the eyes of knowledge, and to bring a
palpable darkeneſſe vpon the face of the earth, a
darkeneſſe to be brought in by the groſſe miſt of
deuout ignoraunce as more perillous, ſo more lamentable
than the temporarie darkeneſſe of Aegypt.
For that is the pretence which they vſe,
when as they ſeeke no other thing than to entrap
men by diueliſh Sophiſtrie. What need the lawe
(ſay they?) We haue the Goſpel. What neede we
written expoſitors? We haue the liuelie voices of
Preachers ſounding in great plentie euerie where.
Of which two ſpeaches, the former is vaine, the
latter parciall, and both of them are wicked. Truth
it is, that the ſtrength and ſting of the lawes dominion
to condemnation, concerning the faithfull,
is weakened and cleane plucked out: that the fire
is extinguiſhed wherewith the mountaine ſmoked,
that the ſtonie tables are ſoftened, that the heauie
yoke is lightened, that grace hath ſuperabounded,
and an horne of ſtrong ſaluation is erected
and declared through the adminiſtration of the
ſpirite. What then? Shall we therefore welter in
ſinne, and wallow in the luſtes thereof, becauſe of
theſe things? God forbid. Nay rather, as the lawe

ſchooleth vs, to ſeeke for grace at the bodie of
Chriſt, ſo the gratious Chriſtian is taught to repaire
againe to the booke of the lawe, to liue therafter:
in deede now, without ſeruile feare, being
deliuered from bondage, to ſerue in freedome of
an vpright, holie, and ſincere conſcience. But as
the Bee that hath in her honie, hath alſo a ſting: ſo
the beſt men indued with the grace of GOD, a
thing incomparablie better than honie, haue notwithſtanding
certeine remnantes of the ſtaine of
Adam, as a ſting of corruption to their mortall
bodies. Whereof to put vs in mind, that we may
plucke out this ſting, and as it were weed the garden
of our conſciences (who as the pureſt ground,
yet bring forth ſome weedes of imperfection:) the
lawe of God is moſt behoouefull and neceſſarie,
and M. Caluins trauelles thereon, moſt fruitefull
and profitable, who ſtriketh euer at the originall
and roote of ſinne, and bringeth the commandement
to his olde, firſt, and true meaning, from the
corrupt and common vnderſtanding. For hee
groundeth the expoſition of the law, vpon the nature
of the Lawgiuer, who, becauſe he is a ſpirit,
will be ſerued in ſpirit and truth. And becauſe he
ſearcheth the reines, & ſoundeth the depth of the
heart, will be ſerued with euerie affection and motion
thereof, in all holineſſe and ſinceritie: ſo that
no man can ſafelie feede or flatter himſelfe in the
ſmalleſt of his owne faultes or follics. And now,
what need there is of this knowledge in England,
all men ſee, and others can better ſaie, than my ſelfe
declare, how thinlie, ſcant here and there, ſuch excellent

vnderſtanding groweth. Which thing in
more wordes to lament, were an ouerlong deteining
of your Lordſhip from your greater affaires.
The Lord of Lordes, and God almightie
garde you euer, and guide you
with his holie ſpirit, to the benefite
and commoditie of our countrie,
and to the profite of his
Church, with increaſe
of honour, to his honour
alwayes.
            
               Your humble to commaund▪
Iohn Harmar.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt Sermon of M. Iohn Caluine,
vppon the Commaundementes
of the Lawe.
            
               Deut. Chap. 4.
               
                  44 This is the Lawe, whiche Moſes ſet before the children of
Iſrael.
                  45 Theſe are the witneſſes, and the ordinances, and the Lawes,
whiche Moſes declared to the children of Iſrael, after
they came out of Aegypt.
                  46 On this ſide Iordan, in the vallie ouer againſt Beth-peor, in
the land of Sihon King of the Amorites, which dwelt at
Heſhbon.
               
            
            
               FOraſmuch as the world is hardly kept
and reteined in ſubiection vnder God,
let vs ſee how he, for his part, after he
had choſen to himſelfe one peculiar
people, vouchſafeth to rule them, not
for one time onely, but ſo long, and ſo
often, vntill the people ſhould bee well
accuſtomed to the yoke: whiche order
he vſeth yet daily in his Church. It
ought to ſuffice vs, that we had vnderſtood of the truth of our God
in one ſimple woord: but becauſe we are not ſo readie to beleeue, as
were requiſite, and when we haue begonne, we decline and fall away
in the end, inſomuch that we vtterly forget that which was taught
vs: ſee I ſay, howe he is not contented to haue declared vnto vs for
one day, that whiche apperteineth to our ſaluation, but calleth the
ſame to our mindes continually, and imprinteth it in our heartes as
much as is poſſible. Let vs conſider to this purpoſe, how Moſes reciteth
in this place, that he not onely deliuered the Lawe in Horeb,
but alſo that after that he had made his circuite in the wilderneſſe by
the ſpace of fortie yeares or there about, he hath againe inſtructed
the people, yea, that of all the time he was with them, he neuer ceaſed
to ſet before them, that which God had commaunded him to publiſh,

as we haue alreadie aboue touched. And the diligence we here ſee in
Moſes, is not ſuperfluous, but to good purpoſe, when he ſaith, that
being come almoſt to Iordan, and hauing diſcomfited Sehon King
of the Amorites, and Og the King of Baſhan his neighbour, that he
yet putteth them in minde of the ſtatutes and ordinaunces of God,
to the end the people ſhould reſt on them, and put them in practiſe,
and that if heretofore they haue not bene ſufficientlie inſtructed, they
ſhould at the leſt then knowe the truth of the Lorde, wherein they
ſhould wholie abide. Thus yee ſee what Moſes ment by this place:
and here he purpoſely placeth together theſe wordes: the Lawe, the
Witneſſes, the Statutes, the Ordinaunces, to the end he might
more fullie expreſſe & declare (as we haue before ſhewed,) that God
hath not inſtructed his people by halfes, or deliuered vnto them ſome
obſcure or ſhort and vnperfect doctrine: but that he hath compriſed
in the Lawe whatſoeuer was good and profitable: ſo that if in it the
people would ſtay them ſelues, they ſhould not neede to be buſied in
ſeeking for any thing beſide, as being fullie and wholie guided and
directed by it. Let vs marke this, for in this ſenſe the Lawe is a doctrine,
as indeed, the worde whereby it is called, is hence taken and
deriued. It foloweth, The witneſſes, which unporteth as much, as if
God ſhould declare that he maketh ſome contract or bargaine with
men, that he ſetteth downe articles to this end, that he neither omitteth
or forgetteth any thing, whiche ſhould ſerue to knit vp this mutuall
agreement and aliance, when it pleaſeth him to chooſe and adopt
vs for his people and for his Church: & to bring vs to himſelfe.
For to ſpeake in fewe woordes, all that whiche concerneth this ſpirituall
couenaunt betweene him and vs, is comprehended vnder this
word, Witneſſes, becauſe theſe are as the articles and pointes of the
couenaunt, as when bondes are geuen when men contract and bargaine
together, all is put in, which may ſerue for the one, and the other
partie. Wee ſee then how God hath proteſted, that the Lawe
conteineth a ſufficient doctrine, if ſo be men would keepe them ſelues
vnder it: to the declaration whereof the two other woordes followe,
the Statutes, the Ordinaunces. Nowe when God beſtoweth ſuch
paine to teach and inſtruct vs, and declareth that he hath omitted nothing
whiche might perteine herevnto, who will not meruell that
our mindes for all this are ſo fleeing and wandering, that we alwayes
deſire, I knowe not what ſomething better than that whiche

wee finde in the woorde of God? This diueliſh curioſitie both from
all times reigned in the world, and at this day a man may ſee, that
whatſoeuer one doeth, he can not repreſſe and ſtay this wicked and
curſed deſire, but that men will bee alwayes wiſer than God would
haue them to bee. And why? We can not denie when his woord is
preached, but that he hath declared all thinges, which were good and
for our profite: but yet we for all this time are verie tickliſh, we flote
in out fantaſies, and we will alwayes haue one thing or other, more
than that which God hath ſhewed vs. Seeing then that ſuch a vice
bewrayeth it ſelfe in vs, it doth ſtand vs in hand to beare in mind the
warning which is here conteined: namely, that if we will ſuffer God
to be our maiſter, we ſhall finde in his ſchoole all perfection of wiſedome.
For his lawe is ſufficient of it ſelfe to make vs wiſe againe.Col. 1. 28. It
conteineth as we haue ſaide the articles whiche ſerue to ioyne vs to
our God, in whome all our glorie and felicitie conſiſteth. Moreouer,
it ſheweth vs the rule of well doing, in ſuch ſort that we neede not
ſearche further to vnderſtand what God liketh and alloweth: for we
haue both his ſtatues & ordinaunces. So then we may know and be
throughlie perſuaded, that our life ſhalbe acceptable vnto God, if
we paſſe not the boundes whiche he hath ſet and aſſigned vs: but if
wee adde any thing of our owne, whatſoeuer it bee, let vs not thinke
that God approueth it as right and good: for he hath forgotten nothing
of that whiche belongeth to our profite and neceſſitie. Theſe
two pointes are well worth the noting, for they ſerue to make vs to
haue in greater price and reuerence the doctrine, whiche is euerie
day propoſed vnto vs in the name of God. For when wee ſee that in
it is perfect wiſedome, ought not we is applie all our ſenſes to it, and
to hold our ſelues thereto? When we ſee that God ceaſeth not, but
continueth daily to teach vs, ought not we for our part to be diligent
and attentiue, to the end we might profite vnder him? And if at the
firſt we be not ſo geuen vnto it, as were requiſite we ſhould be all the
time of our life, ought wee not to traine our ſelues to knowe alwayes
better and better, the will of God, euen vntill we bee wholie ridde of
all ignoraunce, which ſhalbe when we are taken foorth of this world,
and not before? Nowe it is certeine, that whiche Moſes hath
done, ought at this day to ſerue vs for a rule and example: for it is
not done at randon, and beſide good purpoſe: Againe, God appointed
him as a ſpectacle and mirrour to all Prophetes, and to all thoſe

which haue the charge of teaching in his church. Let vs then vnderſtand,
that God will not that we receiue his truth for one day onely,
as if one leſſon were inough for vs: but that wee ſhoulde repeate
againe that which before we vnderſtood, to the end it might tarrie
by vs, and take ſuch deepe roote in vs, that we might haue no excuſe,
nor make any allegation, to ſay: O, I haue not bene yet throughly
inſtructed. God then on his part is alwayes readie to teach vs, to
the end we might not erre, except we our ſelues woulde wittingly
decline, and of wilfull malice. And here is expreſſe mention made of
the temple of Peor, to ſhewe, that although the people had in that
place an obiect or ſight to turne them to ſuperſtition, yet they had alſo
a remedie, in that God daily ſtirred them vp by his worde, to the
end they ſhoulde not meddle with the idolatries of the Painims.
True it is, that it was an hard and greeuous chaſtiſement, that the
people of God were feigne to haue euer before their eyes the temple
of an idol: it was all one, as if God, to ſpite and anger them, ſhoulde
ſay: I did call you to poſſeſſe a land, which ſhoulde be dedicated to my
ſeruice, where you ſhoulde haue ſeene nothing which might in any
point haue offended you: for my ſanctuarie ſhoulde haue bene ſet vp
in the middeſt of you. I woulde haue bene purely worſhipped according
to my lawe, the lande ſhould not haue bene vnhalowed & defiled
with her old ſuperſtitions, all idolatrie ſhould haue bene ſo raced out,
that a man ſhould heare nothing but my praiſes ſounded: but now ye
ſee ye are here in the corner of the countrie, where you ſee a temple
of idols, where you ſee many villanous abhominations. This is
then as a vengeance which you feele for your ſinnes, for as much as
you haue not bene worthie to enter into the lande, which I did promiſe
you. See then how God woulde chaſtiſe his people, when he ſuffereth
them to dwell nigh vnto the temple of Peor. And at this day,
when we are mingled among idolaters, and perceiue what vncleaneſſe
they commit, and howe they peruertall religion, let vs know
that God by this meanes doth puniſh vs, or at leaſt humbleth vs becauſe
of our ſinnes. And in deede conſidering this, we ought not onely
to lament for the ſinnes which are committed by theſe incredulous
and vnbeleeuing perſons, but alſo becauſe we knowe that we are not
worthie to haue the worlde wholy reformed, and to behold an agreement
& harmonie in religion, that God might be in all places purely
worſhipped, that when we are ſo neere to the ſuperſtitions of other,

that we be conſtrained to ſee ſome of the markes and ſignes, and to
heare ſomething thereof, we muſt impute this to our owne ſinnes.
But how ſo euer it be, God ceaſeth not to geue a good remedie to the
people of Iſrael: for when the lawe was in this ſort taught by Moſes,
it was all one, as if God ſhoulde ſeparate his, from thoſe miſerable
blinde ones, which wandered and went aſtraie in their ſuperſtitions.
Now herevpon we haue to note, that although all the worlde
be peruerted, and that in it wee ſee great confuſions, and that all is
full of errours and corruptions, yet notwithſtanding it behoueth that
we haue recourſe to the worde of God, to be guided thereby, which
muſt ſtrengthen vs in ſuch ſort, that we may defie all the ſuperſtitions
of idolaters. And if we be ſo full fraughted with vanitie, that
we geue ouer our ſelues to decline and to turne aſide hither and thither,
after that God ſhall haue geuen vs his worde, there remaineth
then no excuſe. For (as I haue alreadie ſaid) this ſhoulde be a bridle
good enough for vs, that God declareth to vs his will. Although all
the worlde drawe backward, and ſome haue one fantaſie, and others
make a faire ſhewe of ſome religion, yet all this muſt be eſteemed
as vaine & friuolous, after that we haue heard the voice of our God,
and by that ſhall haue intelligence of his will. And therefore let vs
put to our vſe this certeine and infallible doctrine, the worde of God,
to withdrawe vs from all wicked opinions, from all euill errours,
from all that the diuell hath forged and counterfeited, and from
all that men ſhall haue inuented & deuiſed in the world. Thus ye ſee
what we haue to beare in minde, when Moſes maketh mention here
of the temple of Peor. Nowe he alſo addeth, that this was after the
two kinges, Og the king of Baſhan, & Sehon the king of the Amorites,
or of Heſhbon, were diſcomfited. This circumſtance ſerueth to
reproue the people, if they ſhoulde not yeald them ſelues in all obedience
vnto God. We knowe that according to the benefite GOD
beſtoweth on vs, we ought ſo much the more to be ſtirred vp and prouoked
to loue and to feare him. God hath ſhewed himſelfe bountifull
and liberall towards vs: ought it not to drawe vs ſo much the more
vnto him? For when a mortall man is indebted and bounde vnto vs
for ſome benefite and good turne, ſhall he not be accounted diſſolute
and verie vnthankfull, if he reknowledge not the good we did him?
Howe then ſhall there be leſſe excuſe towards the liuing God? Let vs
then remember that Moſes in this place maketh expreſſe mention

of theſe two Kinges, which were banquiſhed and ſubdued, to the end
the people ſhould reknowledge this benefite in this manner: Go to,
we haue had here two excellent victories. When heretofore we attempted
warre againſt the commaundement of God: our enimies
with great courage gaue vs the foile, there was in vs no ſtrength:
our enimies were as waſpes, which come to put out our eyes, as the
ſimilitude hereof hath bene before giuen: there are now two Kings
ſtrong and mightie ouerthrowen, and ſubdued, without any coſt of
ours, God hath deliuered them into our handes. Who hath bene the
cauſe of both theſe victories? Hath it not bene God, which hath ruled
& gouerned all herein? Sithence then it is ſo, that he hath pitie on vs,
& hath begonne to accompliſh the promiſe whiche he made to our fathers,
& that we haue alredie ſo good a warrant & gage thereof, ought
not wee to endeuour to yeald our ſelues wholie to our God? Ought
we not in all thinges to be ſubiecte vnto him? Ought we not to geue
our ſelues ouer into his hand, which he hath ſhewed ſo ſtrong by reaſon
of the loue he beateth vs? See I ſay how Moſes hath vnderſtod
this, which he reciteth touching the ouerthrow of Sehon & Og, euen
to reproue the vnthankfulneſſe of the people, if they ſubmite not them
ſelues willinglie to the ſeruice of their God, to whome they were ſo
much bound. But now we ought alſo to applie this doctrine to our
owne vſe that is, that as often as we perceiue in our ſelues any ſlouth
or litherneſſe in the buſines of the Lord, any remiſſe negligence, any
coldnes, any rebelliō of the fleſh, which ſtriueth & ſtubbornly reſiſteth
in ſuch ſort, that wee come not to God with ſo cheerefull & earneſt affection,
as were requiſitie, that then we enter into a count of the benefites
wee haue receiued of him, to ſay: Wretched creature, howe art
thou ſo negligent, that thou cleaueſt not to thy God, when he hath declared
his will vnto vs? Conſider what thou holdeſt of him, conſider
the benefits he hath beſtowed on thee, euen vnto this houre. So then
let euerie one examine & conſider, how farre he is indebted to God,
that we may be the more prouoked to ſerue him. And in generall, let
vs know that he not only created vs, when we were not: but alſo that
after that he had redeemed vs, by the bloud of our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt, as he redeemed his people out of the land of Egypt, he hath
by his grace drawen vs to him: ſo as we had the doctrine of the
Goſpell deliuered vs, which is all one, as if he had receiued vs vnder
his gard and protection, and daily he ſheweth the ſame vnto vs by

effectes: for what greater aides and ſuccours haue wee from him in
our infirmities? Should we not a thouſand times bee ouercome of
Satan, if our God had not his hand ſtretched out to ſuccour vs? Yes
uerelie: we ſhould be then all ouercome, and not onely oppreſſed,
but alſo ſwalowed vp in our temptations, without ſuch a ſtay and refuge
as I haue ſaid. Sith then it is ſo, that our Lorde ceaſeth not to
confirme daily his goodneſſe towards vs, let vs on our part aduiſe
our ſelues and conſider to take this occaſion, to ſerue him with a more
ardent deſire, and greater zeale, as we ſee it is heere ſpoken. In this
ſenſe it foloweth, that Moſes ſpeaketh to the people of Iſrael ſaying,
Heare O Iſrael the lawe which the Lord hath cauſed to be propoſed
vnto you, that ye may learne it, and obſerue it. Here againe Moſes
ſetteth downe the preface, of which before we tooke ſome view, that
the Lawe is not geuen onely, to the end that men ſhould heare it, to
knowe what it conteineth: but that by it we ſhould alſo be reformed,
and that God might proue herein what ſubiection we yealde vnto
him. In fewe wordes, we ſee that the doctrine of God conſiſteth in
practiſe, and that we muſt by our doinges ſhewe, that we haue not
in vaine bene taught it. Nowe, then Moſes ſaith in the firſt place,
Heare the Lawe whiche I propoſe in your eares, to the end you
ſhould learne it: As if he ſhould ſay, that God will not that the doctrine
which is preached vnto vs in his name and authoritie, ſhould
fall to the grounde: but that we muſt receiue it with all diligence,
and applie our whole ſtudies therein. For what is the cauſes that wee
profite ſo euill in the woord of God, but that wee are ouermuch buſied
in the thinges of the world? And if we come to the ſermon, if we
read the holy ſcripture, it is but for faſhion and manners ſake: wee
ſeeke not to performe our dueties as we ought, in obſeruing that
whiche is taught vs. But let vs aduiſe our ſelues to be better and
more diligent ſcholers, while the Lord vouchſafeth to inſtruct vs by
his woord: and that is the cauſe why Moſes ſaith he hath told the
Lawe in their eares. Indeede, this manner of ſpeaking would bee
verie hard in our tongue: howbeit, it importeth as much, as if God
ſhould ſay, That he ſpeaketh not vnto vs in an vnknowen & ſtrange
language, but ſheweth himſelfe in as plaine and familiar manner
as may be deſired. Seeing then it is ſo, that God cōmeth downe vnto
vs, in ſuch ſorte, as to make a plaine and familiar declaration of his
will, what excuſe ſhall we haue to alledge, if his woord be loſt in vs,

or if it ſlippe from vs, or if we keepe it not to make our profite thereof?
It is true, that for aſmuch as we are ouer dull and ignorant, we
ſhall alwayes find much obſcuritie in the woord of God, that the langauge
of the Lord is to high and profound for vs, but to whom ſhould
the fault therof be imputed? Let vs note therefore, that all they which
complaine, that the woord of God is hard and obſcure, as if it were
hid vnder an vnknowen tongue, are here reproued of a manifeſt lie.
Yea, that they do God great iniurie, yea, blaſpheme him, for that they
deſpitefully diſſemble, & denie the bountie & goodneſſe, which Moſes
proteſteth was ſhewed the people at the publiſhing of the law: for it is
there ſaid, that God ſpake to the eares of the people by the mouth of
Moſes. So that the doctrine which he deliuered, ought to haue bene
throughly knowen of them. And at this day we haue leſſe occaſion
to vſe this ſhifte, to alledge that we vnderſtand nothing of that which
is conteined to holie Scripture: for GOD ſpeaketh ſo neerelie and
familiarly vnto vs, that we neede but to haue our eares cleanſed and
prepared to heare him. And let vs note, that there remaineth nothing,
but that we be attentiue & diligent to profite in the doctrine of
ſaluatiō. But withall let vs call to mind that we haue aboue touched,
namely, that this doctrine muſt be kept & folowed throughly: for if we
doe not allowe the worde of God, and yeald our conſentes that it is
good, and true, and holie, God is much beholding vnto vs. What
muſt we doe then? See: God will make a triall whether he ſhall be
maiſter ouer vs, or no. Now then, if the worde of God rule our life,
that is: if we not onely inquire after that which he telleth vs, but forſake
our naughtie luſtes and deſires, and endeuour onely to pleaſe
him, and to be gouerned by him, and his righteouſnes: when we come
to this, then ſee we one good proofe, that he hath ſuch dominion and
ſuperioritie ouer vs, as he deſerueth. But, vntill wee haue profited
ſo much, that we are come hither, let vs not thinke that we haue profited
any thing at all in the doctrine which hath bene taught vs. Let
this worde therefore of Doing be often called to minde, and imprinted
in memorie of them, which heare the worde of God. As howe?
Beholde, God doth vs this courteſie in vouchſafing to teach vs. And
why is that? Is it to this end, that we ſhoulde onely lend our eares to
ſay in the end, Yea: well ſaid, that is good? Nay, but to the end our
life ſhoulde be reformed, and becauſe it is a true and certeine rule
that we ſhoulde not erre as we haue done, and as many poore ignorant

wretches doe which are ſtraied from the right way, and are not
inſtructed as we are, vnto whome this doctrine ought to ſerue for
mortification and newneſſe of life: that God may beare rule ouer
vs, and that we be ſubiect to him. Thus wee ſe in effect what Moſes
meant, when he proteſted vnto the people in this preface, that he ſet
before them the lawe, not that they ſhoulde heare it, and ſo but haue
their eares beaten there with: but that they ſhould receiue it and keepe
it. Nowe for the better confirmation of this, he alledgeth: That
God had made his couenaunt with that people on the mount Horeb,
the better to perſuade them to feare God, and to continue in his
obedience. For if God woulde onely require of vs that which is his
due: yet were we ſufficiently bounde to cleaue vnto him, and to obſerue
his commandements: but when it pleaſeth him of his infinite
goodneſſe to couenant with vs, to binde himſelfe vnto vs, when he
needeth not: to ſtand on articles with vs, that he wilbe our father and
ſauiour, that he will receiue vs for his flocke and heritage, that wee
may liue vnder his gard and protection, offering vs euerlaſting life:
ſeeing that he doth all theſe thinges, ought not our heart to be ſoftened
though it were of ſtone? When the creatures behold that the
liuing God abaſeth himſelf hitherto, as to treate the matter with vs,
and to ſay: Goe to, let vs conſider what we are, both you ſee what
an infinite diſtance is betweene you and me, and knowe that I could
commaund you what ſeemeth good to me, and not haue any thing to
deale with you, and that you are not worthie to come nighe me, or to
haue any acquaintaunce with him, which can command what he will
without any further declaration than this. See, this I will, and this
is my minde: yet loe I yeald of my right, I come hereto offer my
ſelfe to be your guide and ſauiour, I will gouerne you, you ſhalbe my
familie, if ſo be that you will content your ſelues with my worde. I
wilbe your king and you ſhall be my ſubiectes: & for all this, thinke
you not that the couenant which I haue made with your fathers was
to gaine any thing of you: for I haue no neede nor want of any thing
whatſoeuer, and what benefite can you beſtowe on me? But all which
I haue done and doe, is onely for your profite, and for your welfare.
I am then here readie to couenaunt by articles with you, and to bind
my ſelfe vnto you on my part. Seeing I ſay, that the liuing God doth
abaſe himſelfe ſo farre, I pray you ſhall not we be to vnthankfull, if
we be not herewith beaten downe to humble our ſelues vnder him

laying aſide all our pride and hautineſſe? It is not therefore without,
cauſe, that Moſes ſpeaketh here of the couenaunt which God hath
made with his people, to the end that eſpecially his fauour and
goodneſſe ſhoulde be knowen. Nowe if this was to be done in the
time of the lawe, there is at this day much greater reaſon thereof:
for the Lorde hath not onelie made a couenaunt for one time, as with
the Iewes: but when he ſent this onely ſome, then declared he him
ſelfe to be our father and ſauiour much more fullie than before he had
done, and that after ſo ſweete, ſo gratious, and ſo amiable a manner,
as nothing more: in ſuch ſort that he hath here as it were laid forth
his bowelles of loue and compaſſion towards vs. Seeing therefore
God hath preſented vnto vs his heart in the perſon of our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt,Iohn▪ 15. 15. and wee heare beſides the proteſtation which Ieſus
Chriſt maketh, that he will call vs no more his ſeruaunts, but his
friendes: becauſe he hath ſo familiarly communicated vnto vs all the
ſecrets of his will: muſt it not I beſeeche you needes be, that the diuell
hath bewitched vs, if wee bee not hereby moued to frame ourſelues
wholy vnto him, renouncing euen our ſelues, and all our affections?
So then, when we perceiue in our ſelues any wickedneſſe,
wherby we are hindred to ſerue God, when we feele our ſelues idely
diſpoſed in the worke of the Lord, & are euen brought into an heauie
ſleepe by the cares of this world, to ſtirre our ſelues vp to praiſe our
God, let vs haue in minde this couenaunt which the Lord hath made
with vs. Nowe herevpon Moſes further addeth: The Lord made
not this couenaunt with our fathers, but with vs, euen with vs which
are aliue at this day. This place may bee vnderſtood after two
ſortes: for it may bee taken for a compariſon which Moſes maketh,
the better to declare, that the people which then liued, ought to bee ſo
much the more diligent in the ſeruice of God, becauſe they had receiued
greater benefites than their fathers. In which ſenſe he ſpeaketh
in Exodus,Exod. 6. 3. I haue not communicated this name to your fathers:
where God ſpeaking vnto Moſes ſaith, that he declared not him ſelf
ſo plainly to bee God to Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, as he did vnto
Moſes, And by this he ſignifieth, that the people ſhould be now more
attentiue, becauſe God had reuealed himſelfe vnto them after an vnaccuſtomed
manner. Euen ſo in this place one may vnderſtand this,
God hath not made ſuch a couenaunt with your fathers. It is true
that God ſpake vnto his ſeruaunts Abraham, Iſaac, & Iacob, and did

ſufficiently inſtruct them. And it is expreſly ſaid in the.Gen. 18, 17 19. 18. of Gen.
Shall I hide from my ſeruant Abraham that which I will now execute
vpon Sodome, and Gomorra? For I knowe that he will inſtruct
his houſholde in my decrees and ordinannces, in my ſtatutes
and iudgements. See then howe Abraham inſtructed his familie,
not after ſome bare and naked manner, but in the iudgements and
ſtatutes and ordinaunces of the Lord, Briefly, wee muſt needes ſay
that Abraham had the lawe of God imprinted in his heart: yet loe
beſides a benefite not to be contemned, when God hath ſent this lawe
in the two tables, to the end the inſtruction thereof might remaine
and abide for euer to his people, and that the thinges therein conteined,
might be ratified for euer, and teſtified to all poſteritie as well
as to them. We ſee then what we may gather vpon this ſentence, euen
as much as if Moſes ſhould haue ſaid vnto the people, Beloued,
acknowlege we the benefite the Lord beſtoweth on vs this day, euen
ſuch an one as our fathers haue receiued none the like: for he deliuered
not vnto them the lawe by writing, as vnto vs, he hath not declared
to them theſe thinges in ſuch plaine order. True it is, that he did
ſufficiently inſtruct them, & as much as was neceſſarie & requiſite
for their ſaluation- but here is yet an higher degree & further ſteppe,
to which we are come at this day, and therefore wee ought to drawe
ſo much the neerer to him, ſeeing we ſee that he hath ſo ſtooped vnto
vs. And this is the meaning of Moſes, if we vnderſtand the place in
this ſenſe. As if a man ſhoulde ſay at this day, that God hath not
done ſo to our fathers, as he hath done vnto vs. And this is that
which Chriſt ſaid to his diſciples,Mat.. 13. 17 That many Kings and Prophets
haue deſired to ſee thoſe thinges which you ſee,Luke▪ 10. 24. & heare thoſe thinges
preached which you heare, and yet haue not had their deſire. Seeing
then it is ſo, that God of his infinite mercie & goodneſſe vouchſafeth
to preferre vs before the Patriarches and Prophetes, (as it is alſo
ſaid, that the Prophets ſerued not ſo much their owne time as ours,)
we ought with greater diligence to ſuffer our ſelues to be taught vnder
him,1. Pet. 1. 12. & to applie our ſelues wholy to his doctrine. Notwithſtanding,
when all is well conſidered, although this we haue alledged
be profitable, and the exhortation is often brought in holy Scripture,
yet when we ſhall haue weighed all the wordes, wee ſhall finde
that Moſes, when he ſaith that God did not make his couenaunt
with them which heard the lawe the firſt day it was publiſhed, meaneth

to ſay, that not onely with them he made his couenaunt, but
alſo with thoſe which ouer liued them, and ſucceded in the place of
thoſe which were dead. So that in fewe woordes Moſes woulde
here declare, that the lawe was not tranſitorie, to endure onely for the
life of them which firſt heard it, but that it was a doctrine which
ſhoulde reteine his ſtrength & authoritie foreuer. The Lord our God
(ſaith he) hath not made a couenant with our fathers, that is to ſay, he
woulde not onely haue our fathers for his people, he was not tied to
them, ſo that his lawe ſhould ſerue but for fortie or fiftie yeares, but
he hath made a couenaunt with vs as well, and with them which
were not borne when the lawe was publiſhed. You then which were
not at the mount of Horeb, which haue not ſeene the fire on the montaine,
nor heard the thunderinges, know you not withſtanding that
your God did then adopt you alſo to himſelfe, and that he made a couenaunt,
in the which you alſo were compriſed. You muſt therefore
obſerue his lawe, becauſe it hath bene eſtabliſhed to bee perpetuall,
to endure from age to age and to bee preached euen to the end of the
worlde. And this is the true and naturall meaning of Moſes. And
from hence we may gather a good and profitable doctrine: namely,
that although we were not at firſt when the Goſpell was publiſhed,
although wee haue not ſeene with our eyes thoſe thinges which are
mentioned in the lawe, yet ought we not therfore to haue in leſſe eſtimation
& price the authoritie of he word of God. And why? I graunt
that when God raiſed vp Moſes, it was an eſpeciall token of his fauour
and goodneſſe towards the people, which then liued: yet notwithſtanding,
the authoritie of the Lawe muſt not at any time bee
diminiſhed: for it cōteineth the truth of God, which alwayes abideth,
and is not variable and tranſitorie as men are. It is ſaid, that men
are as a flowre,Iſaie▪ 40. 6. 7. or as an herbe, which by and by drieth and withereth,
but the truth of the Lord endureth for euer.1. Pet. 1. 24. Now this truth which is
vnchaungeable, is conteined in the Lawe. Truely the Lawe as
touching the ceremonies is vtterly aboliſhed: but as touching the ſubſtaunce
& doctrine which it cōteineth, it reteineth alwayes his force &
power ſtill: not one iot thereof falleth away or periſheth. So then let
vs note, that though we haue not liued in the time of Moſes, this ſerueth
not to alledge, that we may therefore contemne the admonitions
he hath geuen & are conteined in the lawe. And why? For he hath ſpoken
to vs, he hath not onely ſpoken to the multitude which was aſſembled

at mount Horeb, but generally to the whole world. And if this
be ſaid of the lawe, by a greater & more ſtrong reaſon is it to be ſaid
of the Goſpel. For as we haue ſaid, the law concerning the ſhadowes
thereof is cleane done away, but the Goſpel hath no ſuch thing. For
in it our Lord maketh a new & euerlaſting teſtament, & a couenaunt
to laſt from generation to generation. Howe then muſt we be affected,
when the Goſpel is preched? We muſt remember that the ſonne
of God came into the world, not onely to inſtruct them, with whom
he was conuerſant in his manhood: but that he hath wonne vs to
God his father, and hath called vs to ſaluation, by ſending his Apoſtles,
that their voice ſhould ſound to the endes of the worlde, to
them which heard not him, to make them partakers of the doctrine
of ſaluation: the which at this day alſo we ought to receiue, as if
Ieſus Chriſt were yet in the middeſt of vs, or as if the Apoſtles with
their owne mouthes did ſpeake vnto vs. And this is that which wee
haue to beare in minde vppon this place, that we make no alteration
in the Church of GOD, neither attempt to chaunge any thing in
his woorde, knowing that he will alwayes haue kept therein one
equall traine. For ſeeing that he hath deliuered vnto vs his Goſpel,
and ſtabliſhed a certeine rule of regiment in the time of the Apoſtles,
and in the primitiue Church, we muſt held the ſame, and thereon reſt
our ſelues. If we doe otherwiſe, it is as if wee woulde make the
word of God mortall and corruptible with vs. So then let vs learne,
that though the worlde be variable and inconſtant, and hath euerie
day his backturning: and though there bee none of vs, whiche hath
not alwayes many gadding opinions, whiche trotte in our braine,
that yet not withſtanding, concerning that the word of God hath appointed,
we are not to take that libertie, to doe at one time this, and
at an other time that, as we liſt, and as we fanſie. Wherefore? Becauſe
God hath not made this couenaunt with our fathers, but with
vs which are aliue at this day. As long then as we are in the world,
let vs knowe, that Gods gouerning of vs, and his ſhewing vs the
way, is to the end we ſhould not be as wandering pilgrimes to ſtray
hither and thither, and to raunge as our luſtes and appetites turne vs:
but that we ſhould be conducted as by his hand. To be ſhort, whereas
Moſes ſaith, Heare we that are all aliue at this day, it is to declare &
proue, that men during their life time, ought not to forge any newe
Lawe, that they ought not to haue to day one, to morrowe an other.

And why? For the life of man is in the lawe of God, which ought to
ſuffice vs. Let vs then make our profite by regarding the thinges
that tend therevnto. And further, it is no doubt, but Moſes here chargeth
the people with vnthankfulneſſe which ſhould be in them, if they
dedicate not their liues to the ſeruice of God: as if he ſhould ſay, How
liue we? Is it not for that the Lorde hath placed vs in this world? If
then our life we haue, be geuen of him: ought we not to beſtowe it &
employ it in his ſeruice? Ought it not to be wholie conſecrated to his
will? We ſee then how Moſes reproueth here all them which wander,
and continue not then courſe in the word of God. Let vs withall
reteine in memorie that which I haue aboue touched, that is: that
we haue not a doctrine for three dayes, but one wherein we muſt bee
confirmed as long as we liue. Therfore when we haue once receiued
and embraced that which is conteined in the holie ſcripture, let vs
ſtudie to profite our ſelues by it, and to go forward, encreaſing in the
knowledge & practiſe of it, till God ſhall drawe vs out of this world,
knowing that he will vouchſafe to take vs into his couenaunt, and
that he for his part will not be vnfaithfull and vnconſtant, but ſure
and ſtedfaſt in his purpoſe and promiſe. Let vs doe the like, that we
may be ioyned to him: and as long as we liue let vs haue no other
purpoſe, but to cleaue vnto him, howbeit as he hath declared in his
word. But let vs not thinke to ioyne and vnite our ſelues to our God
by our owne fantaſies: but ſince he commeth vnto vs, let vs goe vnto
him, and when we are come thither, let vs take good heede to ſtay
our ſelues there. And thus we ſee what we haue togather vpon this
place, to the end we may the better bee diſpoſed and prepared to receiue
the inſtructions, which ſhall hereafter be geuen vs, concerning
the lawe of God and his Commaundements.
            Nowe let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good
God, with acknowleging of our ſinnes, deſiring him to make vs feele
them better than we haue done, in ſuch ſort that we deſire nothing
but to yeald out ſelues wholie vnto him: and that it will pleaſe him
to reach vs his hand, and not ſuffer vs to be wedded to our owne fantaſies,
and affections, that we may alwayes magnifie his goodneſſe,
whiche he vſeth towards vs, that we may profite by it, in rendring
vnto him that obedience and dutie which he deſerueth, eſpecially,
for that it hath pleaſed him to bring and deliuer vnto vs his lawe,
and that he is not onely contented to ſhew vs the way of well liuing,

but hath vouchſafed alſo to adopt vs for his children, and to declare
himſelfe our father and ſauiour, for our Lorde Ieſus Chriſtes ſake,
that he will not onely graunt this grace to vs, but to all people and
nations of the earth, &c.
         
         
            
               Deut. Chap. 5▪
               
               
                  1 Then Moſes called all Iſrael and ſaid vnto them, Heare O Iſrael
the ordinaunces and the lawes whiche I ſet before
you this day, that ye may learne them, and take heede
to obſerue them.
                  2 The Lord our God made a couenaunt with vs in Horeb.
                  3 The Lorde made not this couenaunt with our fathers, but
with vs, which are all aliue at this day.
                  4 The Lorde talked with you face to face on the mount out of
the middeſt of the fire.
               
            
            
               WE haue ſeene heretofore howe greatly
Moſes hath laboured to make the
people perceiue the Maieſtie which
is in the worde of God, to the end they
ſhould receiue it with all reuerence and
feare. For although men proteſt that
they will obey God, (for ſo nature conſtraineth
them,) yet can they not order
them ſelues and their doinges according
to his word: and that is the verie
true touchſtone to knowe whether wee bee obedient to God or no.
But herein is the rebellion of the worlde ſeene, that although all
will confeſſe that the worde of God is to bee receiued without any
gainſaying, yet ſhall one finde ſcarſe one among an hundred, which
willingly humbleth him ſelfe to yeald vnto it that authoritie it deſerueth.
And why is this? Surely, becauſe we conſider not of the Maieſtie
of God, which declareth it ſelfe therein. See then howe Moſes,
not without cauſe, ſo often heretofore hath wained the people,
that the worde of God ſhoulde be of ſuch Maieſtie towardes vs, that
all creatures ſhoulde tremble at it. And nowe againe he addeth a

confirmatiō of the ſame matter when he ſaith, That the Lord talke
                  •
               
face to face on the mount, out of the middeſt of the fire: as if bee
ſhoulde ſaie: You haue no cauſe now to doubt whether the doctrine
which I propoſe vnto you be of God or of men: for it is ſufficiently
proued. God hath declared himſelfe vnto you by plaine and viſible
ſignes, in ſuch ſorte, that you may well perceiue, it is he which
ſpeaketh. Nowe then wee ſee the intent and meaning of Moſes.
But before wee paſſe any further, one may here make a queſtion,
How it is ſaid that God ſpake face to face, ſeeing that men cannot
comprehend his infinite glorie? For with what eye can wee contemplate
his ſubſtance & being? We are ſo fraile & weak, that if God
ſhould but ſhew one beame of his brightneſſe, behold, we ſhould be all
dazeled & confounded therewith. On the other ſide we know how it is
ſaid, That we cannot ſe God face to face,1. Cor, 13. 12 vntill we be renewed, which
ſhall not bee vntill the latter day. For now (ſaith S. Paule) We ſee
as in a glaſſe, & in part, euen obſcurely & vnperfectly.2. Cor. 13. 14 and 18. Which more
is, he ſaith in an other place, That the Goſpell at this day doth preſent
vnto vs the Maieſtie of God, in ſuch ſort, that wee may ſee it, but the
lawe was darke and obſcure, and had availe which hindered our fathers
to knowe God, in ſo plaine and familiar a manner as wee doe
at this day. But all this agreeth verie well. For when wee make a
compariſon of the lawe with the Goſpell, it is certeine wee ſhall
finde this which Saint Paule ſpeaketh to be moſt true. For then
God declared not himſelfe in ſo familiar a faſhion as he doth vnto vs,
by the meanes of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt,Heb. 1. 
                     •
                  . who is the liuelie image
of him. Nowe a dayes therefore, there are laide open vnto vs the
great treaſures of wiſdome, in that God calleth vs to the kingdome
of heauen, & ſheweth that he holdeth vs for his children & heirs. Now
this was not in the time of the lawe. And yet, although at this day
we haue ſuch a knowledge and ſo plaine & manifeſt, yet remaineth
that alwayes true which we haue alledged, that wee ſee but in part.
And why? For we are not yet partakers of the glorie of God, neither
can we come neere it, but it behoueth that he ſhew it according to
our rudeneſſe and infirmitie. Yet notwithſtanding, from the beginning
of the world God hath appeared vnto mortall men. Howbeit,
this was not to ſhewe him ſelfe as he is, but as the weakneſſe and infirmitie
of men might beare it. We muſt then note, that God was
not knowen to the fathers, neither appeareth at this day in his owne

beeing: but he applieth him ſelfe to vs, in aſmuch as he ſheweth him
ſelfe for our meaſure and abilitie, to make vs perceiue that he is
preſent. And yet for all that, it is not without cauſe, that Moſes ſaith
here, that God ſpake face to face: for he vnderſtādeth hereby, that the
people had not ſome coniecturall ſigne, that they might dout of him,
or conceiue onely ſome ſmall opinion of God, but that they had a certeine
and infallible warrant: whereby they might in this ſort conclude:
Behold, God hath ſo ſhewed himſelfe to vs, that our faith need
not wauer and be doubtfull: and the doctrine which is propoſed vnto
vs in his name, ought no longer to be diſputed of, whether it be to be
receiued or refuſed. And why? For God hath deliuered vnto vs a ſure
and certeine marke, which can not beguile, nor leaue vs in doubt, but
that this doctrine proceedeth from him. Now we vnderſtand the mening
of Moſes, from whence we haue to gather a good leſſon, that
is, that if God declare not himſelfe vnto vs after ſo high & glorious a
manner as our luſt deſireth, let vs know that he doeth it for our profite
and ſaluation. For let vs haue an eye to our infirmitie, and it will
be ſufficient to abate that ouer boldneſſe, to the which our nature alwayes
ſtirreth vs. For we would inquire and ſeeke after the ſecrets
of God, without end or meaſure: And why is that? Verely, becauſe
we conſider not our owne power and abilitie. Wherefore let vs
praiſe the great goodnes of our God, for that he in fauour ſo conſidereth
of vs, & regardeth our weakneſſe, that he is content to hide his
glorie▪ leaſt we ſhould be ſwallowed vp thereof. For as I haue alreadie
ſaid, we can not beare it, being ſo fraile & weake as we are. And
here withall let vs knowe, that when God geueth vs ſome euident
ſigne and token of his preſence, there reſteth then no excuſe, if we
yeald not to him the honour, and doe him the homage he is worthie
of. Let vs not then deſire that God come in his ineſtimable glorie,
that the heauens cleaue in ſunder, that all the Angels of heauen
appeare: but when the Lorde any way declareth, that it is he which
ſpeaketh, let it ſuffice vs, and let vs humble our ſelues incontinently.
For if then we will foreſlowe to yeld him our dutie, we ſhalbe ſharply
reproued for turning our backe to him, when he ſheweth his face
to vs. It is true that it is ſaid in an other place, That men cannot ſee
the face of God,Exod. 33. 20. & liue. And although Moſes had a wonderfull reuelation
of the glorie of God,Iud. 13. 22. as he ſpeaketh in Exodus 33, That the
Lord ſpake face to face vnto him,Exod. 33. 1
                     •
                  
                as a man ſpeaketh vnto his friend:

yet is it ſaid, That he ſawe but the backe of GOD only: but this
is to the end alwayes to ſhew vs, that while we be enuironed in this
fleſh, wee ought not to approch vnto the maieſtie of GOD, or
thinke to mount ſo high.Eſaie. 6. 2. For if the verie Angels of heauen, vnder
the figure of Cherubims, hide their eyes, when there is any mention
of the appearance of God, what muſt we do which doe but traile
here and creepe on the ground? But how ſo euer it be, God will condemne
vs of vnthankfulneſſe, when we will not behold his face, & bee
ſufficientlie contented with thoſe viſible ſignes, which he ſheweth vs
of his preſence. Aboue all, let vs be mindefull of this, when any queſtion
is of ſubmitting our ſelues both to the lawe & the Goſpell. For
it is there eſpecially, that God will bee knowen of men, to the
intent they ſhoulde worſhippe him, receiuing ſimply what ſoeuer
commeth out of his mouth. To what purpoſe then ſhall wee applie
this ſentence of Moſes? Forſooth to this, that when the Scripture
is ſet before vs, when one preacheth and expoundeth it vnto vs, or
that wee our ſelues reade it, this ſpeach of his muſt ſerue to humble
vs, to the end that God may bee with all reuerence exalted, and
that wee preſume not to make any replie to his worde: but that wee
tremble at it,Eſaie. 66. 2. as he ſpeakes therof to the Prophet Eſaie. For all that
which is conteined in the holy Scripture, is in ſuch ſort proued, that
one may ſay, that God hath ſpoken to men euen after a viſible manner.
Now Moſes after this addeth, That he ſtoode betwene the Lord
and them, as a mediatour betwene God and men, becauſe the people
feared, and durſt not aſcend vp into the mount. Whereby Moſes
ſignifieth, that though the lawe were brought by a mortall man, yet
ought it not to be derogation to the authoritie thereof. And why? Becauſe
this was for the inſtruction of the people: ſo that the faulte
reſted in them. And this place is well worth the noting. For wee
alwayes ſeeke ſome ſtarting holes, to the end wee might ſet light
by the woord of God. Truelie, we doe not pretend it openlie, but in
couert, but yet all the world is ſet vpon this wickedneſſe, ſo that a
man ſhall finde, men thinke them ſelues well, and at verie good reſt,
when they can find any colour to ſay: O, I know not whether this
be the word of God, or no: I know not whether it be ſpoken to me, I
know not what condition it hath. Thus ye ſee how the world ſeeketh
alwayes to exempt it ſelfe from the obedience to Gods worde. And
this excuſe is ouer cōmon, to ſay: Yea, it is true, that God ought to be

obeyed, but they be but men, which preach it to vs, as we bee: muſt
we then receiue their doctrine, as if Angels appeared to vs from
heauen? Many thinke it ſufficeth to ſay thus, when notwithſtanding
they ſhew them ſelues herein rebellious to God, or rather they haue
no care to ſubmit themſelues to him & his word. But we haue here
one anſwer to cut off al ſuch vain allegations, that is, when God ſendeth
his word by the hand & miniſterie of men, he doth it, becauſe of
our fault & infirmitie▪ Howbeit, he ceaſeth not to ſhew vs ſome mark
of his glorie, in ſuch ſort, that his word may be knowen to be heauenly:
& ſo that being duly conſidered, it is euident, that God hath warranted
enough, & more than enough. Neither hath Moſes ſpokē this
onely for the inſtruction of the auncient fathers, but this admonition
ſerueth alſo for vs: that if men, as we are, be appointed meſſengers to
preach vnto vs the word of God, it ought not in our eſtimation derogate
any thing from the maieſtie thereof. And in very deede we conſider
litle of our owne frailtie & weakeneſſe, when we deſire that God
ſhould teach vs by miracles euerie day, & we know not what is meete
& conuenient for vs. For as for miracles, there haue bene enow alreadie
ſhewed, to confirme the truth, both of the Lawe, & of the Goſpel,
that we might haue a full & certeine aſſurance of them. Yet, it is
moſt behoofull, that God dealeth ſo mercifullie with vs, that he ſendeth
men like to our ſelues, & committeth vnto them the charge and
office of teaching vs in his name, and in his roome, as one that
allureth vs vnto him ſelfe, with all kindeneſſe & gentleneſſe. For can
we thinke our ſelues able to ſuſteine and abide his preſence, if he
ſhould appeare to vs as he is? Alas, we ſhould bee all vtterly conſumed,
if God ſhould ſpeake in his maieſtie & power. We knowe it
is ſaid,Pſal. 29. That the voice of the Lord is enough to ſhake mightie rocks,
& moue huge mountaines out of their places: & can we which are ſo
feeble & weake, as nothing more, ſtand before ſo puiſſaunt a power, &
not be daunted, & caſt down, as with the force of ſom vehement thundring,
to the bottomleſſe pit of hell? Let vs note then, that when God
hath ordeined, that his word ſhould be preached to vs by men, & committed
to writing: therein he applieth himſelfe to our weaknes, and
dealeth with vs, as if he were a mortal man, to the end we ſhould not
feare to come vnto him, being drawen by ſo great lenitie and gentleneſſe.
And withall let vs conſider, what honour he doeth vs,
when he vouchſafeth to chooſe out from among vs poore and vile

wretches, to repreſent his perſon, and to ſpeake vnto vs in his name.
For what greater thing could he yeald vnto the Angels of heauen?
What more honourable charge & office could he commit vnto them?
Therefore when he daineth & vouchſafeth men of ſo great and excellent
honour, as to carrie abroad his word as his Embaſſadours, doth
he not declare vnto vs in this one thing his more than fatherlie goodneſſe
toward vs? Now on the other ſide he maketh triall of our humilitie.
For if he ſhould thunder from heauen, if he ſhould appeare in viſible
maner, if the Angels ſhould deſcend vnto vs, we neede not greatly
meruell, if men did giue credit to his word: but when all both great
& ſmall receiue the order which God hath ſet in his Church, as they
yeald obedience to his word when it is preached, therein is our faith
tried. But in the meane while let vs alwayes remember this, that
God hath ſufficiently declared him ſelfe to men, ſo that we haue no
occaſion at all to doubt of his word, & to diſpute whence it commeth.
For his will is made more than certein, if ſo bewe be not vnthankfull
in receiuing the ſignes which he hath geuen vs. Thus ye ſee then,
what we haue to note in this place, when Moſes ſaith, The people
durſt not approch nigh to the hill, for the great feare they had conceiued.
And although at this day we refuſe not, but that God ſhoulde
ſpeake vnto vs: yet when all is well conſidered, it ſhould not bee profitable
for vs. And therefore let vs knowe, that this ought not to leſſen
the certeintie and aſſurance of our faith, when God thus vſeth the
meanes & miniſterie of men. It is ſaid conſequently, That God hath
taught his people, ſaying: I am the eternall or euerliuing thy God,
which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, thou ſhalt haue no
other GOD before my face. In this place, GOD, to hold his people
as with a bridle in obedience, telleth them, that the knowledge
they haue, ought to keepe them farre from all ſuperſtitions. For it is
no ſtraunge thing to ſee the Heathen haue their idols, and to
runne aſtray after their errours and fantaſies, if wee remember
what man is in him ſelfe. Wee are alſo ſo geuen to vanitie, that it
is lamentable to behold, neither neede wee to goe to ſchole to learne
to bee deceiued: for euerie man heerein is a great Doctour in that
caſe: briefly, wee all runne to euill, though vnder the cloke and colour
of that whiche is good: ſo that for the true ſeruice of GOD,
there is nothing in vs, but ſuperſtition and idolatrie: and ſo the
Gentiles haue had their diuerſe kindes of ſuperſtition: for euerie

one hath forged ſomewhat at his pleaſure, and all this while the
liuing GOD hath beene left and forſaken of all. And why? Becauſe
GOD vouchſafed not to bee ſo gratious to all the worlde,
to declare him ſelfe vnto them. Wee ſee then how men were become
as beaſtes in their opinions, and that was for default of teaching:
although for all this they are not helde excuſed, for they
are alwayes guiltie before GOD, for aſmuch as the founteine of
idolatrie proceedeth from their owne malice, and vnthankfulneſſe,
when as men by their owne motion haue forſaken the
euerliuing GOD. But when the worlde was growne out of kinde,
the poore Gentiles wandered like blinde men in darkneſſe, for
they wanted the light to ſhew them the way of ſaluation. Howe
here the Lorde accuſeth the Iſraelites of rebellion, if they obſerue
not the Lawe which he hath giuen. Why ſo? I am the euerliuing
thy GOD. When he ſaith, The euerliuing: it is to exclude other
Gods, which are inuented of men. As if he ſhould ſay, There is but
one Godhead, and that is found in me: it muſt needes then be concluded,
that they, whiche hauing knowen me, turne themſelues after
their idols, haue no excuſe to alledge, that they haue not willinglie
and wittinglie renounced the liuing GOD. Nowe, when he adioyneth,
That he is the GOD of his people: this is to ſhew that he
hath ſufficiently declared himſelfe to bee knowen vnto them, as if
he did ſay: I haue ſeparated you from among the reſt of men: you
ſee howe others wander, and that becauſe they lacke wherewith to
guide, and direct them: but I haue choſen you for my people,
and I haue giuen my ſelfe to you. Seeing then I am your GOD,
hold your ſelues to me, otherwiſe you ſhall haue much leſſe excuſe
than the Painims. My bengeance muſt needes bee double vpon
you: yea, an hundred times more grieuous than vppon other, becauſe
you haue falſified the promiſe, and broken the couenaunt
which I made with you. He alledgeth yet further the fauour he did
ſhew to this people, when he ſaith, That he brought them out of
the land of Egypt, out of the houſe of bondage: whereby he ſignifieth,
that he hath ſo bound the people vnto him, that they can
not reuolt, but that they ſhall deſerue to be more grieuouſly puniſhed.
For when they ſhall haue forgotten the redemption, by
the whiche they were deliuered out of bondage, ſhould not their
vnthankfulneſſe be double, when being deliuered by ſo mightie an

hand, they yeald not them ſelues wholie to the ſeruice of their
redeemer. And of purpoſe doth he call Egypt. The houſe of bondage,
to the end the people ſhoulde well conſider, in what eſtate
they had bene there. For we ſee howe they, whiche had ſighed
and cried when they were oppreſſed with ſuch great violence, and
tyrannie, (as we reade of in Exodus) aſſoone as God had deliuered
them,Exod. 1. deſired to returne thicher againe. And whence proceedeth
this, but that they remembred not their wrong and oppreſſion,
but while they endured it: and that the diuell did ſhutte vp
their eyes, that they ſhould not eſteeme the fauour of GOD,
according to the price and worthineſſe thereof? That is the cauſe,
why Moſes in this place nameth Egypt, The houſe of bondage.
In the end there is ſet downe the commaundement, that the people
ſhoulde haue no other GOD before the face of him, whom
they ought to hold for their God. Now let vs applie this whole
doctrine to our vſe. Firſt therefore, when it is ſaid, I am the eternall
or euerliuing, let vs learne ſo to weigh the ſenſe and meaning
of this woord, that when as the maieſtie of GOD appeareth
vnto vs, we imagine no other deitie. For GOD can not
ſuffer any companion. If the brightneſſe of the Sunne darken the
light of the Starres, is it not great reaſon that when GOD ſheweth
him ſelfe, euerie one ſhould worſhippe him, and that all
glorie, whiche ſhall haue bene before, be as it were brought to nothing?
And this is the cauſe why it is ſaide to the Prophetes,
That when the Lorde ſhall reigne,Eſaie. 60. 9. there ſhall then appeare no other
brightneſſe but his: that the Sunne it ſelfe ſhalbe dimmed,
and that the Moone ſhalbe turned into darkneſſe. This is to ſhewe,
that if we mingle with GOD the fantaſies of our owne braine,
we take away ſo much from the right whiche apperteineth to him:
for he can not ſuffer any companion. It behoueth then, that this
woorde, Euerliuing, bridle all our fantaſies and fond imaginations,
in ſuch ſort, that wee preſume not on the libertie to conceiue
this and that, but that we content our ſelues with this
ſimplicitie, to haue one GOD, and that this ſuffice vs. And
for this cauſe, it is alſo ſaid: That when our Lorde Ieſus ſhall
prepare and eſtabliſh his ſeate in the worlde, that all the idols
of Egypt ſhall fall to the ground. Now this place apperteineth
vnto vs. For as Moſes ſaide to the people of auncient time,

You haue the euerliuing, and therefore it behoueth that all idols
bee chaced from among you: euen ſo nowe, ſithence GOD is
declared and made manifeſt vnto vs in the perſon of his onely
ſonne, all our idols muſt fall downe. Moreouer, we knowe, that
Egypt, aboue all countries of the worlde beſides, was full fraughted
with idols. Therefore, though wee haue bene in former times
euen plunged in lies, and errours, and darkneſſe, though wee
haue had an infinite number of idols, yet as ſoone as GOD declareth
that he is the euerliuing, all muſt vaniſh and fall away
as water. Nowe, when further he nameth himſelfe, Our GOD,
this is to entiſe vs after ſo gentle a manner, that his maieſtie
might be knowen vnto vs in moſt louing and amiable wiſe. For
if GOD ſhould ſpeake only of his eternitie and ſouereigne being,
we ſhould be all confounded. Of a trueth, this might ſuffice to
condemne all our dotages: yet we in the meane time can not bee
fitlie hereby inſtructed to our vſe and profite. It behoueth then,
that after it hath bene declared, that it is he alone whom wee
ought to reuerence, and to whome we muſt doe homage: that
he come vnto vs all, after a gentle and familiar manner, that
wee may perceiue him to be our father and maiſter, & that we may
knowe that he will alie himſelfe, and make a couenaunt with vs,
to the end we ſhould cleaue vnto him. This is meant by the title
which he giueth himſelfe in this place, ſaying, I am not onely thy
euerliuing, whiche come here to fright thee: but I am withall
thy GOD. I haue choſen thee to my ſelfe: I will that thou bee
my heritage. So then wee nowe ſee, howe GOD authorizeth
his Lawe, to the end we ſhould receiue it in all feare and humilitie,
and howe withall he ſweeteneth it with his loue, to the end we ſhould
take a taſt of it, and with a delighte & pleaſure, ſubmit our ſelues vnto
it, not refuſing to be gouerned by the doctrine therein conteined.
And let vs knowe, that wee can haue no excuſe, if at this day we honour
not our GOD in trueth, renouncing all our ſuperſtitions,
and what ſoeuer is contrarie to his ſeruice. And why? Becauſe
he ſhoulde winne vs to himſelfe by theſe titles, whiche are
giuen to holde vs in his feare. When he ſpeaketh of the rule
and power he hath ouer vs all: and when he calleth him ſelfe, Our
GOD, this ought to make vs taſt his fatherlie goodneſſe.
Theſe two thinges are here compriſed. Wee ſee then that there

remaineth nothing, but that we geue diligent eare to that which is
declared vnto vs in the lawe of God, & theron wholie reſt and ſtay our
ſelues. And for this cauſe he vpbraided the people of Iſrael, that they
neither feared nor loued him. If I be thy God and maiſter, where is
then my feare?Malach, 1. 6. If I bee thy father, where is my loue? ſaith he
by his Prophete Malachie. There is no doubt, but the Prophet
in this place had reſpect vnto this whiche Moſes here breefly
toucheth. For when GOD nameth himſelfe, The euerliuing, he
doeth it to the end, that we ſhoulde beare him due reuerence.
When he nameth himſelfe, The GOD of his people, it is to winne
them by loue and gentleneſſe, and to ſhewe, that after he hath elected
them, they ſhoulde geue them ſelues ouer wholie into his hand.
Now if this were vnder the lawe, by greater right it agreeth vnto
vs. For although God in the perſon of his onely ſome would as it
were be much abaſed, yet for all this remaineth he always in his glorie,
neither is any thing diminiſhed from the highneſſe of that maieſtie,
whereof he here maketh mention. The abaſement of our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt, is an infallible teſtimonie of the mercie and loue of our
God, yet howſoeuer it be, this ought not to occaſion vs to cōtemne, or
to leſſe eſteeme his maieſtie: for God in this ſort hath ſtopped to vs,
that he might allure vs to behold with leſſe feare his maieſtie, and
learne to reuerence him in ſuch ſorte as wee ought to doe. So then
of good right ſhall he reproue vs at this day, as beeing altogether
inexcuſable, if wee doe not feare and loue him. For he ſheweth
himſelfe our GOD, and our maiſter. But where is our feare, when
we regard not that he commaundeth vs, when we haue hardened
our heartes againſt his threatenings, as if wee would deſpitefully
reſiſt him, when wee continue in our wickedneſſe. And although
he hath ſaid, He will bee our iudge, and that he will one
day take an account of our doinges: how is it that wee make
but a ſcorne and mockerie of it? Where is (I ſay) the feare
which we owe to our GOD? For it ſeemeth, that wee will feare
a mortall creature more than the liuing GOD, which hath all
preeminence, and ſuperioritie, and maiſterſhippe ouer vs. Moreouer,
it is not enough that wee feare GOD, after ſome ſeruile
manner, as being forced therevnto: but wee muſt haue a loue alwayes
ioyned with our feare: For therefore nameth he him ſelfe,
Our father. And let vs alſo note, that when he declareth him

ſelfe the God of Iſrael, he meaneth by this word, that he is our Sauiour
alſo.Abac. 1. 12. Thou art our God (ſaith the Prophet Abacue) and wee
cannot periſh. So then let vs keepe in minde theſe titles, foraſmuch
as they apperteine to vs, and ought to ſerue this day for our inſtruction:
knowing that the Maieſtie of God hath appeared in our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt. Nowe let vs marke this which he further addeth for
the greater proofe of his loue and fauour: I haue brought you (ſaith
he) out of the land of Egypte. It is true, that God here eſpecially
bindeth vnto himſelfe the people of Iſrael aboue all other nations,
to which end he expreſſely ſetteth downe the redemption he had
wrought them: But when God ſpeaketh, wee muſt conſider of all
the benefites for the which wee are indebted to him, which albeit
they are in number infinite and ineſtimable: yet wee ought at leaſt
wiſe call them to minde, ſo farre as our ſmall abilitie may doe, applying
all our wittes & ſenſes thereto: & perceiuing, that wee faile,
and are behinde in this point, let vs ſtraine our ſelues better to minde
them, at leaſt ſo farre, as to be therby inſtructed in the loue and feare
of our God. Doth then God ſpeake? We muſt firſt conſider, that
this is he which created vs, wee are therefore his. This one benefite
were ſufficient to prouoke euerie one with all his might to ſerue
& honour God. For what ſufficient recompenſe can we make him,
if there were but this, that he hath placed vs in this worlde, and of
his mercie nouriſheth vs here? But yet, when wee ſhall haue caſt
our eyes vp on high, or downe belowe, and take a diligent view of all
the tokens he ſheweth vs of his loue, ſeeing that he hath created
the worlde for our ſake, that he hath appointed all thinges to our
vſe, conſidering that he hath engrauen his owne image in vs, that
wee ſhoulde be immortall, vnderſtanding that he hath prepared a
better heritage for vs than this brittle and tranſitorie life: when we
perceiue all theſe things, muſt it not needes bee that wee are more
blockiſh and brutiſh than beaſtes, if wee bee not rauiſhed with a
feruent deſire to worſhippe our God, to vowe, and to dedicate our
ſelues wholy vnto him? But yet further than this, wee muſt make
enquirie, and enter into accompte, as well of the benefites which are
beſtowed on vs all in generall, as which euerie one alſo particularly
receiueth, and then behoueth it euerie one to make his confeſſion
with Dauid: Lord when I thinke on thy benefites,Pſal. 40. 5. loe my ſpirite is
plunged as it were in ſome great deapth, they ſurmount in number

the haires of mine head, as he ſpeaketh in the, 40. Pſalme. Againe,
when wee ſhall haue knowen howe farre we are all bound to God in
generall, let euerie one in the priuie chamber of his owne heart conſider
the benefits which he hath receiued of the handes of God. And
in ſteade of that which was ſaid in old time to the people of Iſrael, I haue redeemed you out of the land of Egypt, let vs remember from
whence our Lord hath deliuered vs, when it pleaſed him to receiue vs
into his fannlie & into his church. For we are the children of Adam,
by nature curſed, and inheritors of death, we haue nothing in vs but
ſinne, & ſo conſequently we muſt needes be accurſed before God. Let
men pleaſe & magnifie themſelues as they liſt, yet behold their birth,
behold their nobilitie: they are but bondſlaues of Sathan, they haue
a ſinke & bottomleſſe gulfe of corruption in them, they are worthie
that the wrath & malediction of God fal on their heads: briefly being
baniſhed from the kingdome of heauen, they are geuen ouer to all
miſerie & wretchedneſſe. Now our Lord and God, by the hand of his
ſonne, hath hence deliuered vs. He hath not ſent a Moſes, as to the
people of auncient time: but not ſparing his onelie ſonne, he hath
deliuered him to death for vs. Being then raunſomed with ſo deare
and ineſtimable a price, as is the holie and ſacred bloud of the ſonne
of God, ought wee not wholie to yeelde our ſelues vnto him? And
withall let vs note, that if it be ſaid, That Egypt was a houſe of bondage,
what thraldome and ſeruitude is this, when Sathan holdeth
vs in his bondes, and vnder his tyrannie, in ſuch ſort that wee
haue no meane to eſcape death, that we bee excluded from all hope
of ſaluation, that God is our enimie and aduerſarie? Nowe being
deliuered from all this, is not our redemption farre more greater
and excellent than this, whereof Moſes here ſpeaketh? So in
ſteede that it was ſa
                  •
               ed to the auncient people, Thy God hath deliuered
thee out of the land of Egypt, it is nowe ſaid, That wee be redeemed
from the bondage of Sathan to liue vnto the Lord, as Saint
Paule ſpeaketh in the.Rom. 14. 9. 14. Chapter of his Epiſtle to the Romanes,
and the ſixte of the firſt to the Corinthians;1. Cor. 6. 19. that wee are not our
owne. It behaueth therefore the faithfull, that they preſume not on
the libertie, to doe what ſeemeth them, and to liue euerie one after
his owne luſt. And why ſo? The Lord Ieſus therefore died & roſe againe
& reuiued,Rom. 14. 9. that he might be Lord both of the quicke & dead. It
is then good reaſon, that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be Lord both of the liuing

& of the dead, ſeeing he hath not ſpared himſelf for our redemption
& ſaluation And beſides this, that the ſonne of God hath offered
himſelfe vpon the croſſe to redeeme vs, let vs knowe that at this day
by the meane of the Goſpell he maketh vs partakers of this benefite:
for he hath gathered vs to himſelfe, to the end wee ſhould bee of his
flocke and inheritance. It is true that he is that vndefiled Lamb and
without ſpot which taketh away the ſinnes of the worlde, and that he
hath offered himſelfe ſo reconcile man vnto God. Howbeit, ſo it is,
that wee ſee many people for ſaken, to whom the gate is ſhut, and to
whom God hath not ſhewed this fauour, to inlighten them in the
faith, as we are. And withall let vs note, that foraſmuch as the Goſpell
is preached vnto vs, we haue herein a ſure teſtimonie, that the
ſonne of God will make the redemption which he hath once accompliſhed,
auailable vnto vs, and that he will haue vs to reioyce in ſuch
a benefite. Let vs learne then that our vnthankfulneſſe ſhalbe ſo
much the more vilainous, if wee employ not all our paines to ſerue
that God, which hath by ſuch benefites bounde vs vnto himſelfe. If
ſuch as are not of the houſhold of faith behaue themſelues as vntamed
horſes broken looſe, if they paſſe all meaſure in their ſuperſtitions,
if they be looſe and lawleſſe in their liuing, this may well be, becauſe
they haue no bridle to reſtraine them, becauſe the Lorde raineth them
not backe as he doeth his houſholde ſeruantes. Wee ſee the horrible
confuſion which is now in the Papaſie. But all this while they haue
no doctrine to reduce men vnto God, but rather to eſtraunge them
from him. And wee ſee how the diuell hath gained an empire and
kingdome among them in ſuch ſort, that all is full of deceites & illuſions,
& that the liuing God is forſaken. See then here an horrible
confuſion. But as for vs, ſeeing God hath drawen vs to himſelfe, is
not this a moſt ſtreight obligation, to make vs knit our ſelues wholie
vnto him, to make vs hold the obedience of the doctrine propoſed vnto
vs in his name? Let vs therefore learne ſo to cleaue vnto our God,
that we renounce all that we might forge of our owne braine, that
we ſtagger no more hither or thither, or bee moued and toſſed in any
ſorte whatſoeuer. Knowe wee that there is one God which will poſſeſſe
vs for his people, & ſo wholie poſſeſſe vs, that his honour be not
taken from him, to be beſtowed on creatures, knowe we that he watcheth
ouer vs, to the end wee ſhoulde acknowledge, that it is he
onely whom wee muſt call vpon, and of whom we muſt looke for all

helpe and ſuccour. And for that he will receiue vs, and keepe vs in
houſe, let vs walke as in his preſence: ſo that wee worſhippe him as
our onely God, not onely by way of ceremonies and outward proteſtation:
but ſincerely and in heart, as wee knowe that his ſeruice is
ſpirituall. Briefly, let vs yeald vp our ſelues, our ſoules, and bodies,
to be gouerned by him, that he may bee in all thinges honoured and
glorified.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good God,
with acknowledging of our faults, beſeeching him that he will make
vs feele them better than we haue done, that we may be led to a true
and earneſt repentaunce, that he will mortifie vs more and more,
cutting off our euill and diſordered affections, to the end wee may bee
wholy geuen to feare and honour him. And becauſe we cannot ſerue
him ſo purely as he deſerueth, whiles wee bee helde bound vnder
the infirmittes of our fleſh, pray we him that he will beare with vs,
vntill he hath clothed vs with his righteouſneſſe. And ſo let vs ſay
humbly from our heart, Almightie God and heauenlie father.
         
         
            The. 3. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               
                  8 Thou ſhalt make thee no grauen image, or any likenes of that,
that is in heauen aboue, or whiche is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters vnder the earth.
                  9 Thou ſhalt neither bow thy ſelfe vnto them, nor ſerue them:
for I thy Lord thy God am a gelous God, viſiting the iniquitie
of the fathers vpon the children, euen to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me:
                  10 And ſhewing mercie to thouſandes of them that loue me, & keepe my Commaundements.
               
            
            
               
               BEcauſe men are ſo farre inclined to
corrupte the worſhippe of God by wicked
ſuperſtitions, it behoueth that God
feare them by his threates, to the end
they might be as it wereforceably kept
backe: when otherwiſe they woulde
carrie them ſelues headlong by their
vanitie, to imagine of GOD cleane
contrarie to all that which is agreeable
with his Maieſtie. And this is a pointe
worthie to bee noted. For it ſeemeth (as wee haue alreadie touched)
that it was now needeleſſe to forbidde the people of Iſrael to make
any images, after they had knowen the liuing God. But becauſe
of our curſed inclination, it was requiſite that this ſo ſtreight a forbidding,
as wee ſee, ſhould be adioyned. And this is done as well for
vs, as for them: becauſe this vice is as it were ſettled in our bones.
If God ſhewe not, that he will not ſuffer idolatrie, and that wee bee
not wounded with ſuch threats, there is not one amongeſt vs which
forgeth not an infinite number of idols, and by this meane the honour
due to the liuing God is tranſported vnto our fantaſies. Let
vs note then, that here we are reproued of hauing a curſed and peruerſe
nature, whiche alwayes draweth vs to ſuperſtition, and that
there is great need that we be held backe after ſome violent and forceable
manner. For of our owne good will we neuer ſerue GOD in
ſuch ſort, as that we imagine nothing of him, but that which is proper
to his Maieſtie. And withall wee may note, to what purpoſe
our good meanings ſerue vs. For if there be any thing in whiche
men may excuſe them ſelues with this, that they thinke they do well,
it is when they forge vnto them ſelues idols. For to what end doe
they make them, but to ſerue God, to bee ſtirred vp to greater deuotion,
and to haue a more ſtrong aſſuraunce that GOD will heare
them in their requeſtes: Theſe then are the men whiche may beſt
pretend this colour of good meaning: but yet we ſee on the contrarie
ſide, that God hereby is grieuouſly angred: wee ſee how he pronounceth
an horrible ſentence of condemnatiō vpon all them, which leaue
them ſelues to be gouerned by their thinking and meaning. They
will ſay ſtill, and the thing is ſo, That they thinke to ſerue God: but
what? He accepteth no ſuch ſeruice, but rather accurſeth it, and

that by good right. For as wee haue aboue ſhewed, his maieſlie is
diſguiſed, when one will make vnto him a viſible image. We are
then inſtructed in this place to doe nothing as ſeemeth vs, eſpecially
when there is any queſtion of the ſeruice of God, that we attempt nothing
after our owne fantaſies, but that wee followe in all ſimplicitie
that which he appointeth by his worde, without adding of any
thing vnto it whatſoeuer. For aſſoone as wee ſhall haue declined
neuer ſo little herein, what euer we alledge to make our cauſe good,
God will not leaue vs vnpuniſhed. For this is no vaine threate, when
he ſaith, That he is a God of gelouſie and anger, which viſiteth the
iniquitie of parentes vpon their children. Thus you ſee then two
pointes which wee haue to beare in minde in this place. The one is,
that becauſe wee are by nature ouer much giuen to idolatrie, this
threatning of God commes alwayes before our eyes, to the end we
preſume not to mingle any thing with his word, or to deuiſe any kind
of idolatrie, but that we ſerue him purely according to his nature,
and not according to our fantaſie. And let this be for one note. The other
is, that we knowe we muſt not pretend our good me aninges, to
iuſtifie that which we ſhall haue inuented and deuiſed: but contrarie
wiſe let vs remember, that the principall ſeruice which God requireth,
is obedience. Nowe let vs come to the wordes which are ſet
downe in this ſentence: God ſaith in the firſt place, I am thy euerliuing
thy God, or thy mightie and ſtrong one. Here againe, he
ſetteth himſelfe againſt all idols. For wee haue alreadie ſeene,
that to redreſſe the ſuperſtitions of the Iſraelites, he declared himſelfe
in his maieſtie. Nowe this is to take all excuſe from men,
when GOD once manifeſteth himſelfe vnto them. When wee
knowe not which is the true religion, neither can diſcerne who is
the true GOD, it is no maruell if all our ſenſes wander, and wee
runne hither and thither without any right directing of our wayes,
as poore wanderers: but when God hath once declared himſelfe
vnto vs, and wee knowe his trueth, then is there great reaſon that
all our dreames fall to the grounde, and that wee abide ſtedfaſt in
that, whereof wee haue knowledge. For this cauſe God repeateth
this thing, That he hath declared himſelfe to his people, and
hath choſen them to himſelfe, and that he will gouerne them euen by
the lawe which is nowe publiſhed. And of purpoſe nameth he himſelf
A gelous God, & wrathfull. For this word importeth both theſe

thinges. And againe, although he be called here, God, notwithſtanding
the worde he here vſeth, is deriued from a word which ſignifieth
ſtrength & feare. Now when he nameth himſelfe Gelous, there is
no doubt but he meaneth thereby to ſignifie, that he will not ſuffer
that his honour be violated, or that he be robbed of that which properly
belongeth vnto him, to haue it geuen to creatures, that he can
not patiently endure any ſuch treacherie. Therfore when the honour
of God ſhall not be ſo priced on our part as it deſerueth, let vs knowe
that he will not neglect it. For wee ſhall feele in the end that he forgetteth
not himſelfe, but will mainteine his glorie, as he declareth
throughout all the holie ſcripture. Verely if wee had but one droppe
of true vnderſtanding, wee woulde be zealous for the honour of our
God, ſo that wee needed not to be ſtirred vp herevnto: wee woulde
of our ſelues endeuour to accompliſhe that which is written in the
Pſalmes,Pſal. 69. 9. that is, That his zeale ſhould deuoure vs: that we ſhoulde
burne within our ſelues when wee ſee his maieſtie reprochfully abuſed,
it would be (I ſay) that wee ſhould then feele within vs a burning
and conſuming fire. But what? Wee are curious to mainteine
our owne honour, and in the meane while wee will ſuffer that
the honour of the Lorde bee trampled vnder feete, that men make
their ſporte and game of it, that men haue it in deriſion and mockerie,
or at leaſt that men mangle and teare it in peeces. And therefore
when the worlde ſhall be wholie ſet on idolatrie, when all of vs
ſhall neglect our duetie in the ſeruice of God, ſhall not our Lorde, after
he hath reproued our looſeneſſe and vnthankfulneſſe in this point,
ſhewe that although wee haue bene careleſſe herein, he will yet haue
ſuch a zeale as behoueth him to mainteine his honour, and that when
he ſhall bee trode vnder the feete of men, he will execute on them a
ſharpe and grieuous reuenge? Nowe to the ende that wee ſhoulde
knowe that being gelous in his honours behalfe, he knoweth well in
what ſorte to puniſh the idolaters, he taketh to himſelfe the name of
God, which importeth force and ſtrength, as we haue alreadie touched:
and to this end he doeth it, that wee alſo, when wee thinke
of him, ſhoulde ioyne theſe two wordes together. For Moſes
vnderſtandeth in this place, that which is more fully expreſſed
by the Prophete Nahum,Nahum. 1. 
                     •
                  . when he ſayeth, The Lorde is
agelous GOD, a God of vengeance, a God which puniſheth
them that haue offended, which reſerueth wrath for his enimies,

a God, which ſhall come in a whirle winde and tempeſt. The Prophete
vſeth this word, that God is Gelous, that is to ſay, that he is
not forgetfull, that he hath not his eyes cloſed and ſhut vp when men
contemne him, but that he marketh it, that all which is done is regiſtred
before him, that he will one day take accompt of it. Nowe after
that he hath ſpoken of this affection, that is to ſay, that God will
mainteine his honour, he ſheweth by and by that he hath wherewith
to doe it, that he is armed with force and might to puniſh his enimies,
and that they cannot by any meanes eſcape his hand. And to
that end he ſpeaketh of a whirle winde and tempeſt. See why he
ſpeaketh of vengeaunce. He addeth alſo further, that though God
diſſemble for a time, that yet he reſerueth wrath for his enimies,
and will in a conuenient time make them feele with whome
they haue had to doe, and that they haue prouoked the liuing GOD
to anger. We ſee now what Moſes vnderſtandeth namely, that God
will haue his honour eſteemed of vs. And although we thinke to remaine
vnpuniſhed, when wee haue polluted his ſeruice, and corrupted
it, in what ſorte ſo euer, yet in his time he will ſhew, that he is not
forgetfull of him ſelfe, but that he will mainteine and defend his
own honour. This is one point to be noted. Moreouer he adioyneth,
that he is alſo mightie enough to put in execution, his gelouſie. For
the Lord is not as mortall men, which can but fume and chafe, when
their honour is foiled, & they contemned and iniuried, but they haue
not the meane to worke the reuenge they woulde. God is not ſuch
a one: he is armed with might and power to confounde all his enimies.
Truely wee muſt not imagine in God any humane affections,
ſuch as with whiche wee ſee men to bee moued and carried away.
There is neither anger nor wrath in God. But becauſe wee
cannot comprehend him as he is, it behoueth that he applie him
ſelfe to our rudeneſſe. So, as often as the Scripture ſpeaketh of
wrath, anger, and indignation: this is not that God is changeable,
that he reſembleth vs, to bee moued as we are with paſſions. For he
alwayes abideth in one eſtate: yea, there is no ſhadowe of chaunge
in him. As Saint Iames vſeth the ſame ſimilitude, to declare, that
in his nature & being there is no chaunge.Iam. 1, 17. But becauſe we comprehend
not the iudgments of God, but by theſe words, of anger, wrath,
and indignation: for this cauſe the Scripture ſpeaketh after this
manner. Nowe let vs alſo note principally in this place, that it is a

fearefull and horrible thing,Heb. 10. 31. as God here declareth, to fall into his
handes: and aboue all, when wee ſhall haue peruerted the puritie of
his ſeruice by our wicked inuentions, raſhly attempting that which
our braine hath fondly conceiued. Let vs therefore knowe wee ſhall
feele with whom we haue had to deale, and that he is a greater maiſter,
than with whom we might thinke to dallie after ſuch a faſhion.
Now withall, God is not here contented to threaten them which by
idolatrie are turned away from his lawe, in ſaying onely that he will
puniſh them in their owne perſons, but he extendeth his vengeance
to their whole poſteritie. I am (ſaith he) a gelous God, which puniſhe
the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children, vnto the thirde & fourth
generation. It ſeemeth at the firſt ſight, that this is euill agreeing to
the iuſtice of God, to puniſh the children for the ſinns of the fathers &
mothers. And beſide that, naturall reaſon is againſt it. We ſee what
is ſpoken concerning this point, to the Prophete Ezechiel, namely,
That he which ſhall haue ſinned ſhall beare his owne payment, &
that the ſonne ſhal not beare the iniquitie of the father, nor the father
the iniquitie of the ſonne. This place then here which might ſeeme
ſomewhat too auſtere and rigorous, which ſhould ſeeme to derogate
from the righteouſneſſe of God, for ſinne, bringeth his hire, that is,
the death of him which committeth it. He then which is innocent
why ſhall he die?Rom. 6. 23. And albeit this reaſon were not ſufficient, we haue
the teſtimonie of the holie ſcripture, where God declareth, that he
will not puniſh the innocent children for the ſinnes of their fathers.
For he reproueth the Iewes for this blaſphemie whiche ranne
much in their mouth, and whereof they had nowe made a common
prouerbe: Our fathers haue eaten ſowre grapes, and our teeth
are ſet on edge.Ezech. 18. 2. Wee are not thus rigorouſly handled for the faultes
wee haue committed, for wee haue liued as behoued vs, but
he grateth here vppon the ſinne of our fathers. Thus the Iewes
murmured againſt GOD. Now he ſweareth that this blaſphemie
ſhall no more reigne among them. But for all this, when
all ſhall be well conſidered, there is no contrarietie in theſe places.
For in the place of Ezechiel God vnderſtandeth no other
thing, but that thoſe which are puniſhed of him, cannot alledge their
innocencie, that they cannot ſay that God doeth them any wrong
or iniurie, if he vſe them ſharpely: for they ſhall finde themſelues

guiltie euerie one in his owne perſon, and that he ſhall bee declared
iuſt, when euerie one ſhall ſee that he exceedeth neither meaſure
nor reaſon.
            Nowe this is alſo certeine, that when God puniſheth the children,
becauſe of the fathers: yet ceaſeth he not to bee iuſt in his chaſtiſementes:
for the children on their part being well examined, ſhall
be founde faultie. I ſay yet further, that they can no ſooner come
foorth of the wombe of their mother, but they committe many notable
and manifeſt ſinnes, and ſuch as might bee knowen to the
whole worlde. For what ofſpring are wee? What bring we forth
by nature, but ſinne and wickedneſſe? See then the infantes which
are alredie ſinners, yea, being in the wombe of their mother, they are
condemned before God, there is yet no euill perceiued in them, howbeit
their nature is altogether corrupt and ſinfull. They haue a ſeede
of wickedneſſe in them, & becauſe of this originall ſinne which is deſcended
from Adam vpon all mankind, behold they are alredie vnder
condemnation. Now ſeeing it is ſo, that the little infantes are not exempted
from the auger & maledicion of God, it is certeine when he
puniſheth them, this ſhall not be without good cauſe: but we ſhall alwayes
knowe, that he proceedeth herein in all equitie & iuſtice, as an
vpright iudge: by greater reaſon they which are elder & further ſtriken
in yeeres, are puniſhed as not innocent, for one ſhall finde them
by many degrees more faultie. And ſo as concerning the place of
Ezechiel the caſe is cleare, that God puniſheth not the innocent children
for the tranſgreſſion of their fathers, for the faultes ſhalbe alſo
founde in themſelues. As for this, when he ſaith, That he puniſheth
the iniquitie of fathers vppon the children, let vs conſider
howe this is done, and then this hard knotte ſhall bee eaſily vnties.
Firſt then let vs knowe, that God oweth vs nothing, and
that if he beſtowe any benefite vppon vs, this is altogether of his
meere liberalitie, not that he is any thing beholding vnto vs. In
the meane while, if he will vſe his rigour towardes vs, he may
leaue vs in condemnation as wee are. Let God onely withdrawe
his mercie, and ſhewe himſelfe iudge ouer the whole worlde,
and what ſhall beecome of vs? Surely wee ſhall all periſhe, there is
no remedie: little and great, fathers and children, without exception
(I ſay) wee are all condemned, if GOD drawe vs not

out of the curſe in whiche wee are, and that by his free mercie,
without the leaſt occaſion of beeing bounde vnto vs. So nowe,
ſeeing GOD may bring vs all to deſtruction, if it pleaſe him to
vſe his goodneſſe and clemencie towardes ſome, if he call them
to himſelfe, if he deliuer them from this deepe dongeon of damnation,
in which they are: may any one accuſe him for this? May
any one reprooue him herein, the leaſt that may bee? No. For
our eye muſt not bee euill, if he of his goodneſſe taketh pitie and
compaſſion of his creatures.
            And although he vſe not the like meaſure towardes all, yet
notwithſtanding wee muſt haue our mouth cloſed vp: or rather
wide open, not to murmur, but to confeſſe that all which he doth
is in equitie and iuſtice, although it ſurmount our ſenſe and reaſon.
For wee comprehend not alwayes the reaſon why GOD
diſpoſeth ſo of men, and yet muſt wee laie aſide our prating, and
learne to reuerence and adore God in his iudgementes, when they
ſhall bee ouer high for vs, ouer wonderfull, ouer ſecrete. How euer
it bee, let this generall rule abide certeine, that is to ſay, That God
might leaue vs in our deſtruction, wherein wee are, if ſo it pleaſed
him, and that by this meanes the whole world ſhoulde periſhe: but
becauſe it pleaſeth him to ſhewe himſelfe gentle and pitifull, not
towardes all, but towardes a parte, ſee what diſcerneth the one
from the other.
            Nowe, herevppon he leaueth them, as it ſeemeth good vnto
him, in the curſe wherein they are borne. And if one demaunde
why God vſeth his mercie towardes ſome, when on others he executeth
his ſeueritie? It is certeine, the firſt and principall cauſe is
vnknowen vnto vs, neither ought wee to enquire after it. And
why? For it behoueth that all our ſenſes bee locked vp captiues in
that behalfe, and that wee confeſſe that God hath libertie to chooſe
whom he pleaſeth, and to refuſe the reſt. But howſoeuer the caſe
ſtandeth, he maketh this promiſe to the faithfull, that he will take
pitie on their children, and that as he hath begonne his mercie in
their perſons, ſo he will continue it in their poſteritie, euen to a
thouſand generations. Seeing God hath made this promiſe to his
ſeruauntes, wee ſee nowe there is ſome cauſe why God hath pitie of
the one, rather than of the other.
            
               
               
                  〈…〉
                contrarie part, he threatneth the vnfaithfull that the

                  〈…〉
                not onely in themſelues, but alſo in their iſſue, and

                  〈…〉
                which ſhall deſcende from their ſtocke and familie. But
nowe let vs come to the mercie which God ſheweth, and to the puniſhmentes
he executeth. His mercie then is not in this, that he
bleſſeth the children of the faithfull with riches, with health, or other
like thinges: or that he maketh them to proſper to the world ward:
thoſe are not the chiefe bleſſings of God, that is not the end whereat
he beginneth, but rather he ſheweth them his goodneſſe and mercie,
when he gouerneth them by his holie ſpirit, when he geueth
them the marke and ſeale of the adoption of his children, when he
correcteth them, and purgeth them from their ſinnes, to reforme and
renewe them to his image and likeneſſe. Ye ſee then the mercie
which God extendeth to the children of the faithfull, that is to ſay, he
ſuffereth them not to remaine in their corruption and wickedneſſe,
but that he reformeth them and gouerneth them by his holie ſpirit.
This being done, he continueth his mercie further more and more,
and maketh them to proſper euen in this world, vntill the fulneſſe of
his mercie be heaped vpon them: namely, vntill he hath drawen
them out of this world into his kingdome, and geueth them there
the fruition of euerlaſting life. On the contrarie ſide, whereas he puniſheth
the iniquitie of fathers vpon the children, this is as much to
ſay, as that he will leaue the ſtocke of them in the ſame plight, they
are in. There is a wicked man, there is a deſpiſer of God, there is an
hypocrite, there is an vnfaithfull and vnbeleeuing man: well, he ſhall
haue children: God will, as we may ſee, forget them, and account
them for ſtraungers. And whereas he acknowledgeth them not in the
number of his owne, he daineth not nor vouchſaleth to ſhew himſelfe
a father towardes them. So he leaueth them as forſaken, and then
it muſt needes be that Sathan poſſeſſe them, & being deſtitute of the
ſpirit of God, what other thing may happen vnto them than euill and
miſchiefe, ſo as they procure to themſelues the wrath and anger of
God more and more? Nowe then doth our Lorde puniſh them without
good cauſe? Can then ſay they are innocent and guiltleſſe: No.
For there is ſufficient fault in them before hande. Wee ſee then a
great deale the better how this which God hath pronounced by Ezechiel
is true: namely, that he which hath ſinned ſhall beare the
payment and puniſhment as he hath deſerued, and that the innocent

ſhall not bee puniſhed for the cauſe of the ſinner and tranſgreſſour.
Notwithſtanding, we ſee alſo, that not without cauſe he declareth,
that he will puniſh the iniquitie of fathers vppon the children. For
why? It is in him to ſhew mercie to the children of the wicked and
vnbeleuing, or of the contemners of his word, or of hypocrites, which
abuſe his name: it is (I ſay) in the choice and libertie of God, to
withdrawe his grace from their poſteritie. And when their children
are eſtraunged from God, what reteine they but the filth and corruption
of Adam? There is nothing elſe in them, but ſinne and wickedneſſe.
And therefore needes it muſt be, that they bee enimies to
God. Ye ſee then how he puniſheth them in iuſtice, and that they
can not ſhift them ſelues out of his hand, in ſaying that he doeth them
wrong, that he is ouer cruell towardes them. It behoueth that euerie
mouth be ſtopped in that behalfe. True it is, that a man can neuer
ſatiſfie and content the rebellions, as wee ſee there are many
which aduaunce them ſelues againſt God in this caſe, with ſuch
boldneſſe and preſumption, that good men which are ſober and modeſt,
are aſhamed to behold them, but leaue we theſe dogges to barke
their fill, and in the meane time let vs glorifie our God in all humilitie,
knowing at leaſt wiſe this one thing, that he hath this authoritie,
and might, to ſhew fauour and mercie to whom it pleaſeth him. And
for this cauſe we muſt conclude, that if God withdrawe his ſpirite
from the poſteritie of the wicked, he may not bee accuſed of crueltie:
For they are in them ſelues puniſhable, when they are in this ſorte
forſaken of him, and are not gouerned by his holie ſpirite. Let vs
then note well that this ſentence hath no contrarietie to that of Ezechiel.
Nowe let vs returne to ſee the meaning of Moſes in theſe
words. There is no doubt, but by his manner of ſpeaking in this
place, he would imprinte a greater feare in vs, than if barely and
ſimplie he had ſaid: God will puniſh you, when you ſhall haue corrupted
his ſeruice, when you ſhall haue chaunged any thing in religion,
when you ſhall haue deuiſed and faſhioned any image or likeneſſe
of him, thinke not that you ſhall eſcape his vengeance: for he
will not ſuffer that his honor be defaced, and brought to nothing in
ſuch ſorte. If Moſes had thus ſpoken, men as ouerhardied and flow
of nature, would not haue bene ſufficiently moued with feare. Therefore
he here paſſeth further: God (ſaith hee) will not onely puniſh
you in your owne perſons, but he will extend his vengeaunce vppon

your ofſpring, and not onely on your children, but he will purſue
it euen to the further end of your linage, in ſuch ſort that you ſhall
for euer feele his wrath, as a kindling fire, and after your death, men
ſhall behold the ſignes and markes of your iniquitie: GOD ſhall
place you in ſuch ignominie and reproch, that you ſhalbe as ſpectacles
to the world: and although you be rotten & putrified vnder the
earth, yet ſhall his vengeaunce purſue you ſo, that your ſinnes ſhall
bee grated on, and called to remembraunce from age to age: and
men ſhall know that you haue rebelled againſt him, whiche ſhewed
you ſo many of his benefites, that at leaſt you ſhould haue
bene as the ſheepe of his flocke, to bee gouerned by him and his
worde. Now then let vs take heede, wee bee not ouer ſluggiſh and
paſt ſenſe, when God in this manner ſtirreth vp and awaketh vs.
Truely if onely in one woord, or by ſome exteriour ſignification he
ſhould ſignifie his anger, we ought to bee touched with great feare:
but ſince wee are dull vppon the ſpurre, yet at leaſt then, when God
declareth that after he hath puniſhed vs, he will yet followe on his
vengeaunce vppon our poſteritie, and that after our death it muſt
needes bee, that thoſe which ſhalbe begotten of vs bee condemned,
when (I ſay) God ſpeaketh in this wiſe, let vs then bee more attentiue
to walke in his feare, and to turne our ſelues vnto him, that
we prouoke him not to anger, being as it is ſo fearefull and terrible.
Thus wee ſee in what ſorte we are to make our profite by this text.
Now he addeth further, Of them which hate him: in which word he
comprehendeth all the tranſgreſſours of the law. If then one demand
whether all thoſe, whiche turne them ſelues from the obedience of
God, hateth him therefore? This place here anſwereth, Yea: not
that it ſemeth ſo them, and yet the truth is ſo. And we ought here
not to reſt vppon our owne iudgement, for God onely is a competent
iudge to pronounce ſentence herein. And becauſe that men,
when they geue them ſelues ouer to worke wickedlie, will not ſay,
neither thinke ſo in heart, that they hate God, it behoueth that this
vice ſhould be diſcouered. It is true that hypocrits will make a faire
ſhew, that the loue of God cauſeth them to ſhew ſome good countenaunce.
And in deed it may haue ſome ſmall ſeede, but it is a baſtard
& vicious ſeede. So then this hatred is not apparant in hypocrites,
nether in many other which lead a diſordered & diſſolute life: but yet
is it in them, though we know it not, for as all male factours & licentious

liuers woulde there were neither iudge, nor order, nor policie
in the world: ſo all they which willinglie & of their own accord would
not acknowledge them ſelues Gods ſubiects, they ſpite him, & could
be contented he were plucked out of heauen. This appeareth ſufficently
in them, which are wholy geuen ouer & peruerted. When men
haue looſed the bridle to all iniquitie, they can not beare any correction,
& are ſo farre from being tractable to be taught, when they are
threatened, they grind the teeth, they ſtorme & rage, they are furious,
& madde againſt God. This hating then of God is manifeſt enough
in them which haue granted them ſelues a more outragious libertie
of doing ill, in thē which are carried away as with a tempeſt in their
wickedneſſe, & are fullie ſettled in their ſinnes. In others which haue
yet ſome feare, & are in ſome ſorte moued, when we ſpeake of God, &
of his iudgements, this appeareth not, & yet there is alreadie in them
an hatred of God. Truelie they thinke it not, but God ſeeth much
more cleare than we, and when thinges are hid and vnknowen vnto
vs, he noteth them. We muſt alwayes beare in minde, howe Saint
Iohn ſaith, That God is much greater than our conſciences: that is
to ſay,1. Iohn. 3. 20. That if our conſciences beare vs witneſſe of our faultes, God
ſhall not ſleepe in the meane time. And ſo let vs brieflie remember,
that all they whiche conforme not them ſelues to the obedience of
God, & which humble not them ſelues vnder his maieſtie, to ſerue &
honor him, that all they hate him, although by effect they ſhew it not
at firſt, and that men can not iudge ſo of them. And for the ſame cauſe
we ſee why in like maner, when God ſpeaketh of them, which keepe
his commaundements, he beginneth with his loue. He ſaith, That he
will ſhewe mercie on thouſand generations to them which loue him.
And why? For it is not poſſible to deſire to honour God, & to bee his
ſubiects, if we haue not a feeling of this loue, wherof he here ſpeketh,
And this may ſerue vs for a good leſſon, as we ſhall ſee herafter, that
Moſes when he would geue a ſhort abridgment of the Lawe ſaith,
What doeth the Lord thy God Iſrael require of thee, but that thou
loue him with thy whole hart,Deut. 10. 1
                     •
                  . & that thou cleaue to him? We ſhall neuer
(I ſay) know, what it is to yeald obedience to Gods lawe, and
to rule our ſelues according to it, if we beginne not at this loue. And
why? For God requireth a willing ſeruice, he will not that we ſerue
him with a ſeruile feare but his deſire is that we come vnto his worſhip
with a free & chearfull courage, & take, euen a pleaſure in obeying

& honoring of him. Now this can not be, except we loue him. Wherfore
let vs not, that the beginning, the founteine, the foundation,
and roote of obedience is this loue of God, ſo as we bee not forced
to come vnto him, but euen take a ſingular delight & pleaſure therein,
knowing that this is our true happineſſe, that we deſire nothing
elſe, but to bee ruled by his will, and to bee in all pointes conformable
to the ſame. And moreouer let vs note, that this loue can not
bee in vs before we haue taſted of the goodneſſe of our God. For as
long as wee conceiue God our aduerſarie and contrarie partie, wee
can not, but flee him. Will we then loue him? Will wee bee reformed
to his obedience to take a pleaſure in his ſeruice? Wee muſt firſte
knowe, that he is our father and ſauiour, and that he deſireth nothing
more than to ſhew himſelfe louing, & fauorable towardes vs. When
we ſhall ſo haue caſted the great loue he beareth vs, then ſhall we bee
ſtirred vp to loue him as our father, and when this loue ſhalbe in vs,
there is no doubt, but wee ſhall obey him, & his lawe ſhall beare
rule in our thoughtes, and in our affections, and in all our members.
For what is the cauſe that we are ſo rebellious againſt God,
but that we hate him, as we haue before ſaid? Againe on the contrarie
ſide, the loue of God ſhall leade vs to ſerue him, and to ſet our
ſelues, & our doings in order according to his iuſtice in ſuch ſorte, that
a man ſhall ſee a certeine conformitie & melodie betwene the lawe of
God, & all our deſires, & affections. But yet the better to vnderſtand
this, let vs conſider what God is, for he will not bee knowen according
to our nature: and when we ſhall heare him ſpeake, it is not enough
to yeald him this title of God, but he will bee knowen as he
is: namely, iuſt, and good, that he is the founteine & perfection of all
wiſedome, of all power, of all vprightneſſe, of all equitie and iuſtice.
Now then let vs conceiue God as he is, that is, with his iuſtice, and
vprightneſſe, & equitie: and then ſhall we not deſire but to frame and
faſhion our ſelues vnto him: contrarie wiſe, when we ſhall loue that
which is euill, and ſhalbe wrapped in wickedneſſe as in a garment, it
can not be, but we muſt hate him. And why? Becauſe here is no queſtion
of ſome bare nature & being, neither ought we to imagine God
as an idol, but we muſt comprehend him in his iuſtice. It then we
ſhall hate this which is in God, that is to ſay, his iuſtice & vprightneſſe,
it muſt needs be that we hate him alſo. For he can not denie him
ſelfe, he cannot be diſguiſed, he cannot be tranſfigured after our fanſie,

he alwayes abideth like himſelfe. So then, as I haue alreadie touched,
all they which loue God, they faile not to be obedient to his law,
they ceaſe not to obſerue and keepe his commaundements, for theſe
things are knit together, and are inſeparable. And this wee haue to
beare in minde vpon this place. Nowe here hence we are to take a
warning, that we haue in greater horrour, than we are woont to haue,
all rebellion, all ſinne, and offences. For it is no ſmall thing to bee
proclaimed the enimies of God, and to make open warre with him.
Now, it is ſo, that wee cannot turne our ſelues from him, nor caſt off
his yoke, but wee ſhalbe conuicted to haue bene his enimies, and to
haue waged open battell with him? And loe, is not this an execrable
thing? Let vs therefore learne to haue our ſinnes and offences in horrour
and deteſtation, foraſmuch as by them, wee are accuſed to be the
enimies of God, and that he alſo muſt ſhewe himſelfe our aduerſarie
partie. Withall we are alſo warned to come vnto God with a pure
and ſincere affec
                  •
               ion. For it is not enough to withhold our feete, and
our handes, and our eyes from euill doing, but it behoueth that our
heart goe before, and that God be ſerued of vs with a true meaning
minde and vpright affection: and this affection muſt not be forced
and conſtrained, but it ought to proceede from a true loue of God.
Therefore, when wee will rightly obſerue his lawe, wee muſt firſt
knowe, that God is vnto vs a kinde hearted father, gentle and fauourable
vnto vs, to the end we may be led to yeeld vnto him like loue and
affection. And withall, let vs not thinke to mocke & deceiue our ſelues,
in proteſting that we loue God, if in the meane while this be not
ſhewed in the whole courſe of our life. For when here is mention
made of the loue of God, Moſes addeth, that they which loue him doe
alſo keepe his commaundementes. It behoueth then that our life be
aunſwerable in this behalfe, and that it beare witneſſe whether wee
loue God, or whether wee hate him. For the reſt which followeth,
it is not without cauſe that God making compariſon of his wrath
and vengeaunce, with his fauour and mercie, ſaith, That he will puniſhe
them that hate him to the thirde and fourth generation, and
that he will ſhewe mercie to them that loue him in a thouſand generation?.
For by this he declareth that, which is better and more folly
expreſſed in other ſentences of the ſcriptures, that is, That he is ſlow
to anger, greatly inclined to compaſſion and pitie,Pſal. 103. 8. that he is patient
& of long ſuffering,Pſal. 30. 5. that his anger endureth but a while, that his mercie

is to life, & endureth for euer. Ye ſee then the true nature of God,
that is, that he deſireth nothing more, than to drawe men vnto him
by all lenitie and gentleneſſe, and to vſe his mercie and goodneſſe
towardes them. When he puniſheth them, this is as it were againſt
his nature. Not, but that it is agreeable to God, aſwell to puniſh, as
to ſhewe mercie: but he will ſhewe vs, that his goodneſſe is much
more greater: and briefely, that he is not ſharpe and rigorous, but
deſirous to lay open his heart towards vs, if we would ſuffer him, for
in verie déede he will bee knowen gratious and pitifull. And this is
that wherin his principall glorie ſhineth. Therefore let vs note well,
that not for naught Moſes here aſſigneth a thouſand generations to
the mercy of God, and reſtraineth his wrath & vengeance to a three or
foure generations. As if he did ſay: It is very true that our Lord will
not leaue ſuperſtition vnpuniſhed, when you ſhall haue peruerted
his ſeruice, and defaced his honour, buſying your ſelues in your own
dreames, and doating fanſtes: you ſhall ſurely feele the puniſhment,
and your children after you ſhall feele it: and when the fire of his
wrath and indignation ſhalbe kindled among you, it ſhall not bee
ſo ſoone quenched as you thinke: but yet for all that, God will not
ceaſe to bee pitifull, and his mercie ſhalbe alwayes greater than his
anger. And in verie deede, as God by the threat we haue here heard,
would reteine the world in true religion, to the end it ſhoulde make
no idols nor puppittes to counterfeit him, ſo he would by his promiſe
here conteined, as it were allure vs to beare him the loue and reuerence
which we owe vnto him, and he deſireth rather to winne vs
by his gentleneſſe, than to reſtraine vs by his threatenings. Ye ſee
then in what ſorte he ſpeaketh: My children, thinke not that I will
deale roughly with you: it is true, if you prouoke mee, I ſhall not
ſuffer that men make a ſport and game of me, but when I haue declared
mine anger, I deſire yet rather to traine you, and winne you
to my ſelfe by mercie and gentleneſſe. I proteſt then, and declare vnto
you, if you abide wholy and ſincerely in my obedience, I will
continue to beſtowe my benefites vpon you, euen to a thouſand generations:
ſo that your children, after your death, ſhall finde mee the
ſame I haue beene to you. Beholde what wee haue to beare in
minde vppon this place.
            And moreouer, for concluſion, let vs note, that it is not without
gre
                  •
               t cauſe, that God placeth here this worde of Mercie, although it

bee as a rewarde of the ſeruice which is done him, He might well
haue ſaide, I will conſider the ſeruice of them which ſhall haue honoured
and worſhipped me, which ſhall haue loued mee in obſeruing
my lawe, I will ſhewe them that it is no loſt labour to haue ſerued
and honoured mee, as they ſhall haue done. God might haue ſpoken
ſo. But he ſaith, I will ſhewe mercie? And how ſo? Seemeth
it not, that if wee ſerue God, as he hath appointed, he oweth vs a recompenſe?
Nowe he declareth that he will beſtowe a benefite vpon
them which haue honoured him, and obſerued his commandements,
and that this is not by any obligation of due debte, or becauſe of
their merites and deſertes: for he vſeth herein mercie. So this
worde of Mercie, is to beate downe all pride of men in ſuch ſorte,
that they may not boaſt of their woorkes, as if they were worthie
of reward and payment: but rather knowe, that God ment to declare
by this, that when wee ſerue him the beſt that wee can, wee haue alwayes
neede to bee borne, withall of him, and that he pardoneth vs
our vices and our infirmities. Thus are there two thinges which
wee haue to note in this place.1. Cor. 15. 11. The one is, that although we ſhoulde
ſerue God in all puritie, if he recompenſe vs, it is not of any duetie
he oweth vnto vs. For in deede, from whence commeth this, that
wee haue ſerued him, but from his meere and onely grace? And
what then may he owe vs? The other is, that wee ſhall bee all
founde guiltie, when it ſhall pleaſe him to examine vs according
to the exact meaſure of his iuſtice. So then, in that God recompenſeth
vs, when wee haue ſerued him, he doeth this for his
mercie and goodneſſe, and not that he is bounde vnto vs: Nay,
which more is, he muſt forgeue vs our ſinnes, and beare with
vs, euen in that which wee doe well. Knowe wee therefore, that
GOD ſheweth himſelfe gentle and liberall towardes vs, in
that it pleaſeth him to beare with our infirmities, making vs to
taſt his mercie, where he might of right make vs feele his rigour.
For let vs not thinke, but without this mercie wee ſhoulde
all periſhe: yea, though we ſhoulde enforce our ſelues to obey him,
wee ſhoulde notwithſtanding bee alwayes founde faultie, were it
not that he would vſe this mercie towardes vs, of which he here ſpeaketh:
So then this is that whither vnto we muſt flee for refuge, if we
will be aſſure of our ſaluation.
            
               
Nowe let vs caſt our ſelues downe, before the face of our good
God, with acknowledging of our faultes, praying him that he will
make vs feele them better than we haue done, to the end he may lead
vs to a true repentance, and that being taught to feare him, we tremble
and ſtand in ſuch awe of him aſſoone as he ſhall threaten vs with
his anger, wee may conceiue the force thereof, that being humbled
therwith we run to his fatherly goodnes, not doubting but that if he
hath once begonne to ſhewe himſelfe our father and Sauiour, he will
continue it euen after our death, if ſo be we withdrawe not our ſelues
from him by our wickedneſſe and rebellion. That it will pleaſe him
to graunt this grace not onely to vs, but to all peoples and nations,
&c.
         
         
            The. 4. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               11 Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltleſſe which ſhall take his
name in vaine.
            
            
               IF wee were but well aduiſed, there
were no neede that men ſhould teache
vs to beare reuerence vnto God. For
nature ought to leade vs herevnto. For
to what end are we created? And why
liue we in this world, but to do homage
to him, to whom we be beholden for all
good giftes, and to applie our ſelues to
honour and glorifie his Maieſtie? Behold
the whole end and ſumme of this
life. But for all this in ſteede of honouring our God, and applying
our whole ſtudies and endeuours herevnto, it ſeemeth that wee haue
conſpired the cleane contrarie. For ſome woulde haue the remembrance
of God burried: others deſpiſe and mocke him, others with full
throate & open mouth blaſpheme him, ſo that we ſufficiently declare,
that wee knowe not why wee liue or ſhould haue our being. Nowe
becauſe there is ſuch a vice in vs, God, to remedie it, ſheweth that
wee ought likewiſe to abkeine from abuſing his holie name,

for this is as it were to vnhallow it, & therfore he hath forbidden that
his name be not taken in vaine. By theſe wordes we ought diligently
to conſider, what is the right & lawfull vſe of his name. True it is that
we are not worthie to take in our mouth the name of the Lord, in what
ſort ſoeuer it be, for we muſt conſider of that whiche Eſaie ſpeaketh in
the. 6. Chap. Lord I am a man of polluted lipps,Eſaie. 6. 5. & I dwel in the middeſt
of a people, which is altogether filthie and defiled. Seeing then
we haue ſuch filthineſſe and vncleanes in vs, it is certeine we can not
take the name of God in our mouth, were it not that God of his goodneſſe
would that we vſe his name, ſo it be to glorifie him withall. Let
vs then note well, that when it is ſaid, That we take not the name of
God in vaine, that the Lord reproueth vs of vnthankfulneſſe, if wee
vſe not his name, as he hath permitted vs, and folowe not herein the
rule which is conteined in his word. For this is the lawfull meane,
by which we may vſe his name. But to the end that this be yet more
clearely vnderſtood, we muſt marke, that God vnder one kind would
here ſhew vs, what maieſtie there is in his name, to the end we ſpeake
not of it, but with all feare and reuerence. Therefore aboue all other
kindes of profaning his name, he taketh the eſpeciall forme of an
oth, when any queſtion is of ſwearing. We ſee how our Lord loueth
vs, in that he lendeth vs his name, to the end we might communicate
with our neighbours, & if there were any controuerſie and diſſention
among vs, it might be ended by this meane: namely, that if wee bee
not beleued, if any matter were in doubt, the name of God ſhould be
brought foorth as Vmpier in the matter to end the controuerſie, ſo
as the thing ſhould bee altogether certeine, when it ſhall haue ſuch a
confirmation. Is not this an ineſtimable goodneſſe, that our Lorde
abaſeth himſelfe ſomuch, as to permitte vs to vſe his name? And
why? For it is certeine that the maieſtie of God is ſo precious, that
it ought not to bee abaſed ſo farre: but yet he bouchſafeth to applie
himſelfe vnto vs. So much greater then is our villanie & wickednes,
if wee vnhallowe the name of God in our othes. Nowe this is done,
not onely when we are forſworne, but if we take the name of God,
in our mouthes raſhlie and at randon: when we haue not a regarde
to ſpeake thereof in all wiſdome and diſcretion, and conſider whether
the thing which is in controerſie deſerueth to bee confirmed in ſuch
manner or no: For if we vſe it raſhlie and fooliſhlie, behold the name
of the Lord is as it were vnhallowed. It is true that God accounteth

it for one kinde of his ſeruice, when men ſweare by his name, not
that he is herein bound vnto vs, but altogether the contrarie. For
(as I haue alreadie touched) wee ought to perceiue in this thing,
howe GOD beareth with vs, when he licenceth vs to vſe his name.
But yet doe we in ſwearing confeſſe that GOD hath all preeminence
and ſuperioritie ouer vs. He whiche is inferiour, ſweareth by
him which is his ſouereigne & greater,Heb. 6. 16. ſaith the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes.
And if we knewe to what end an oth ſerueth, we ſhall vnderſtand,
that this can not agree, but onely to the maieſtie of God.
For by it our meaning is to confirme thoſe thinges which are ſecret
and can haue no other proofe among men. Nowe this can not bee
done by any creature, but herein GOD muſt ſhew himſelfe, for
it is he which ſoundeth the deapth of mens heartes, and herevpon
alſo not without cauſe he challengeth to him ſelfe the title of trueth.
Wee ſee then that in ſwearing we doe homage vnto God, proteſting
that he is our Iudge, and that it is he vnto whom we ought to haue
recourſe for things which are doubtfull and hidden, becauſe it is his
office to bring them vnto light, and becauſe he will mainteine the
truth: for that it apperteineth to his honour and glorie. That is the
cauſe, why GOD reputeth it for one forme of his ſeruice, when
one ſweareth by his name: ſo that it bee not in ſuperfluous and vnneceſſarie
othes. By this we perceiue, that the fault of them whiche
forſweare them ſelues, or ſweare at randon, is ſo much the more
grieuous. For this is as it were to violate the ſeruice of God, and
as much as lieth in vs to bring it to nothing. As for them whiche
peruire them ſelues, they bee not onely culpable of taking the
name of GOD in vaine, and of falſlie abuſing it, but they are
rebelles and traitors to the maieſtie of GOD. For knowe wee
how to worke any greater outrage againſt GOD, than to aboliſh
his truth? No. For there is nothing more belonging vnto him.
So this is as much as if we would plucke him out of his throne,
and vtterlie beereue him of all diuine honour and glorie: for this is
done, when his truth is turned into a lie.
            Whoſoeuer therefore forſweareth him ſelfe, that is to ſay, whoſoeuer
taketh the name of GOD in an euill conſcience, to colour
falſe thinges, to cloke and diſguiſe an vntruth, to the end he might beguile
and deceiue others: let him knowe it for certeintie, that he
blaſphemeth God in ſo doing. Now purpoſelie I ſay, to diſguiſe an

vntruth. For many diſpenſe wt them ſelues, becauſe before men they
can not be conuicted of periurie. And why? They turne the beſt
ſide of the coate, they paint and trimme their matters ſo well,
that it ſhall ſeeme verie well to men they ſpeake the truth, & are not
periured: but GOD alloweth not any ſuch ſubtilities. Let vs
not then thinke to bee acquited and abſolued before him, when wee
ſhall haue vſed ſuch policies, ſuch ſhiftes, and ſly practiſes. And
ſo in ſumme wee ſee, that all they which take the name of GOD
otherwiſe than in truth and in ſimplicitie, blaſpheme him. Marke
this for one point. Now as for them, whiche ſweare raſhlie and
without cauſe, they declare ſufficientlie, that they make no other
account, than to ſport them ſelues with GOD. It is true they
proteſt the contrarie, they will ſtill ſay their meaning is not ſuch,
but this is but hypocriſie. For the effect ſufficientlie proueth, that
they beare no reuerence vnto God. If a mortall man be heald deare
of vs, we take not his name in vaine, we will not that any make a
ſcorne of him, and floute him, and when a matter of plaie and
mockerie is propoſed, we can not ſuffer that he be brought in as
on the Stage, for wee take this to be to his infamie and diſcredit.
And will we haue a greater priuiledge than the liuing GOD? We
are vile carions, and rotteneſſe it ſelfe, and yet will wee bee had
in honour and eſtimation? And ſhall our God in the meane time bee
placed beeneath as our vnderling? And thus we ſee, that there are at
this day verie fewe of any religion in the worlde: although many
make a ſhewe and countenaunce of being Chriſtians, that yet not
withſtanding neuer knew, what it is to worſhippe GOD, to
doe him homage, or to yeald him the ſeruice whiche apperteineth
vnto him. For howe is this, that the name of GOD runneth
in euerie mans mouth? One can not bargaine for the worth of
one farthing, without he hath ſome othe at the end of euerie word.
If the honour of GOD were of price among vs, it is certeine,
wee would abſteine from ſuch ſuperfluitie of othes: whiche
more is, it would breede an horrour in vs. But nowe a dayes
euerie one maketh a game of it, and when a man is reprehended
for ſwearing, he will thinke he hath great wrong done him.
            Nowe, if one ſhoulde mainteine any matter whiche were
not for his profite, he woulde bee much grieued therewith:
yea, hee woulde make his complaintes thereof: but if wee

haue the zeale of God to be grieued, when his name ſhalbe throwne
to the ground, ſee what quarels are made with vs, ſee on what ſpite
men are ſet, how they grind their teeth at it. Now when the world
is come into ſuch a poſſeſſion of contemning God, and men haue
hardened them ſelues herein, is not this a ſigne that his maieſtie is
not knowen nor regarded? And albeit, men yeald vnto them ſelues
ſuch an outragious libertie vnder this ſhadowe, that the thing is accuſtomably
vſed, and that of cuſtome is made a lawe: yet will God
in the end ſhewe, that his name is more deare vnto him than men
haue had it, and though we ſell it good cheape, it ſhall coſt vs deare,
and with an ouer vantage: and it ſhalbe in the end that the lande
wherein we haue bene conuerſant, which hath bene defiled, and made
vncleane by vs, bee raiſed vp in iudgment againſt vs. In like manner
all the benefites which wee haue receiued, and which God with a
liberall hand hath beſtowed on vs, ſhall come into account for our
condemnation, for aſmuch as we haue not knowen him, which hath
bene the author of them, to honor him as he deſerueth. Yee ſee then
what we haue firſt to obſerue and note in this place: namelie, that
God beareth gratiouſly with vs, and vſeth ſo great gentleneſſe towards
vs, as that he is willing and content wee vſe his name in
thinges lawefull and right: by whiche leaue of his we may ſufficientlie
knowe, that he is more than a father vnto vs. But withall
he warneth vs, to take ſo much the more diligent heede we abſteine
from all wicked othes. For as for periuries (as we haue ſaide) this
is a villamous outrage which we doe to God. For in aſmuch as his
truth is conuerted into a lie: we are falſifiers thereof as much as in
vs lieth. Yee ſee then a mortall and deadlie offence. But this is not
enough to keepe our ſelues from forſwearing, but our othes alſo
muſt be ſober, and the name of God muſt not be toſſed vp & downe among
vs as a Tenniſe ball: but it behoueth, that there be ſome great
neceſſitie which may hold vs excuſed, when we make mention of it.
Now foraſmuch as we proteſt in our othes, that God hath all ſuperioritie
ouer vs, by this we may vnderſtand, that all the othes which
are made by creatures are wicked and intollerable, as proceeding
from ſuperſtition: as among the Papiſtes, one will ſweare by Saint
Anthonie, an other by Saint Iohn, which is aſmuch as if one would
make idols of them. And why? For wee muſt always returne backe
to that ſentence which I haue before alledged of the Apoſtle, that

we declare God to bee our ſuperiour: yea, our ſouereigne, when wee
ſweare by his name. And this is the cauſe why, when God ſweareth,
to confirme vs in his promiſes, or happily to awaken vs when hee
ſeeth vs hardened in our ſinnes, and that we ſtand not in awe of his
iudgmentes, he ſweareth by himſelfe, he reſerueth to him ſelfe this
honour,Deut. 6. 13. whereof it ſhalbe further handled in the ninth Chapter of
this booke. And ſo they which ſweare by creatures are idolaters.
And for this purpoſe alſo, when there is mention made of ſuperſtitions,
the oths of men are put in as witneſſes to conuince them, that
they haue turned them ſelues from the puritie of the lawe. The Paſtours,
ſaith Ieremie,Iere. 12. 16. which haue charge to conduct and leade the
people, muſt teach them to ſweare by the name of God, that is, that
all other othes be laid aſide, and that creatures bee not mingled, and
brought in, when any thing by othe is to bee confirmed. Moreouer,
when it is here ſpoken of the name of God, let vs note, that we are
not onely forbidden to pronounce this woord, but that the ſubſtaunce
thereof is here conſidered: for God regardeth the deede. As there
are ſome whiche ſweare not expreſſelie by the name of God, and yet
notwithſtanding they ceaſe not to offend & tranſgreſſe againſt this
commaundement. For we muſt alwayes haue regard to come to
this which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt handleth in the fift Chapter of S.Mat. 5. 34.
Mathew. When you ſweare by heauen, is not this the throne of the
liuing God? If you ſweare by his temple, is not this the place where
his maieſtie abideth? If then we thinke we ſhall not be accuſed and
condemned, when wee expreſſe not the name of God in our othes,
wee greatlie abuſe our ſelues. Let vs not therefore thinke to deceiue
him in this, for the excuſe is altogether fooliſhe and childiſh. And
why? The heauen, beareth it not a marke and token of the maieſtie of
God? Se then how his glorie is diminiſhed. As much is to be ſaid of
the earth, for it is his footeſtoole, as Chriſt toucheth in that place
whiche I haue alledged. Therefore, ſo let vs briefly learne, that wee
ought to beare ſuch a reuerence to the name of God, that all othes be
laid aſide and baniſhed from among vs, but as neceſſitie requireth,
when God ſuffereth vs to borrowe his name. Otherwiſe let vs folowe
this forme of ſpeach, as handling our matters in all ſimplicitie,
to ſay. Yea, it is ſo. And let vs knowe, that all whiche is beſides
this,Mat. 5. 37. is euill & rondenmed by the lawe: namelie, if we take the name
of God in vaine. And withall let vs note, that all ſuperfluous othes,

and thoſe in which the name of God is not honoured, as it deſerueth,
haue in them a double euill. For firſt, when men let them flie ſo at
all aduentures, it is a ſigne they ſcarſe make any account what
they ſay: ſecondlie conſider wee from whence this common ſwearing
proceedeth, and wee ſhall finde that from none other thing, but
that men be ſuch liers, ſo full of falſhood and deceite, that when they
ſpeake the one to the other, none can beleue that it is true which is
ſaid. So then, it muſt needes bee, that there is in vs great wickedneſſe,
conſidering that when God hath giuen vs a tongue, it is in
part to communicate one with an other: For our tongue is the
meſſenger of our heart, whereby we expreſſe vnto others what wee
haue in our mindes conceiued. Wee may then conclude, that ſuperfluous
othes proceede from the diſloyaltie and rebellion of men,
neither neede wee to make much enquirie, or vſe any long proceſſe
in this matter: for euerie one hath his owne witneſſe. How euer it
be, let vs learne to vſe in this thing ſuch ſobrietie as God commaundeth,
and let vs not ſweare without great neceſſitie, and being herevnto
required. But to goe on ſomwhat further in this matter, that all
may bee eaſily vnderſtoode: there are ſome, who thinke that when
they ſweare by their faith, it is as if they ſwore not at all. It is true
indeed, that the moſt part ſweare nothing, for they haue no more
faith than dogges, they haue no conſcience, nor religion. But yet this
name of faith ceaſeth not therefore to be in price before God. For he
holdeth it deare, and it is as an hallowed thing vnto him, whiche
neither can, neither ought to bee vnhallowed: except wee will bee
in greate fault, and incurre the daunger of the threate here made, as
we ſee. So it is not ſufficient not to haue pronounced expreſſelie by
God, but when one ſweareth by his faith, or taketh any cōfirmation
from that which hath any ſigne of the maieſtie of God, his name is
vnhallowed in this thing. What ſhall wee ſay then of them, whiche
vſe falſe othes to diſguiſe their purpoſes, which ſweare raſhlie, euen
to ſport them ſelues with othes: yea, to deſpite God by their execrable
blaſphemies, in ſo much that he hath neither fleſh nor bloud, nor
nothing elſe which they ſpare? Are theſe onely holden faultie for abuſing
the name of God? No, but becauſe they vſe him to the greateſt
and moſt execrable reproch, that they may doe. Beholde our
Lorde Ieſus Chriſt,Phil. 2. 7. which made himſelfe of no reputation for
a time, (as Saint Paule ſpeaketh) who beeing the founteine of all

life, became mortall man, hauing ſuperioritie & dominion ouer the
Angels of Heauen, tooke the forme of a ſeruant, euen to ſhedde his
bloud for our redemption, and in the end to ſuffer the curſe that
was due vnto vs. And nowe for a recompenſe of all this, hee
muſt at this day bee rent and torne in peeces of the carion and
ſtinking mouthes of them whiche name them ſelues Chriſtians.
For when they ſweare by his bloud, and by his death, and by his
woundes, and by this, and by that, is not this as much as in
them lieth to crucifie the ſonne of GOD, and to teare him as it
were in pieces? And are not theſe altogether worthie to bee cut
off from God: yea, from the worlde, and not to bee numbered in
the band and companie of creatures? Muſt Ieſus Chriſt for abaſing,
and humbling himſelfe for vs, haue ſuch a reward at our
handes?Eſaie. 5. 2. God vpbraideth the people of Iſrael in this ſorte, O
my people,Ierem, 2. 21. what haue I done vnto thee? I haue brought thee out
of Egypt, I haue conducted thee by the deſert, I haue nouriſhed
thee in all gentleneſſe and ſweeteneſſe, I haue planted thee as in
my heritage, that thou ſhouldeſt haue beene as a vine whiche
ſhould haue borne mee good fruite, I beſtowed all labour in keeping
and fencing thee, and muſt thou now bee turned into bitterneſſe
vnto mee, and bring foorth ſowre fruite to ſtrangle and to
choke me? Nowe the ſame apperteineth alſo at this day vnto vs.
For when the ſonne of GOD, whiche is appointed Iudge of the
world, ſhall come in the laſt day, he may ſay vnto vs, What meaneth
this? You haue borne my name to bee called Chriſtians, you haue
bene baptiſed, in witneſſe and teſtimonie that I was your redeemer:
I haue drawen you foorth of the deepe dongeon, wherein you
were plunged, I haue deliuered you from euerlaſting death, by the
cruell death whiche I ſuffered, and for this cauſe I beecame
man, I ſbmitted my ſelfe to the malediction of GOD my
Father, to the end you might bee bleſſed by my grace, and
by my meane. And beholde the rewarde you haue rendered mee.
I haue bene rent in pieces of you, I haue beene as a 
                  •
               eaſting
ſtocke, the death whiche I haue ſnffered hath beene had in deriſion
and mockerie, my bloude whiche is the waſhing of your
ſoules, was as it were trampled vnder your feete: briefly,
you haue taken all occaſion to blaſpheme and to raile on mee,
as if I had bene a wretched and miſerable creature. When

When this ſhalbe rebukefullie told vs of our ſouereigne Iudge, will
not this be to thunder on vs, and to throw vs downe to the bottomles
pit of hell? And yet notwithſtanding, there are verie fewe of vs, which
deeplie conſider of this. For if ſuperfluous othes were at this day
had in ſuch greate horrour and deteſtation, as they ſhould bee, men
would not yeald vnto them ſelues any time hereafter ſuch an outragious
boldneſſe and libertie of ſwearing and forſwearing. As for
blaſphemies, ſee wee not how common and rife they are? And in the
meane time wee wilbe verie zealous for our owne honour and reputation,
when the name of God is ſo troden vnder feete amongeſt vs.
If one ſpeake any thing reprochfullie of ones father, he will make a
greate quarell of it, or enter ſome action of ſlaunder: yea, many will
reuenge them ſelues by their owne handes, and by all meanes they
may on euerie ſide: and it ſeemeth to them, that they haue an honeſt
excuſe to take vppon them the defence of their fathers. Beholde our
ſouereigne father ſhall ſuſteine wrong and iniurie, beholde in like
manner our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, who not without cauſe is named
The Lord of glorie, before whom euerie knee ought to bow,1. Cor. 2. 8. as Saint
Paule ſpeaketh to the Philippians,Phil. 2. 10. loe he (I ſay) ſhalbe mocked,
than whiche deſpite none could bee wrought him greater, except a
man would ſpitte in his face: and yet notwithſtanding, they whiche
name them ſelues Chriſtians, whiche make a countenaunce of procuring
and mainteining his honour, will not bee moued any whitte
therewith: nay, they them ſelues will bee the men, whiche will blaſpheme
him in moſt execrable manner: But for all this (as I haue
ſaid) our Lorde will not ceaſe to mainteine his owne honour, as he
himſelfe ſpeaketh, when he ſeeth that men are ſo wicked and profane,
ſo to violate his maieſtie, as much as lieth in them. For he
maketh a ſolemne othe, that he will wreake his vengeaunce vppon
them for this wickedneſſe. I am the Lorde (ſaith hee,) this is my
name,Eſaie. 42. 8. and my glorie I will not geue to an other, neither my praiſe
to grauen images. Now, as he will not that his honour bee tranſferred
to idols, ſo is it certeine it extendeth it ſelfe further: namelie,
that if men ſhall falſly abuſe his holy name, they ſhall perceiue in
what price it was vnto him. And therefore let vs not waite vntill
this bee accompliſhed vppon vs, but let vs learne to beare ſuch reuerence
vnto our God, and to him that hath all ſouereigne maieſtie,
that is, to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that we be throughlie inſtructed to

ſweare in ſuch ſorte, that this be alwayes to confirme, that it is he by
whome we are, that he is our Father, our Creatour, & our Iudge.
Thus ye ſe in effect, what we haue to gather of this place. Now here
is withall anuexed a threatening, whereby we are to vnderſtand the
blockiſhnes of men, how Sathan hath as it were bewitched them in
ſuch ſorte, that they conceiue not the wrath and anger of God, when
it is ſet before them. I will not hold him guiltleſſe, which ſhall take
my name in vaine. Loe God, who ſpeaketh. I pray you, ought not
all the haires of the heades of them ſtand on end, which blaſpheme
God ſo wickedly and villainouſly, as I haue ſaide? When one
ſweareth lightelie by his faith, behold God who is armed, and ſaith,
For as much as thou haſt not honored mee, thou ſhalt geue an account
for ſuch trecherie: God can not beare with vs for a ſimple lie:
if one periure him ſelfe, this is much worſe: if an other blaſpheme:
herein is the extremitie and furtheſt degree of all euill, when wee
openlie deſpite God, as if wee would arme our ſelues againſt him,
and ſtrike him with ſome deadlie wounde. Nowe, if after this, one
thinke not of this puniſhment which hangeth ouer, and is readie to
fall vppon them, which ſo haue falſified the name of God, or haue diſhonored
him, muſt we not needes ſay, that this proceedeth of ſome
beaſtlie dronkenneſſe, and that men are altogether without ſenſe, and
vnderſtanding: and that Sathan hath altogether blinded them? Alas
yes: & yet notwithſtanding, this thing is ſo common, as nothing
more. If ſome maiſter ſhould ſay in his houſe, I will bee obeyed in
all thinges: but loe, one thing whiche I deſire aboue all to bee done,
and I will not ſuffer any one to faile herein, but I will put him out
of my ſeruice, or I will correct and chaſtiſe him as he deſerueth: If
ſome maiſter (I ſay) ſhould geue ſuch a charge of ſome one thing, although
in the reſt a ſeruant would not bee ouer diligent, yet in this
would he haue ſome feare. Now behold God curſeth them whiche
tranſgreſſe and offend againſt his lawe in any article. Curſed be he
which honoreth not his father & mother, Curſed be he which ſtealeth,
Curſed be he which committeth adulterie, Curſed be he which
obſerueth not all the thinges which are conteined in the lawe. But
here, by ſome ſpecialtie, hee manaceth a generall threate on them
whiche ſhall abuſe the name of GOD. By this hee declareth,
that although he will that wee obſerue his lawe, in all pointes,
and that our life bee ordered thereby, notwithſtanding he reſerueth

this article to this place, as if he would his name ſhould haue
an eſpeciall priuiledge. Nowe if for all that, this threatning ſlip out
of our minde, and that wee conſider not of it, and that it ſtaieth vs
not, but we ventur ſtill ouer boldly to ſport our ſelues ſo with God,
and his maieſtie, muſt it not needes bee ſaide, (as I haue alreadie
touched,) that the diuell hath carried vs away headlong, & beereaued
vs of all ſenſe and reaſon? Yet if this threatning awake vs not at
this day, wee ſhall in the end knowe that God hath not publiſhed
his warnings in vaine. Let vs therefore learne to bee touched to
the quicke, when God ſo preciſelie ſetteth himſelfe againſt vs, and
proteſteth that he will bee aduerſarie partie to them, whiche haue
abuſed his name. For let vs conſider what it ſhall coſt vs, if wee abſteine
not from raſh and ſuperfluous othes, and aboue all, from blaſphemous
periuries. Now the greateſt excuſe they haue which would
diminiſh their faultes, is this, that they can not chooſe, but ſweare:
becauſe they haue bene ſo accuſtomed therevnto. O ſeelie and miſerable
excuſe. And yet ſee how if euerie one woulde bee his owne
iudge, and ſpeake the truth, it is certeine he might verie ſoone forget
his othes. For when queſtion is of taking the name of God, if
one would well conſider of the thing, and take good heed thereof, he
would not take it without great reuerence. And when one ſhoulde
come to ſweare in iudgement, he ſhoulde haue there as preſent the
maieſtie of God, he ſhould behold him as iudge, when he calleth him
to witneſſe. This might verie well be done. But what? Our tongue
is ſo lauiſh, that we vtterlie deſpiſe and ſette at naught the name of
God, as I haue alreadie ſaid, howe euer a man crie and call on vs
for the contrarie, and hammer vs neuer ſo much with warnings. For
in verie deede, the warninges and admonitions, which for this abuſe
are made in holie ſcripture, are as great ſtrokes of maules & hammers
where with God ſtriketh vs, and yet we continue ſtill the ſame
we were, and the name of God hath no greater honor and maieſtie
among vs, than it had before, when we were in ignorance, & wanted
the admonitions conteined in the word of God. Howbeit they which
haue any vnderſtanding & feeling of his name, ought well to weigh,
and conſider that which is here ſaid. And withall (as I haue declared)
when we haue bene warned of this, whereof we haue before conſidered:
namelie, that he which ſpeaketh is the euerliuing, and our
Creatour, that it is he whiche hath redeemed vs, and declared him

ſelfe more than a father and ſauiour towards vs, if this remaine well
imprinted in our memorie, it is certeine wee ſhall eaſily forgette all
othes. But if wee followe on ſtill our wickedneſſe herein, that
whiche is ſaid to the Prophete Zacharie,Zach. 12. 1
                     •
                  . ſhalbe fulfilled vppon vs,
that is to witte this: They ſhall feele him whom they haue pearced:
that is to ſay, him whom they haue wounded. For though men flatter
one another, & make their othes but a laughing game, & thinke that
this ſhall eaſily be pardoned them, God ceaſeth not to be wounded, &
he will in the end ſhew, that he ought not ſo to haue bene ſet on, & warred
againſt. Moreouer, we haue to note, that God would in this place
by one ſpeciall kind of abuſe, ſhew briefly what reuerence we ought
to beare generallie to his name. It is true that in expreſſe words here
is mention made of othes, but yet this doctrine ought to bee further
extended: namelie, that when we thinke on God, or ſpeake of him, we
doe it with all reuerence, that we be awakened, not onely to honour &
praiſe him aboue all, but to haue a feeling of his ineſtimable
glorie, before whiche the Angels tremble, that wee whiche are
poore and fraile creatures, as nothing more, may at leaſt doe homage
to the ſouereigne maieſtie of our God, when ſoeuer mention is
made thereof. Beholde one point whiche we ought well to obſerue
in this ſentence. True it is, that this doctrine is eaſie of it ſelfe,
but yet obſcure vnto vs, becauſe it is ſo euill practiſed. When wee
thinke of GOD, what vaine thoughtes come into our head? Our
nature verilie is much enclined herevnto, as wee are full fraughted
and ſtuffed with fanſies and lies, and there is nothing but darkneſſe
in vs. But when men nouriſh in them ſelues thoſe euill and wicked
fantaſies, whiche they conceiue againſt the honour of GOD: this
declareth that they haue conſpired and made an agrement together
with the diuell. And yet how many are there which take care for this,
when there ſhall ariſe in them any wicked fanſie, or ſuch thoughts and
imaginations which in their conſcience they knowe to be wicked, &
againſt the glorie of God, to repreſſe & keepe them vnder? Who vſe
any forcing of them ſelues to reſiſt them? Nay rather men take pleaſure
in them, and bath them ſelues with muche delight in ſuch imaginations.
And when the minde, that is, the vnderſtanding of men,
is ſo defiled, the reſt is eaſilie corrupted. And that this is ſo,
conſider we by our woordes which followe. For howe ſpeake wee
of God for the moſt part? What opinions hold wee of him? It ſeemeth

men ſeeke nothing more buſilie, than to bee altogether corrupted.
There needeth but little leuen, to leuen the whole lump of dough,
ſaith S. Paule,1. Cor. 5. 6. handling the ſame matter of wicked ſpeaches, which
defile and infect vs with euill vices.Gal. 5. 9. Now that of other is the worſt,
when men ſpeake of God in mockerie, when one will ſcorne & ſloute
him, when one maketh a ieſt of him, not only after a faſhion fond and
vaine, but villainous and execrable: Is not this euen of purpoſe and
wilfull malice to violate the maieſtie of God? And yet notwithſtanding
this is done, and commonlie vſed, ſo that there ſhall ſcarſe bee
any long diſcourſe made, or great matter mainteined, which hath
not I knowe not what intermingled, whereby God ſhalbe contemned
& ſet at naught. Shew we not then hereby, that we neuer knew
aright what it is to worſhippe him? Well, wee ſhall ſay euerie day,
Thy name be hallowed, but we doe all the contrarie. Shall there
then any other ſentence of condemnation light on our heades than
that? When wee come to the Church, wee will confeſſe with
our mouthes, that wee deſire that the name of GOD bee mainteined
in his due honour: wee will ſay as much at the table, and
euerie one, when hee riſeth and laieth him downe to ſleepe: (I
ſpeake of them which are not altogether brutiſhe, for there are
ſome whiche knowe not what it meaneth to make prayer vnto
GOD:) But they whiche ſhall haue ſo much honeſtie as to pray vnto
God, they ſhall well ſay with the mouth, Thy name be ſanctified,
but this is ſcarſe gone from the tip of their tongue, and beholde a
falſe othe in their mouth, and they will toſſe the name of GOD
hither and thither. And whither tendeth his wickedneſſe, but
to the violating of the maieſtie of GOD, and to the deſpiting
of him, as if we would giue him a blowe with a dagger, or ſpit
in his face? And (as I haue ſaid) there needeth no other Iudge
to condemne vs in our falſe othes than this proteſtation whiche
wee make; when wee deſire of GOD, that he will mainteine
the holineſſe of his name. And yet in the meane time, wee ſeeke
to deface it as much as lieth in vs. Nowe it reſteth that wee
muſt ſpeake of the maieſtie of GOD in all reuerence, eſpeciallie,
when wee talke of his woorkes. As howe? When wee
ſpeake of the time, whether he ſendeth faire weather, or raine,

                  •
               oe theſe are markes of the maieſtie of GOD. If he ſende
vs contrarie ſeaſons, bee ſheweth him ſelfe as a Iudge, to

the ende to make vs feele his wrath and indignation, that wee might
enter into the examination of our ſinnes, to bewaile them, and to bee
led to repentaunce. Now, if in ſteade of humbling our ſelues before
God, and hauing a diſpleaſure with our ſelues for our offences, wee
are wayward and ouerthwart, (as we ſee that ſome men are woont
deſpitefully to ſay, And muſt this ſeaſon continue in this ſorte, and
thus long?) and haue not recourſe to our God, beſeeching him to pardon
our faultes, this ſhall be to take the name of God in vaine. As
much is to be ſaid of all the reſt. I bring this example onely to ſhew,
that when we are to ſpeake of the workes of God, it behooueth that
either we perceiue him to be a Father in his goodnes, or feele him to
be a Iudge in his rigour and ſeueritie. Therfore when God ſhall doe
thinges which ſhall not fall out to our mind, and which ſhall be contrarie
to our wiſhes and deſires, let vs know that he grieueth and
chaſtiſeth vs, to the ende we ſhould enter into the acknowledging of
our ſinnes, to condemne them, and to be diſpleaſed with them. If then
we glorifie not God in this thing, we vnhallow his holy name. And
againe, when God on the contrarie ſide draweth vs to himſelfe in
all gentlenes, as a louing and pitifull father, this is to the ende we
be led vnto him, and that we honour him ſo much the more. And if
our vnthankefulnes is to be condemned for not honouring him in the
firſt worde which he ſhall haue ſpoken, what ſhall be ſaid when we
ſhall be vpbraided of all theſe thinges, that by all the wayes GOD
ſhall haue ſought to drawe and allure vs, he might winne vs to himſelfe
by none? But contrariwiſe, we ſhall haue ſhewed our ſelues
contemners of his maieſtie, and ſhall haue troden his workes vnder
our feete, or ſhall haue caſt downe the groine as hogges, and repine
againſt him, I pray you ſhall not this be an horrible condemnation
if we be condemned hereof? Now, although God hath imprinted
ſome marke of his maieſtie in all his workes, and that he ought to
be knowen of vs in raine, in faire weather, in heate, in colde: briefly,
in all the order of nature, yet hath he eſpecially imprinted his marke
in his worde. True it is, that this is an intollerable and inexcuſable
vice, when we reknowledge not God in the benefites which he hath
beſtowed on vs. We hold our life of him, that is, in him we liue, (as
S. Paule ſpeaketh)Acts. 17. 28. ſo that if we haue not a remembraunce of God
in all his benefites: this is already a wonderfull vnthankefulnes.
But (as I haue aboue ſaid) God aboue all would imprint his marke

in his word. Let vs behold the heauen and the earth, and we ſhall ſee
God declared fully in them. For what is this worlde, but a liuely image
(as S. Paule ſpeaketh)Rom. 1. 20. in the which God ſheweth and declareth
himſelfe? For albeit he be inuiſible in his eſſence, yet ſheweth
he himſelfe by his workes, to the end we ſhould worſhip him. But
when we come to the holy ſcripture, in it ſhall we ſee an image wherin
God openeth and declareth himſelfe much more plainly & in more
familiar wiſe vnto vs, than he doth either in the heauen, or in the
earth: in ſuch ſort, that neither Sunne nor Moone, although they
geue light vnto the world, do ſo ſet forth the maieſtie of God, as do
the Law, the Prophets, & the Goſpell. Now for all this, how ſpeake
men of the ſcriptures? With what wicked boldnes and preſumption?
Do not men I pray you at this day geue themſelues to lawleſſe
libertie, to ſpeake of the word of God according to their owne fantaſies?
And when men enter into a diſpute of the holy ſcriptures ouer
the pot, in tauernes and alehouſes, is there any queſtion of humbling
our ſelues vnder it, and that all knowing their owne rudenes and infirmitie,
deſire of God his holy ſpirit, to the end, his ſecrets and myſteries
be handled of vs as it behoueth? No, but theſe diſputes are as
in way of mockerie to ſport our ſelues. And by this a man may ſee,
more than were to be wiſhed, how few there be truly religious & godly
in the world. We ſee ſome make themſelues game with the ſcripture,
drawing it into Prouerbiall ſentences to moue laughter, that
they make no other account than to ieſt and play with it, as if it were
but a noſe of waxe, which one may faſhion as he liſteth, and turne any
way it ſhould ſeeme good vnto him. Others are in their wandring
and flitting opinions, reaſoning why this, and why that? And when
we come to the high myſteries of God, if they miſlike vs, we could
wiſh that all were put out and aboliſhed. And this is all one, as if we
would plucke God out of heauen. So then let vs learne, that aboue
all, God commendeth vnto vs the honour and authoritie of his word,
as if he did ſay, I will that you receiue all that which is conteined in
the holy ſcripture, that is in my word, with all humilitie & reuerence.
I will that you yeld your ſelues tractable, although that which is
there ſaid, agree not with your ſenſe and reaſon, and that you could
wiſh I had ſpoken after your, maner and faſhion. I will you do me
this honour, as to impriſon all your ſenſes, and ſubmit your vnderſtanding
to my word, and to ſay: Lord we are thy diſciples, we receiue

without gainſaying whatſoeuer it hath pleaſed thee to teach vs,
knowing that it is for our profite and ſaluation. Without exception
therfore, let all that which is compriſed in the holy ſcripture, be receiued
with reuerence, and when any queſtion is of the holy myſteries of
God, let vs not geue iudgement according to our owne wit and vnderſtanding.
And albeit the thinges be not conuenient and agreeable
with our reaſon, let vs notwithſtanding be held backe in a ſhort bridle,
that God may alwaies haue his whole entire authoritie ouer vs,
and his worde a full courſe and libertie. And when we read the holy
ſcriptures, when we come to the Sermons, let vs alwayes beare in
minde to ſay, Behold our God declareth himſelfe vnto vs: he ſitteth
as our Iudge, we are not to make toyes and gambaldes of thoſe
things he ſhall ſpeake. As we ſee, many will come to the Sermon:
But what? They haue their hearts empoiſoned againſt God and his
word, ſo that they can carie nothing thence which they peruert not
with their wickedneſſe: yea, they will be further enuenomed to ſpue
forth their blaſphemies at table or els where, when men ſhall ſpeake
any thing to their luſt and appetite. Loe how theſe men honour & ſanctifie
the name of God. Let vs learne then, that whether we read the
holy ſcripture, or heare it handled in a Sermon, to haue alwayes the
name of God in reuerence, and to yeld vnto him ſuch maieſtie, that we
tremble when one ſpeaketh vnto vs hereof. And aboue all, when his
word is preached,Eſay. 66. 2. as God ſpeaketh by his Prophet Eſaie. For let vs
know, that ſo we ſhall declare our ſelues, not onely by wordes, but alſo
by our deedes, that we are his true faithfull ones, and he ſhall take
and auowe vs for his people, and ſhall gather vs in the end into the
inheritance of the kingdome of heauen.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good God,
with at knowledging of our faultes, praying him that it will pleaſe
him not to impute thoſe we haue alreadie committed, vnto vs: but
that it will pleaſe him to reforme vs in ſuch ſort vnto himſelfe, that we
deſire no other thing than to honour him, and to dedicate our ſelues
vnto his ſeruice, to the end he may dwel among vs, and that our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt may reigne in vs both by his holy ſpirit & by his word,
and ſo let vs ſay, Almightie God and heauenlie father, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 5. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               
                  12 Keepe the Sabbaoth day to ſanctifie it, as the Lord thy God
hath commaunded thee.
                  13 Sixe dayes thou ſhalt labour, and ſhalt do all thy worke:
                  14 But the ſeuenth day is the Sabbaoth of the Lorde thy God,
thou ſhalt not do any worke therein, thou, nor thy ſonne, nor
thy daughter, nor thy manſeruant, nor thy maide, nor thine
oxe, nor thine aſſe, neither any of thy cattell, nor the ſtraunger
that is within thy gates, that thy manſeruaunt and thy maide,
may reſt as well as thou.
               
            
            
               AFter that it hath bene ſpoken of the
pure and ſincere worſhip of God, of ſeruing
him, and glorifying his name,
without vaine taking of it, either in
othes, or other thinges, but reuerently,
and to the honour of God: now here is
mention made of the ſeruice of GOD,
according to that he hath required in
his law, touching the order he appointed
for the exerciſe of the faithfull. As
the Sabbaoth day, or day of reſt was in part a figure, to declare, that
men could not rightly ſerue God but by mortifying all that which is
of their owne nature, and afterward by dedicating themſelues in
ſuch ſorte vnto him, as if they were wholy ſeparated from the world.
Secondly, the day of reſt had this ceremonious vſe, to cauſe the people
to aſſemble together, to heare the lawe, & to call on the name of
God, to offer their ſacrifices, and to do all that which ſhould concerne
ſpirituall order and policie. We ſee then now in what ſort mention
is made of the Sabbaoth day. But this cannot be well & ſufficiently
vnderſtoode without ſome plainer and more diſtinct handling:
namely, except both theſe parties ſhould particularly be intreated.
We haue therfore firſt to note, that the Sabbaoth day was a ſhadowe
vnder the law, vntill the comming of Chriſt, to ſignifie, that God will
that men reſt themſelues from their owne workes. And this is that

which I haue ſaid in a worde, that we muſt mortifie our whole nature,
if we will be conformable to our God. And that this is ſo, S.
Paule hath alſo declared.Col. 2. 17. Yea beſides, we haue ſufficient teſtimonie
hereof in the new teſtament. But it ſhall ſuffice to haue alledged him
at this time, which ſpeaketh more fully hereof: namely, to the Coloſſians:
when he ſaith, That we haue the ſubſtaunce and the body of
thoſe thinges which were ſhadowed vnder the lawe. We haue it
(ſaith he) in Chriſt. And therfore it was expedient, that the auncient
fathers ſhould be exerciſed in this hope, as well by the Sabbaoth
day, as by other ceremonies. But 
                  •
               ithence the thing is now giuen
vs, we ought not to ſtay our ſelues on theſe ſhadowes. True it is, that
the law is ſo aboliſhed, that yet we ought to keepe the ſubſtaunce and
truth thereof. As for the ſhadowes and figures, they are done away
by the comming of Chriſt. If one demaund how the auncient fathers
knew of this ſenſe and meaning? Moſes hath made declaration
hereof, as it is ſufficiently ſhewed in the booke of Exodus. For God,
after he had publiſhed his law in the 20.Exod. 20. 13. 17. Chap. he reuealeth it to Moſes,
and declareth to what ende this ſerueth, and ſaith, That he hath
ordeined the Sabbaoth day, as a ſigne, that the people of Iſrael
ſhould be ſanctified vnto him. This is (ſaith he) the marke of my
ſanctification, which I haue iuſtified among you. Now when the
ſcripture ſpeaketh of our being ſanctified vnto God, it is to ſeparate
vs from all that which is contrarie to his worſhip and ſeruice. But
where ſhall one finde ſuch puritie? We are in the world, & we know
that in the world there is nothing but peruerſenes and wickednes (as
ſaith S. Iohn in his Canonicall epiſtle.)1. Iohn. 5. 19. Yea men neede not goe
forth of themſelues to haue battell with God and his iuſtice. For all
our ſenſes and reaſon, and all our affections (as ſaith S. Paul to the
Romanes) are enimies againſt God.Rom. 8. 7. When men looſe the bridle to
their thoughts and imaginations, to their deſires and luſtes, then
make they open battell with God. And we are not ignorant of that
which is declared in the ſixt of Geneſis,Gen. 6. 5. That all that which man can
thinke and imagine, is nothing but euill continually: and all that
which man forgeth in himſelfe, & frameth in his owne ſhop, is vntoward
and corrupt before God. So then we ſee well, that we cannot
be ſanctified before our God: that is to ſay, we cannot ſerue him in
holines and purenes, being not yet ſeparated from that vncleannes,
and thoſe defilings, which are contrarie therevnto, & not hauing firſt

aboliſhed al that which is of our own nature. It behoued then that this
ſhould be repreſented in a figure to the ancient fathers, for that Chriſt
was not yet fullie reuealed vnto them. But at this day we haue in Ieſus
Chriſt the accompliſhment & the performance of all thinges. In
this wiſe ſ. Paul ſpeaketh of the old man,Rom. 6. 6. vnderſtāding by this word,
al that which we haue of Adam, that it ought to die, & be eleane aboliſhed:
namely, not the nature of our body or of our ſoule, but the malice
which is within vs, & the blindnes which maketh vs erre, the luſtes &
euil deſires which are altogether rebellious to the iuſtice of God. It
behoueth that all this, in as much as it is drawn frō Adam, be beaten
down, & cleane taken away. And how is this done? This is not by our
own induſtrie & labor,1. Cor. 15. 3. but Ieſus Chriſt dying for vs, and to wipe out
our ſinnes,Rom. 6. 4. 5. that they might be no more imputed vnto vs, hath gotten
vnto vs alſo this prerogatiue, that by the vertue & power of his holy
ſpirit, we might renounce the world & our ſelues in ſuch ſort, that our
carnal affectiōs to more reigne in vs. And albeit they be ful of rebellion,
yet notwithſtanding ſhall the Spirite of God beare rule euer
them, to repreſſe them, and to hold them backe as it were with a bridle.
Therfore it is ſaid, That we are raiſed with him: And S. Paule
declareth the ſame alſo in the Chap. which I haue alreadie recited
to the Coloſſians.Col. 2. 12. Now this was not yet manifeſted vnder the lawe.
It behoued therfore that the fathers which liued in that time, ſhould
haue ſome aide herein, as they had the ſacrifices, which nouriſhed
them in the hope of the death of Chriſt, to the end they ſhould know,
that their ſinnes were purged by the bloud of this Mediator. So had
they alſo the Sabbaoth day for a teſtimonie & witnes, that the grace
was obteined vs to mortifie our thoughts & affections, to the end that
God might liue in vs by the vertue of his holy ſpirit. Now we haue
ſome entrance to the vnderſtanding of this which hath bene ſhortly
touched: namely, that the Sabbaoth day was as a figure to repreſent
this which in very deed hath bene accompliſhed at the cōming of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt. And ſo let vs note that the Sabbaoth day extendeth
it ſelfe to the whole ſeruice of God, to declare that men could not
purelie & ſincerely honour him, but by renouncing of themſelues, and
by being ſeparated from the defilements of the world, & of their owne
fleſh.Ezech. 20. 13. 16. And for this cauſe the prophet Ezech. reproueth the Iewes that
they kept not the Sabbaoth. For this is ſaid vnto them as if they had
in general brokē the whole law, & not without cauſe. For he which ſetteth
at naught the Sabbaoth day, hath caſt vnder foote all the ſeruice

of God as much as in him is.Eſay. 56. 3. 2. 6. And if the Sabbaoth day be not obſerued,
all the reſt ſhalbe worth nothing, as is ſpoken to the prophet Eſay,
That men muſt bereaue themſelues of their own proper vertues,
that they muſt humble themſelues: otherwiſe, that this is not the reſt
of the Lord, which is agreable to him, or allowed of him. By this we
perceiue, that it auaileth nothing to kepe the ceremonie only. For albeit
the Iewes had well obſerued the ceremonie, albeit they ſhould
haue aſſembled themſelues together on the Sabbaoth day wtout putting
a finger to their houſhold affaires, & yet in the meane time ſhould
nouriſh in themſelues their wicked thoughts & affections, & after put
them in practiſe: this would haue bene but a mere mocking of God,
an abuſing of his name, a defacing & peruerting of the whole order he
had inſtituted, as he alſo reprocheth thē. For the principal point was
to haue reſpect to the truth of the figure: namely, to the ſpiritual ſeruice
of God. And yet notwithſtanding it behoued alſo, that the Iewes
ſhould kepe the ceremonie, which was cōmanded them. For God held
them in this bridle, as not content that they ſhould haue only the ſubſtance
of things, but alſo the ſhadowes & figures of them, vntil the cō
               ming
of Ieſus Chriſt. Now hereby vnderſtand that which S. Paule
ſaith, That now we are not tied vnto this bondage of the auncient fathers,
to obſerue in this ſort the Sabbaoth day. For we muſt do this
honor to our lord Ieſus Chriſt, that we cōtent our ſelues wt that which
he hath brought to vs in his owne perſon, without reteining any longer
that which was exterior & ceremonious vnder the law. Now thē
it is eaſie to gather how this obſeruation perteineth vnto vs at this
day. Touching the ceremonie (as I haue ſaid) it is paſt & done away.
We muſt then come to the ſubſtance, that is, that to the end we may
ſerue God well & ſincerelie, we learne to withdraw our ſelues frō all
our owne wils, & all our euil thoughtes & affections. And why? For otherwiſe
whē we will ſerue God, we marre all. It behoueth therfore
that all our own wiſdom be laid aſide, & that we heare God ſpeake, not
folowing our own wiſdom & fantaſies. Thus ye ſee the beginning &
firſt ſtep to the right obſeruing of the Sabbaoth day, as we ought:
namely, not to truſt to that which we think & imagine to be good. For
we muſt reſt. And how reſt? For ſooth we muſt abide ſtil & quiet. Our
thoughts muſt not ſtir to wāder & deuiſe this & that. We muſt (I ſay)
remain quiet in the obedience of our God. And when we ſhal be pricked
& ſtirred vp by our luſtes,Rom. 8. 7. let vs call to minde that theſe are enimies
againſt God, & that all our affections are wicked & rebellious.

We muſt then quietly reſt in that behalfe, and yelde our ſelues ouer
vnto God, to the end that he onely may worke in vs, that he may conduct
and gouerne vs by his holy ſpirite. By this we ſee, that GOD
hath omitted nothing, when he appointed the Sabbaoth day. For if
it extend ſo farre as vnto his whole ſeruice, what is wanting vnto vs
for a perfect doctrine of ſanctimonie and holineſſe? Seeing then we
haue the holy ghoſt which preſeuteth vnto vs all that which is requiſite,
there is no further queſtiō, but of walking holily in the obedience
of our God. And how is this done? Verily, when with all reuerence
and humilitie we receiue his holy worde, ſeeking to conforme our
ſelues vnto his iuſtice. But becauſe all that which is of our owne, is
contrarie herevnto, we muſt begin at this end: namely, to renounce
our ſelues. When this ſhalbe done, haue we not all that which is requiſite
for the ſeruice of God? But this is very hardly done, and therfore
let vs take the more diligent heed to awaken and ſtirre vp our
ſelues, when we heare that God commaundeth vs to obſerue the
Sabbaoth day, knowing that this is not in ſporting our ſelues, but
that we ought herein to vſe force with our ſelues, conſidering that for
all our life we ſhall haue well profited, if we come to obſerue this day
of reſt, that is to wit, by renouncing all that which is of our owne,
and by dedicating our ſelues wholy vnto our God. And by ſo much
the more ought we to be inflamed to obſerue ſpiritually this reſt of
the Lord, ſeing we are franchiſed from this ſeruile ſubiection of the
lawe, and that God hath geuen vnto vs a greater priuiledge, than vnto
the auncient fathers: in as much as he is contented that we bee
mortified in our olde man, to be renewed by his holy ſpirite, ſo that
we are no more bound to the obſeruing of that ceremonie which was
ſo ſtreightly kept vnder the lawe. Therfore when God handleth vs
ſo louingly, this bindeth vs ſo much the more to haue reſpect vnto the
principall, to the ende we may duely obſerue it. And we may not alledge
that the auncient fathers haue had the ceremonie to ſtirre them
vp, and that this ſerued as a ſpurre to pricke them forward, for we
haue much more than the outward and exteriour ſigne: for our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt is appeared,Col. 2. 17. that in him all this which hath bene figured
vnder a ſhadow might be fulfilled. Wherfore we are not to deſire
theſe ſmaller thinges which haue bene vnder the lawe. Ye ſee then
how this which hath bene ordeined concerning the Sabbaoth day, is
accompliſhed at this day touching the truth of the figure, wherof the

fathers had a ſight vnder a ſhadowe. And in deed wee muſt note, that
this which was commaunded of the Sabbaoth day, is common & belonging
vnto ve, as well as vnto them. For let vs take the lawe of
God as it is in it ſelfe, and we ſhall haue a perpetuall rule of iuſtice,
ſeeing it is moſt certeine, that vnder the ten commandements, God
would geue a rule which ſhould endure for euer. So let vs not thinke
that this which Moſes reciteth touching the Sabbaoth day, is ſuperfluous,
and not apperteining to vs. Not that the figure yet abideth,
but we haue the truth thereof.Heb. 4. 10. See to this purpoſe why the Apoſtle
applieth to the inſtruction of Chriſtians, and of the new Church, this
which is ſaid of the Sabbaoth day. For he declareth that we ought
to conforme our ſelues vnto our God, and that this is our full and perfect
felicitie. So, for aſmuch as the chiefe happineſſe of man conſiſteth
in this, that he was created to the image of God, what ought we now
ſithence this image is defaced & blotted out by ſume, but to ſtudie to
renew and repaire it? See then how me ought to march on forward
to our perfection: namely, that in conforming our ſelues to our God,
and to his will, we enquire and ſeeke after his workes, to the ende to
endeuour to do the like. Let vs know therfore that at this day, to the
end we may the better ſerue God, our duetie is, to beſtowe all the
paines we are able, to tread vnder our owne thoughts and affections,
that God may reigne and beare rule in vs, that he may guide & gouerne
vs by his holy ſpirite. And ſo all hypocrites may well maſke
and diſguiſe themſelues, they may well paint their doings, and ſhew
faire countenances: yet neuertheleſſe, as long as their wicked luſts
ſhall be cloſed vp, and hid in their hearts, as long as they ſhall be full
of enuie, of rancors, of ambition, of crueltie, or of deceit, it is certeine
they ſhall doe nothing els but violate the Sabbaoth day, or day of
reſt. And therefore we may conclude, that they peruert all the ſeruice
of God, according to that we haue alreadie alledged out of Ezechiel:
and as it is alſo ſpoken hereof in Ieremie. And marke we
why the ceremonie was ſo ſtreight vnder the lawe. Thinke we that
God euer tooke pleaſure in the idleneſſe of men? Certeine it is he
hath not. And yet he puniſhed as greuouſly him which brake the day
of reſt to labour therein, as if he had murdered a man. And why ſo?
It ſeemeth that it is extreme crueltie, that for gathering of ſtickes
on the Sabbaoth day a man muſt die, as if he did commit murder.Num. 15. 32.
Yet the Lord condemneth him to death which gathered ſtickes in

the Sabbaoth day. And why? Becauſe that vnder this figure was
comprehended the whole ſeruice of God.Iere. 17. 21. And ſee why in Ieremie it
is ſaid, that they haue carried burthens on the Sabbaoth day. And
why? It ſeemeth that God ſtayeth himſelfe to much on a trifling
and childiſh thing, but he hath reſpect vnto this which was ſignified
by the Sabbaoth day. And therefore when it was ſo neglected of the
Iewes, this was as open ſacriledge, whereby they did declare that
the whole lawe was of ſmall account amongeſt them. So then, to
come to our ſelues, foraſmuch as at this day we haue not this figure
ſo preciſe, and ſo ſtreight, but that God hath geuen vs a greater
libertie, obteined vnto vs by the death and paſſion of our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt, let vs learne with all diligence to bequeſt our ſelues
vnto him, and to knowe (as I haue alreadie touched) that how fairelie
ſo euer we ſhall haue trauelled in all the reſt, it ſhall bee to ſmall
purpoſe, except our affections bee helde brideled, and that wee beſtowe
all our paines to renounce and take leaue of our luſtes and deſires
in ſuch ſorte, that GOD alone may rule and gouerne vs, and
that we may proteſt that we deſire nothing els, but to reſt and repoſe
our ſelues on him. And ſee how God propoſeth himſelfe for an example.
For he is not onelie content to commaund men to reſt, but
hee hath alſo ſhewed them the way hereto.Gen. 2. 2. For after hee had created
the worlde, and all therein conteined, be reſted: not that hee was
wearie or needed any reſt, but this was to leade vs to beholde his
workes, and that ſtaying our ſelues thereon, we might be faſhioned
vnto him. Will wee then obſerue the ſpirituall reſt? Euen as it
is ſaid, that hee ceaſed from all his workes. So muſt wee alſo bee
quiet and ſtill, leauing to doe that ſhall ſeeme good vnto vs, and
which our owne nature deſireth. If this example of GOD ſtirre
vs not vp, wee declare ſufficiently, that wee ſeeke not to obey him,
and by this meanes wee ſearche not after, in any reſpect, the true felicitie,
but deſire willingly to abide in our pouertie and wretchedneſſe.
The ſouereigne goodneſſe and chiefe felicitie of men (as
I haue ſaide) is this, that they cleaue vnto their GOD. Beholde,
our Lorde calleth vs to himſelfe, and ſheweth, that wee can
haue no true and holie coniunction with him, but by reſting our
ſelues from our owne workes. So then, if wee bee ſtill flitting in
our fanſies, if wee labour hande and foote to put that in practiſe

which ſhall ſeeme good vnto vs, it is certeine, this is as if we would
breake the bondes which lincke GOD and vs together, and withdrawe
our ſelues from him as much as in vs lieth. And by this
may not a man ſee, that we deſire nothing els, but to bee ſet forth
as a prey vnto Sathan, who driueth vs on headlong, and maketh
vs to wander, foraſmuch as we remaine no longer vnder the garde
and protection of our GOD? But what? Few there are, which
conſider of this aright. Wee ſee the libertie euerie man yealdeth
vnto himſelfe. When one warneth a man, that hee ought not to
walke after his owne heartes luſt: What? I knowe (will hee
ſaie) howe I ought to rule my ſelfe. Verilie, a man knoweth not
how to deſpite GOD in more open manner, than by ſuch a rebellion.
This is as much, as if wee would ſaie, that wee will
not that GOD haue any ſuperioritie ouer vs. It is true, men
will not openly proteſt this, but the matter is ſo. For (as I
haue alreadie ſaide) there is no true worſhip, except wee hence take
our beginning, to withdrawe our ſelues from our owne luſtes and affections.
            Now then, when men will bee ſo wiſe in their owne conceite,
when they put ſuch confidence in their owne witte and reaſon,
when they geue themſelues all libertie to doe what ſo euer ſeemeth
them good, when they followe their owne affections and fanſies,
when they will take no paine to repreſſe them: Nay, are grieued
when any woulde daunte and tame them, it is a ſure ſigne,
they neuer knewe wherein conſiſteth the true worſhip of GOD,
neuer vnderſtoode the chiefe and principall pointe of the lawe.
And ſo let vs note well, that when GOD alledgeth his owne
example, it is to allure vs with all mildeneſſe and gentleneſſe to
the obſeruation of the lawe, and keeping of this ſpirituall reſt.
And withall let vs note (as I haue alreadie touched) that wee are
wretched and miſerable, when we are ſeparated and remoued from
him. And behold the bonde of our coniunction: namely, that drawing
neere to his truth and religion, wee ſuffer our ſelues to bee guided
and gouerned by him. Nowe a man may demaund, for what
cauſe the Iewes were commaunded to reſt onely the ſeuenth
day: for wee ought not for one day in the weeke renounce our
luſtes and affections, but wee muſt continue in that minde

all the time of our life. Briefly, the reſt which the Lord commaundeth
is perpetuall, and without any ceaſing or intermiſſion. How then is
it, that he hath choſen one onely day in the weeke? It was to ſhewe,
that when we ſhall haue applied all our ſtudies to abandon our falſe
opinions; our wicked concupiſcences, all that which procedeth from
our peruerſe and corrupt nature, that yet we cannot come fullie to
this, vntill we be wholy ridde of our fleſh. In deed, the faithfull ought
their whole life time to obſerue the Sabbaoth day, they ought to
geue ouer their owne deſires, forſake their owne workes, ſeeke to offer
vp themſelues wholy to God in all humilitie, to order themſelues
after his will, they ought to continue in his obedience: (I ſay) wee
muſt do ſo: or otherwiſe, all the ſeruice we ſhall do vnto God, is but
feignedneſſe & hypocriſie: and as for him, he will diſallow and reiect
it. Neuertheleſſe, we cannot acquite our ſelues wholy in this, to renounce
our affections in ſuch ſorte,Gal. 6. 14. that there be no blame found in
vs. Saint Paule glorifieth in this, that the world was crucified vnto
him, and he vnto the world. Yet in the meane time, he ceaſeth not
to ſay, that the fleſh fighteth with the ſpirite,Rom. 7. 19. and haue no agreement
together: yea, he confeſſeth alſo in the ſeuenth to the Romanes, that
he alwayes perceiued in himſelfe this ſtrife, that he did not the good
which he would: that is to ſay, he accompliſhed it not with ſo feruent
a deſire, neither was he ſo reſolued to walke according vnto God, but
that he had alwayes many ſtoppes and hinderaunces to ſtay him in
ſuch ſort, that he ſeemed to halte, in ſtead of ſtrong and vpright running.
Sithence then it is ſo, let vs note, that not without cauſe God
ordeined the ſeuenth day for the Sabbaoth day, ſignifying thereby,
that we cannot neither in one day, neither in one moneth, come to
this perfection of ſanctimonie and holineſſe which he requireth of
vs. And why? Becauſe that when we ſhall haue manfully fought againſt
the luſtes and affections of our fleſh, againſt our euil thoughts
and deſires: yet ſhall there be alwayes a reſidue and remnant in vs,
vntill we be fullie ioyned and aſſociated with our GOD, and that he
hath gathered vs into his heauenlie kingdome. Vntill that time,
there ſhall be alwayes ſome temptations in vs, there ſhall bee alwayes
ſome troubles, ſome vnquietneſſe, we ſhall alwayes feele (I
meane thoſe which ſeek to pleaſe God) that we are yet ſubiect to many
temptations, and that there remaine in our nature many prickes,
by the which we are ſtirred vp and prouoked to this and to that.

And are not theſe ſo many lets to hinder the ſpirituall reſt? If a man
did repoſe himſelfe and reſt ſo in God as he ſhould do: he ſhould conceiue
nothing in his fantaſie which might turne him from the right
way, he ſhould haue in him no euill affections or deſires. All theſe
thinges ſhould be farre from him. Therfore, when we conceiue ſo
many wicked fantaſies, loe, Sathan commeth to aſſaile and to ſhake
vs with ſo many diſquietings. When we ſhall haue thought to doe
well, there ariſe ſome thinges in our minde which tickle and flatter
vs: and ſo albeit we hate that which is euill, yet by ſuch temptations
we are prouoked to purſue after, and to follow it. And by this
a man may ſee, that it is no eaſie thing to be without all wicked concupiſcences,
and to caſt them off, ſo that they beare no rule at all in
vs. So then let vs continually follow this ſtudie and deſire of celebrating
the ſpirituall reſt of God, becauſe we ſhall not come to the
perfection thereof, vntill the end of our life. Now hereby we are
admoniſhed of two thinges: The one is, that we be in diſpleaſure
with our ſelues, and mourne perpetually for our ſinnes. And although
it ſeemeth that we haue beſtowed great paine to make our ſelues obedient
vnto GOD: yet let vs knowe that we are alwayes but in
the way, and that we lacke much of accompliſhing that which God
commaundeth, and requireth of vs in the lawe. And this one thing
may occaſion vs to humble our ſelues, ſeeing that GOD ſhall alwayes
finde in vs ouermuch to condemne vs for his ſeruice, and that
this ſpirituall reſt of ours commeth not neere by many degrees to
that which he commaundeth. On the other ſide, hauing this occaſion
of humbling & bewailing our ſelues in true repentance, let vs know
this for the ſecond point, that we ought ſo much the more to bee moued
and pricked forward to make our further profite, when we may
ſay, How now? It is true that God hath geuen me the graſe that I
deſire to ſerue him. But how do I behaue my ſelfe herein? Alas,
I am yet farre wide, & farre off from it. For when we perceiue this
imperfection in vs, ought we not to enforce our ſelues forwarde in
the ſeruice of God? So, beteſting the euill and wickedneſſe which
is in vs, let vs be pricked ſo much the more forwarde alwayes to
profite in this reſt, and let euery one call himſelfe dailie to account
for his going forwarde herein. Ye ſee then how GOD, hauing
geuen vs occaſion to humble our ſelues vnder his hand, all the time
of our life, ſheweth vs that we ought to be inflamed hereby to correct

the vices which are in vs, and to mortifie more and more the
luſtes and deſires of our fleſhe. Therefore let vs knowe, that it is
not ſufficient, that our olde man be in part crucified, except we bee
wholy buried with Ieſus Chriſt (as Saint Paule ſpeaketh in this
ſeuenth of the Romanes which we haue alreadie alledged.)Rom. 7. 4. Ye ſee
then what we haue to note touching the ſeuenth day, of which it is
here ſpoken.
            It remaineth now, that we ſpeake of the ſecond point, wherein we
haue before in a worde ſaid, that the Sabbaoth day was a ciuil order
to exerciſe the faithfull in the ſeruice of God. For this day was
appointed to aſſemble them together to heare the doctrine of the lawe
preached, to receiue the ſacramentes, to call on the name of God.
And touching theſe pointes, it is common to vs with the auncient
people of the Iewes. For although the figure is ceaſed, (I meane
that whereof Saint Paule ſpeaketh in the Epiſtle to the Coloſſians:)
yet notwithſtanding, this which apperteineth to ciuil order, abideth
ſtil, and hath his vſe. And this policie what is it? It is to aſſemble
our ſelues together in the name of God. True it is, this
ought to be done euerie day, but for becauſe of our infirmitie, or rather
ſlouthfulneſſe, it was expedient that one day ſhould bee choſn out.
If we were ſo ſeruent in the loue of God as we ſhould be, it ſhould not
neede to ordeine one onely day in the weeke, but all would both euening
and morning aſſemble themſelues together, to the ende wee
might be ediſted more and more in the worde of God. And in deede
this exerciſe were more than needfull for vs, conſidering that we are
all ſo enclined vnto euill, that we neede not any thing to leade vs on
further in wickedneſſe, and to looſe the bridle more looſe vnto vs.
It is needefull then that we aſſemble our ſelues together on euerie
day in the name of GOD. But what? We ſee that with much
a doe men will aſſemble themſelues together on the Sunday, and
that many are to bee holden to this order by force and violence.
Hauing then ſuch an infirmitie in vs, let vs knowe that this order
was not preſcribed onely vnto the Iewes, of obſeruing one
certeine day, in the which they ſhould come together: but to vs alſo
as common with them. But yet herewithall wee haue to note,
that this is not all: and that this were a verie bare and naked
thing, that our handes onely, and our feete ſhould reſt, and that
nothing els ſhould bee done. What muſt we then doe? Wee

ought to applie this reſt to a more high and excellent thing: we
ought to ceaſe from thoſe workes which might hinder the workes
of GOD, lette vs from calling on of his name, ſtay vs from
exerciſing of our ſelues in his holy woorde. If wee employ the
Sunday to make good cheare, to ſporte our ſelues, to goe to
games and paſtimes, ſhall GOD in this bee honoured? Is
not this a mockerie? Is not this an vnhallowing of his name?
When our ſhoppe windowes are ſhutte in on the Sundaie, when
wee trauell not after the common order and faſhion of men,
this is to the ende wee ſhoulde haue more libertie and leaſure to
attende on that which GOD commaundeth, that is to wit, to
bee taught by his worde, to aſſemble our ſelues together, to make
confeſſion of our faith, to call on his name, to exerciſe our ſelues in
the vſe of the ſacramentes. Loe then to what purpoſe this policie
ought to ſerue vs.
            But now let vs conſider, whether they which call themſelues
Chriſtians, acquite themſelues in this pointe, as were requiſite.
A great parte of men thinke they haue the Sundaie the better to
attende on their worldly affaires, and they reſerue to themſelues
this day, as if they had no other to deliberate for the whole weeke
to come. Nowe, if the bell ſhall ring to a Sermon, they thinke they
haue no other thing to doe, but to thinke on their buſineſſe, and to
make their accounte of this, and of that. Others glutte themſelues
by riotting, and are ſhutte vp in their houſes, becauſe they dare not
ſhew a manifeſt contempt of their duetie in the open ſtreetes. So
that the Sundaie is to them but a retreate, to withdrawe themſelues
from the Churche and congregation of GOD. By this
one may ſee, what affection wee haue towarde all Chriſtianitie,
and the ſeruice of GOD, ſeeing that by this which was geuen
vs for an aide and helpe to drawe neerer vnto GOD, wee take
occaſion to withdrawe our ſelues ſo much the further from him. And
whither wander wee? Goe wee not ſo farre, as to recule and flee
backe wholie from him? Is not this a diueliſhe wickedneſſe of
men? And yet this is ſo common, as it is pitie to beholde. And
would to God we ſtoode in neede to ſearch for examples herein further
off, and that they were more rare to be founde. But wee ſee
how all is profaned and violated, that the moſt parte are nothing

carefull for the right vſage of this day, which was ordeined to the
end that we ſhould bee retired from all worldlie cares, and drawen
backe from all other buſineſſe, to yelde vp ourſelues wholie vnto
GOD. Moreouer, let vs know that the Sunday is not ordeined
for vs onely to come to the Sermon, but to the end we employ the
reſt of the time to laude and praiſe GOD. Note we this. For although
he nouriſh vs euerie day: yet notwithſtanding, we meditate
not ſufficientlie of the benefites he beſtoweth on vs, to magnifie him
in them. True it is, that this ſhould be but a poore thing, if wee
ſhould conſider of the benefites of GOD but on the Sunday. But
on the other dayes, becauſe we are occupied ouermuch about our
worldlie affaires, we are not ſo geuen to God as in that day, which
is altogether dedicated vnto this. The Sunday the refore ought to
ſerue vs for atowre, to make vs mount on high to view the workes of
God from a farre, when we are neither hindered nor occupied with
anything, but that we may applie all our ſenſes, and our whole vnderſtanding
to reknowledge the gratious giftes and benefites which
he hath beſtowed on vs. And when we ſhall well haue practiſed this
on the Sunday: namely, ſhall haue deepely conſidered of the workes
of God, it is certeine, that all the reſt of our time, we ſhall be geuen
herevnto, and that this meditation ſhall ſo faſhion and poliſh vs,
that the Monday, and all the reſt of the weeke, we ſhall be ledde to
thanke our GOD, when ſo before hand we ſhall haue premeditated
on his workes, to make our profite therein. But when the Sunday
is ſpent not onely in games and paſtimes full of vanitie, but in
thinges which are altogether contrarie vnto God, that men thinke
they haue not celebrated the Sunday, except God therein be by many
and ſundrie wayes offended: When men (I ſay) vnhallowe in
ſuch ſort this holie daie, which God hath inſtituted to leade vs vnto
himſelfe, is it any meruell if wee become brutiſhe and beaſtlie
in our doinges all the reſt of the weeke? What is to bee
done then? Let vs all knowe, that this is not ſufficient, that
we come to the Sermon on the Sunday, to receiue ſome good
doctrine, and to call vppon the name of GOD: but wee muſt
digeſt thoſe thinges we heare and receiue, and applie all our ſenſes
to the better vnderſtanding of thoſe benefites which God beſtoweth
on vs, and that by this meane we bee ſo formed and faſhioned to this
thing, that the Monday and all the reſt of the weeke beſide, coſt vs

nothing, to aſpire and to come to our God: and that we neede but
to call to minde, that whiche we ſhall haue learned before at good
leaſure: when our mindes be as it were vnwrapped from all thoſe
thinges, which hinder vs to recount the workes of God. And this
we haue to note touching the order wee are to obſerue at this day,
which is not in keeping the ceremonie ſo ſtreightlie as it was obſerued
vnder the lawe. We haue no longer this figure. But this reſt
day is to aſſemble vs together, to the end that, according to our infirmitie,
we bee better exerciſed to applie our ſelues to the ſeruice of
God, and to haue this day wholie conſecrated vnto him, to the ende
we be drawen altogether from the world, and that this may ſerue vs
the better, for the reſt of our time, as we haue ſaide. And withall we
muſt note, that this is not enough, that euerie one in particular and
alone thinke on God, and call to minde his woorkes on the Sunday:
but we muſt meete together one certeine day to make publike
confeſſion of our faith. It is true, that this ought to bee done euerie
day (as we haue ſaid:) but becauſe of the rawneſſe and ſlouth of men,
it is behouefull to haue one ſpeciall day, which may wholie be dedicated
and appointed to this vſe. I confeſſe well that we are not bound
to the ſeuenth day (as indeed we obſerue not the day which was commandes
the Iewes, for this was the Saturday,) but to ſhew the libertie
of Chriſtians the day hath bene chaunged to the Sunday, foraſmuch
as Ieſus Chriſt in his reſurrection hath deliuered vs from
the bondage of the lawe, & hath cancelled the bond therof. This was
the cauſe, why this chaunge hath bene made in the day. But yet
wee ought to obſerue this order of policie, to haue ſome day in the
weeke, be it one, or be it two, for this is left in the choice and libertie
of Chriſtians. But that the whole people may bee aſſembled, it is
conuenient that one certeine day bee ordeined, to receiue the Sacramentes
together in common, to haue the inuocation of the name of
God, and to ſhew an vnitie and concord in faith and religion. It ſufficeth
not then, that euerie one withdrawe himſelfe into his owne
houſe, either to reade the holy ſcripture, or to pray vnto God, but it
behoueth wee come into the companie of the faithfull, and there declare
the concorde and agreement we haue with the whole bodie of
the Church, and celebrate in ſuch wiſe this order, as the Lorde
hath commaunded. But what? We may ſee here the vnhallowing
of the ſeruice of God. For as I haue alreadie touched, are there not

many which will ſhewe them ſelues herein deſpitefull vnto God, and
that will be exempted from the common lawe and order? True it is,
that they will happilie come fiue or ſixe times in the yeare to the ſermon.
But what to doe? Euen to make a mockerie of God, and of all
his doctrine. Theſe are indeed in the number of thoſe hogges, which
came to defile the temple of God, and deſerued rather to bee in ſtables:
and better it were they held them ſelues in their ſtinking dennes:
to ſpeake briefly, it were better that ſuch knaues were altogegether
cut off from the Church of God, than to ſhewe them ſelues in
the companie of the faithfull. But yet how many times come they among
them? The bell ſhall ring long enough, before a man may eſpie
them in any place. So then wee ought with more diligence to take
heede to our ſelues, and quicken vp our ſelues to make ſuch a confeſſion
of our faith, that God may bee honored with one common accord
among vs. Moreouer, wee muſt aboliſh all ſuperſtitions. For wee ſee
how among Papiſts men thinke to ſerue God by ſlouth and idlenes.
This is not the manner, after which we ought to celebrate the Sabbaoth
day: but to applie it to his right and lawefull vſe, wee muſt
knowe (as we haue aboue ſaid) that our Lord requireth nothing elſe,
but that this day bee employed to heare his word, to make our prayers
in common, to make confeſſion of our faith, and to vſe the Sacramentes.
See wherevnto wee are called. And yet wee ſee howe all
hath bene corrupted & brought to vtter confuſion in Poperie: for as
they inuented dayes to honour their hee and ſhee Santes, and haue
forged to them ſelues idols, ſo haue they thought they ought to ſerue
them in all idleneſſe. Now ſeeing the world is ſo corrupted, we ought
ſo much the better to note this declaration of the Sabbaoth day, as
is here touched by Moſes. And withall let vs knowe to what end our
Lord hath commaunded the auncient people to haue one day in the
weeke to reſt themſelues. And at this day, vnderſtanding how this
outward ceremonie is aboliſhed by the comming of Chriſt, let vs
geue our ſelues to the ſpirituall reſt: that is, to dedicate our ſelues
wholie vnto God, renouncing our owne deſires and affections: and
further let vs reteine the exteriour policie, as farre as it apperteineth
vnto vs: namelie, to ceaſe from our earthlie affaires, and all
worldlie buſineſſe, to attend the better on the meditation of the works
of God, that wee may bee exerciſed to knowe the benefites he beſtoweth
on vs, and aboue all, that wee may beſtow all our paines in acknowledging

his gratious fauour, whiche he offereth dailie in his
Goſpell, to bee confirmed and eſtabliſhed more and more therein, &
when we ſhall haue emploied the Sunday to praiſe and magnifie the
name of God, and to meditate on his workes, let vs ſhewe all the reſt
of the weeke how we haue profited herein.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good God,
with acknowledging of our faults, praying that it will pleaſe him to
make vs feele them better than wee haue done. And becauſe wee can
not in any reſpect ſerue him, vntill this wickedneſſe and peruerſneſſe
which is in vs be aboliſhed: and becauſe he hath ſhewen that we ſhall
not ceaſe to make warre againſt his iuſtice, as long as we ſhall loſe
the bridle to our wicked thoughtes and concupiſcences, pray we, that
it will pleaſe this good God, by the power of his holy ſpirite, to geue
vs this grace, to bee fullie conformed vnto him, which is dead and riſen
for vs, to the end he might mortifie and quicken vs, that wee may
beare the markes of our Lord Ieſus, euen in renouncing our ſelues,
and ordering our whole life ſo to his will, that wee deſire nothing,
but to bee conformed to his iuſtice, to the end his lawe may bee accompliſhed
in vs, as it is ſpirituall: and that wee bee reformed both
in fleſh and in ſpirite, to liue vnder his obedience. And foraſmuch as
wee ſo ofte returne vnto our ſelues, pray wee that it will pleaſe this
good God to beare with vs in our infirmities, till his reſt bee truelie
accompliſhed in vs, and that he hath gathered vs into his heauenlie
kingdome. That it will pleaſe him to graunt
this grace, not onelie vnto vs, but to all
people and nations of
the earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 6. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               
                  13 Sixe dayes thou ſhalt labour, and ſhalt doe all thy woorke:
                  14 But the ſeuenth day is the Sabbaoth of the Lord thy God,
thou ſhalt not doe any woorke therein, thou, nor thy ſonne,
not thy daughter, nor thy man ſeruant, nor thy maide, nor
thine oxe, nor thine aſſe, neither any of thy cattell, nor the
ſtraunger that is within thy gates, that thy man ſeruant and
thy maide may reſt as well as thou.
                  15 Remember that thou waſt a ſeruant in the land of Aegypt,
and that the Lorde thy God brought thee out thence with a
mightie hand, and a ſtretched out arme: therefore the Lorde
thy God commaunded thee to obſerue the Sabbaoth day.
               
            
            
               WE handled yeſterday, in what ſorte, and
to what end the commaundement of obſeruing
the Sabboth day was giuen to
the Iewes. It was ſaid in generall, that
this was a figure of the ſpirituall reſt,
which the faithfull ought to keepe, the
better to ſerue and woorſhippe God.
And ſeeing our Lord hath brought vs
the full accompliſhment of this, it hath
bene ſaid, that we muſt no longer reſt
and ſtay our ſelues on this ſhadowe of the Lawe, but be content that
our old man be crucified by the vertue of the death and paſſion of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to the end wee may bee renewed in our mindes
wholie to ſerue our God. Withall wee noted, that wee ſtand in neede
of ſome order and policie amongeſt vs, and therefore it behoued that
ſome certeine day ſhould bee appointed to aſſemble vs together, to
bee confirmed in the doctrine of God, and to make our profite therein
euerie day, euen all the time of our life, that wee bee alſo exerciſed
to call vppon his name, to make confeſſion of our faith, and that the
reſt of this day bee ſpent in conſidering the benefites wee receiue at
all times at the hand of God, to the end he bee the more glorified in
them. And now haue we to note this whiche followeth in the text of

Moſes. Sixe dayes thou ſhalt labour, (ſaith the Lord.) This ought
not to bee vnderſtood, as if God commaunded vs hereby, preciſelie to
labour. Howbeit, it is true, that we are borne to this, and wee knowe
that God meaneth not wee ſhould bee idle as long as wee liue in this
world. For he hath giuen men hands and feete, force and ſtrength, to
this purpoſe. Yea, before ſinne entered, it is ſaide that Adam was
placed in the garden of Eden, to dreſſe it, and keepe it. Albeit the labour
and trauell which men are now enioyned, is a chaſtiſement for
ſinne. For it is thus denounced them, In the ſweate of thy face, thou
ſhalt eate thy breade. This is a curſe and malediction laide on mankind.
For we are not worthie to enioy the condition whiche was giuen
to our father Adam, that he might liue at pleaſure without troubling
or tormenting him ſelfe. But yet, before that ſinne entred into the
world, and that wee were in this ſort condemned of God to this painfull
& wearieſome trauell, it was requiſite, that men ſhould exerciſe
themſelues with ſome labour. And why? Becauſe this is contrarie
to our nature, that we ſhoulde be as logges and blockes vnprofitable.
So then it is verie certeine, that wee ought to applie our ſelues to
ſome labour all the time of our life. But yet here in this place it is
not ſimplie commaunded, that we trauell ſixe dayes. For indeede
there were other ſolemnities vnder the Lawe, beſides the reſt of the
Sabboth. There were feaſtes, which might happen in the middeſt of
the weeke: but becauſe the number of them was ſmall, beeing onely
foure dayes in the yeare, there is no mention made of them, but onely
of the Sabbaoth. Therefore, when it is ſaid: Thou ſhalt labour ſixe
dayes, our Lord woulde hereby ſignifie vnto vs, that we ought not to
complaine of yelding vnto him one certeine day, when he leaueth vnto
vs ſixe for one. As if he did ſay. Shall the coſt and charge be great
vnto you to chooſe one day which may be wholy geuen to my ſeruice,
that you doe no other thing in it, but reade and exerciſe your ſelues in
my lawe, or heare my doctrine whiche ſhalbe preached vnto you, a
day to come to the Temple, to the end you may be there confirmed by
the ſacrifices which are there made, a day to call vppon my name, to
declare and proteſt, that you are of the number and companie of my
people? Ought this to bee grieuous and burthenſome vnto you, ſeing
you haue ſixe dayes free, to traffike, and to doe your buſineſſe in?
When I vſe ſuch gentleneſſe towardes you, that I demand but one
day of ſeuen, is not this an ouer great vnthankfulneſſe on your part, if

you complaine of this time, as beeing euill employed, and if you bee
ſuch couetous & niggardlie wretches, as not to ſpare mee one ſeuenth
part of the time? I haue giuen you your whole life. Whenſoeuer the
Sunne ſhineth vpon you, you ought to acknowledge my goodneſſe,
and how that I am a liberall Father towards you. For this Sunne,
which I make to ſhine, is to giue you a meane to goe and walke by,
to the end that euerie one may doe his buſineſſe. And yet for all this,
why is it, that I ſhall not haue one day among ſeuen, in which euerie
one ſhould withdrawe him ſelfe from his labour and trauell, that
you bee not wrapped in the cares of the world, and ſo haue no leaſure
to thinke vppon mee? Now then we ſee, that thus ſentence of trauelling
ſire dayes is not placed as a commaundement, but is rather a
permiſſion, which God giueth, and that to reproch the vnthankfulneſſe
of men, if they obſerue not the Sabbaoth day, and ſanctifie it in
ſuch ſorte, as we haue ſpoken thereof. And here hence we haue to gather
a good and profitable admonition: namelie, that when wee are
ſlowe to obey God, wee ought to conſider of the benefites he beſtoweth
vppon vs. For this ought to make vs reſt with a more feruent
zeale in the practiſing of thoſe things, which God commaundeth vs,
when we ſhall well conſider that he handleth vs not rigorouſlie, neither
preſſeth vs ouermuch. Loe our God might vſe a ſtreighter
bridle if it pleaſed him, he might force vs to things ſo hard, that there
were no meane nor way to ſet vs forward therein: but he conſidereth
of vs, and conducteth vs as a father would do his children. Sithence
then it is ſo, that he in ſuch ſorte beareth with vs, ought not we to bee
ſtirred vp ſo much the more to doe this which he commaundeth vs?
So then, as often as the commaundementes of God are hard, or ſeme
ſo vnto vs, let vs know that he preſſeth vs not by many degrees, ſo
much as he might. For we ſhould bee tormented out of meaſure, if
the Lord would vſe the rigour of extremitie. Knowe we therfore, that
he beareth with vs, and that he vſeth here towardes vs a more than
fatherlie goodneſſe. True it is, that the lawe of God is in it ſelfe vnpoſſible
vnto vs, not onely to obſerue it in moſt perfect manner: but
when a man by his naturall vertue and ſtrength will endeuour to acquite
him ſelfe towardes God, he ſhall not bee able to moue one
finger, nor to heue one good thought to knowe how he ought to beginne:
yea, ſo farre are wee from beeing meete and able to obey
God, and to put in practiſe, that which is conteined in his lawe, that

all our thoughtes and affections are ſo manie enimities againſt
GOD.Rom. 8. 7. If men, by their owne power, could accompliſh the lawe,
it ſhould haue bene ſaide vnto them, Trauell yee. But contrarie
wiſe it, is ſaid vnto them, Reſt yee, to the end that GOD may
worke. So then the lawe may well bee impoſſible touching vs,
but yet it is poſſible for GOD to imprint it in our heartes, and to
gouerne vs by his holy ſpirite, in ſuch wiſe, that this yoke ſhall
bee eaſie and ſweete vnto vs, and that it ſhall haue no hardeneſſe
in it to grieue and trouble vs. So then, when men ſhall haue
well conſidered of this thing, they ſhalbe conuinced that God
beareth with them as a father, whiche ſhoulde ſhewe him ſelfe
pitifull towardes his children. And therefore let vs take diligent
heede wee be not vngratefull, but bee prouoked & allured to
ſerue our GOD, ſo much the more, ſeeing he commaundeth vs
not thoſe thinges, whiche might ſeeine ouer bitter and painfull
vnto vs, but hath a due regarde to our power and abilitie.
Thus yee ſee what wee haue to note out of this place, where our
Lorde declareth that he leaueth vnto men their commoditie. It
is true (as it was yeſterday touched,) that wee ought to bee ſo
ſpirituall, as euerie day to aſſemble our ſelues together to call on
our GOD, that wee ought to mount vp to the heauenlie life, leauing
all our wordlie affaires. But what? GOD ſeeth that we are
enuironed and incloſed with our fleſh, that we creepe and traile on
the ground, that our infirmities ouer beare vs, in ſuch ſorte, that
wee can not leade an Angelicall life. GOD therefore ſeeing
ſuch rawneſſe and weakneſſe in vs, hauing pitie, that we can not acquite
our ſelues fullie in this whiche were our office and dutie to
doe, he releaſeth vs, and ſheweth not the extremitie of his rigour,
but ſaith, that he is content if wee dedicate one day vnto
him, or if this day ſerue vs for all the reſt of the weeke. And
why? For (as I haue ſaide) he dealeth not extreamelie with vs,
but conſidereth that we are ouer weake and fraile. Therefore, when
he beareth with vs after this manner, and leaueth vnto vs our profits
and commodities, ſo much more diſſolute, wicked, and inexcuſable
are wee, if wee bee not inflamed to yealde our ſelues wholie vnto
him. Nowe, it followeth immediatelie, that neither our man
ſeruant, nor maide, nor oxe, nor aſſe, nor any of our cattell,
ſhall labour on the Sabbaoth day, nor the ſtraunger,

which is within our gates. Touching the cattell, one might thinke
it ſtraunge, that God hath compriſed them vnder the obſeruation of
this reſt,Exod. 20. 13. & 17. seeing it is ſo high & heauenlie a myſterie, as it was yeſterday
entreated. And doeth ſuch geare apperteine to oxen and to aſſes?
God ſaith, I haue geuen you the Sabbaoth day to be a ſigne that I
ſanctifie you, and that I am your God, which reigneth in the middeſt
of you. This is not belonging as common to all mortall men:
For God graunteth not this grace to Painims and vnfaithfull ones,
to ſanctifie them: he ſpeaketh onely to the people which he choſe for
his inheritaunce, & which he adopted. Now, when the Sabbaoth day
is a ſigne that God hath ſeparated the faithfull of his Church from
the reſt of the world, why is this extended to oxen and to aſſes? But
note we, that this is not done for the brute beaſtes ſakes, but to the
end that men ſhoulde haue a monument before their eyes, to be ſo
much the more touched therewith. This commaundement then, is
not applied to the beaſtes, whiche haue neither vnderſtanding nor
reaſon, but this is directed vnto men, which ought to make their profite
of it. We ſee that the ſacrifices were made of brute beaſts, we ſee
what furniture there was, what veſſels of gold and ſiluer, and other
like things: and when all theſe were hallowed, is it to be vnderſtood
that God put his ſpirit into theſe corruptible metalles, and into
thinges which had no ſenſe and feeling? Nay: but all this is belonging
to the vſe of men: as all creatures are made for our vſe and behoofe.
And God not only miniſtreth vnto vs in thinges apperteining
to this preſent, fraile, and brickle life, but he giueth them vnto vs as
tokens of his grace, to be meanes & aydes to drawe vs vp on high to
heauen. Therfore when God would that the oxen and the aſſes ſhould
reſt them ſelues this ſeuenth day, this is not that he maketh them
partakers of this ſpirituall reſt, whereof wee haue aboue entreated,
but this was to the end the Iewes ſeing their ſtables cloſed vp, ſhuld
be put in minde to ſay: How now? God ſetteth here before our eyes,
this ſigne and ſacrament viſible euen in the brute beaſtes, and this is
to the end that we on our part ſhould be the better kept and holden in
his ſeruice: that wee ſhoulde knowe that this were to breake the
whole lawe, if wee haue not regard vnto this which is the chiefe and
principall point of all our life, namelie: that wee learne to renounce
our ſelues, and followe not our owne luſtes, reaſon, or wiſdome: but
that we ſuffer our God to rule and gouerne vs, and that wee bee as

dead creatures, that he may liue in vs, and not followe our owne
ſwinge, which is altogether corrupted. Thus it behoued the Iewes
deepely to weigh, euen in the brute beaſtes, this viſible ſigne, which
was giuen to the end this might reſtreine them ſo much the more,
and that they ſhould bee admoniſhed by this meane, to obſerue the
Sabbaoth day, with all reuerence. Withall we ſee, how in all times
God handleth men according to their hardneſſe, and that he hath
prouided them of meete and conuenient remedies, for aſmuch as
they are not inclined of them ſelues, before he draweth them in this
manner. And this is not onely for the Iewes, but for vs. Let vs therfore
acknowledge the great goodneſſe and mercie of our God, which
forgetteth not nor omitteth any thing of all that which might remedie
our vices. And withall let vs acknowledge the peruerſneſſe which
is in vs, that wee flatter not our ſelues, nor geue the bridle to our
affections, ſithence we haue neede to bee conſtreined, and that God
geue vs many prickes with the ſpurre, as to dull and reſtie iades.
And when God pricketh and ſpurreth vs in ſuch ſort, knowe we that
it is not without good cauſe, but that he doth it, becauſe we are ſo croked
and peruerſe to be ruled, becauſe wee are ſo froward and rebellious.
Let vs then beginne to diſpleaſe our ſelues in all our luſtes
and affections, and learne to impriſon our ſelues ſo farre, that nothing
hinder vs to follow the way which God would lead vs in. And
although our nature alwayes reſiſt, yet let vs enforce our ſelues to
walke after his will, vntill we bee fullie ruled and ordered by our
God. Loe what we haue to beare in minde vpon this place: beſides
that which ſhalbe by and by touched of man ſeruantes, and maide
ſeruantes: namelie, that God putteth the Iewes in remembraunce
that they were ſeruantes in the land of Egypt, and therefore that
they ought with all gentleneſſe, to entreate them, which are vnder
their rule and authoritie. For he ſaith, Thy man ſeruant, & thy maid,
ſhall reſt them ſelues. And why? For thou waſt ſomtime in bondage:
the time hath bene thou couldeſt well haue wiſhed that one had giuen
thee ſome reſt and releaſe from thy labours. Thou oughteſt then to
vſe ſuch gentleneſſe towardes them, which are vnder thy hand. But
here it might ſeeme, that God hath ordeined the Sabbaoth day, not
for a ſpirituall order, (as it hath bene aboue ſaid:) but that it might
ſerue as a meane vnto charitie. For he ſaith, If thou wert in bondage,
wouldeſt thou not that one ſhoulde giue thee ſome releaſe?

Wouldeſt thou alwayes bee oppreſſed with labour and trauell?
Surely by thy good will thou wouldeſt not. It behoueth then that
thou be are alſo with others. Now this is not for the ſeruice of God,
but rather inſtituted for common charitie, whiche ought to bee extended
toward our neighbours, howe euer in degree they be vnderlinges
vnto vs. But for aſmuch as this commaundement is conteined
in the firſt table of the lawe, it is certeine that this whiche
is here touched, is but as acceſſarie. I ſay the firſt table of the
lawe, for it is not without cauſe that God hath ſo diuided his lawe,
whiche he wrote in two ſtones. Might he not haue wrote them in
one ſtone, if he had would? Why then hath he made of them two ſeuerall
partes? This is not without great reaſon. For in the lawe of
God there are two principall articles. The one concerneth our
dutie towardes him: the other our dutie we owe to our neighbours,
which liue and are conuerſant with vs. As our whole life, if we conſider
well, ought herevnto to be referred. That is, that firſt in knowing
we haue a God, to whom we are to liue, we walke in obedience:
ſeeing we hold our life of him, we doe him homage and reuerence
therefore, ſeeing he hath created vs into a farre better hope, and hath
adopted vs for his children, we glorifie him for ſo great mercie and
goodneſſe: ſeeing he hath redeemed vs by the bloud of his ſonne, we
beecome his▪ endeuoring to withdraw our ſelues from the defilements
of the world, to be vnto him liuelie and vnſpotted ſacrifices, we call
on him, hauing our recourſe vnto him alone, we render him thankes
for all his benefites beſtowed vppon vs. Yee ſee then the firſt point
of our life conſiſteth in the honour we ought to giue to our GOD.
Againe, ſeeing it pleaſeth him further to proue our obedience, by
liuing with men in all vprightneſſe, none be giuen to his priuate
profite, but that we ſeeke to ſerue to the commoditie one of an other,
that there be mutuall honeſtie betweene vs: ſo as wee abſteine not
onelie from fraude, violence, and crueltie, but that our life be ſober
and modeſt, that wee bee not diſſolute, wicked, and brutiſh in our
liuing. And this is the ſecond point of our life. Nowe ſeeing
it is ſo, that this commaundement of the Sabbaoth day is conteined
in the firſt table: it followeth that it apperteineth to the
ſpirituall ſeruice of GOD, and that here is no queſtion to bee
made of the charitie wee owe vnto our neighbours. And why
then is this matter here treated of? It is aſmuch as if our Lorde.

did ſay, This day of reſt, of ſome ſuper aboundaunce and ouerplus,
ſhall ſerue you to this, that your men ſeruauntes, and your
maides, haue a releaſe with you from their laboures. Not that
this was the chiefe and principall end wherevnto GOD tended.
For this was not his principall meaning, that there ſhoulde bee
one day in the weeke, in the whiche a man ſhoulde ceaſe from
his labours, to the end he might breath for that day, and not toile
ſo continually, as to faint for wearineſſe. This was not the cauſe
which moued God to ordeine the Sabbaoth day, or day of reſt: but
it was to this end, that the faithfull ſhould know they ought to liue ſo
holily, as to reſt from all their affections & deſires, that God might
wholie worke in them. For the reſt, it ſerueth as a benefite of ſupere
               
                  •
               ogatiō,
as we ſay. Behold our Lord ſaith, Conſider ye that ſith you
haue this warrant among you, that I ſanctifie you, that you ſeeke to
giue vp your ſelues wholy vnto me. Yet, loe one thing which ſhall
ſerue you further, and this is for your profite: namelie, that your familie
ſhall not toile, and ouerworke them ſelues continuallie. For
there muſt be ſome reſt for your men ſeruants, and your maides, and
your cattell: you ſhall haue then this as of ſuperaboundance. Nowe
therefore we ſee why here is expreſſe mention made, that the Iewes
were ſeruantes in Egypt, & that it behoueth they haue ſome regard
of them which are held as captiues and bondmen vnder their hands.
For Moſes ſpeaking of men ſeruantes and maides, vnderſtandeth it
not after the common order and faſhion among vs. For with them,
the ſeruantes were ſlaues and bondmen, they burthened them,
and held them vnder, as the oxen and the aſſes, they had ſo vile and
barbarous a condition, as was pitie to behold. God then ſheweth
that the people of the Iewes obſeruing the reſt, ſhall receiue profite &
commoditie by their familie. You ought to be ſo farre (ſaith he) from
complaining of the time which I haue reſerued vnto my ſelfe, that of
ſeuen dayes there ſhould be one dedicated to my ſeruice: that if you
be not ouer cruell & vumercifull, if you vſe not tyrannie toward them
which are vnder your authoritie, ſuch a day would ſeeme conuenient
vnto you to be choſen. For if you ſhould haue no other regard, but this
policie: namelie, that in this day your ſeruantes ſhall haue ſome
reſt, this ought to leave you herevnto: but vnderſtande you alwayes,
that I haue not ordeined it onely for your familie, but
for this end, you might aduiſe your ſelues, conſidering of this

which I haue ſhewed, that beeing ſeparated from the vnfaithfull,
you be vnto me a royall prieſthood, that you deſire nothing elſe but
to ſerue mee in all vprightneſſe, and in a pure and ſincere conſcience.
When you ſhall haue this conſideration, then ſhall you knowe that
this day ſhall further ſerue you for ſome earthlie profite and commoditie,
albeit in the meane time, this is not that you ought to ſeeke
after. To ſpeake in a woord, our Lord in this place declareth vnto vs
that which in like manner hath bene pronounced 
                  ••
                Ieſus Chriſt,Matt. 6. 33.
that when wee ſhall ſeeke the kingdome of God, all other thinges
ſhalbe caſt vppon vs. For we are of that minde, that if we endeuour
to mount on high to the heauenlie life, and beſtowe our ſtudies herein,
we ſhall die for hunger, and this ſhalbe to turne vs from all profits
and commodities. Briefly, the diuell cōmeth alwayes to perſuade
vs vnder this ſhadowe and wilineſſe, that if wee employ our ſelues
to the ſeruice of God, wee muſt needes, die of famine, and that wee
ſhall liue to bee pitied of others for our miſerie, that we muſt needes
quit our ſelues of the whole worlde. But of a trueth we can not ſerue
God, except wee bee ridde of all our affections, and caſt from vs
theſe worldlie cares, which preſſe vs downe ouermuch. Yet neuertheleſſe,
wee muſt reſt vppon this bleſſing which is promiſed vs:
namelie, that if wee ſeeke after the kingdome of heauen, wee ſhalbe
bleſſed in theſe temporall and tranſitorie thinges, that our Lord will
haue pitie vpon vs, and will giue vs all that which he knoweth to be
needefull and conuenient for this preſent life: onelie, let vs but waite
for from him thoſe thinges whiche wee by our induſtrie and labour
can not obteine. That then is the thing whiche is declared vnto vs
in this place. Now this ſentence ought to ſerue vs as a pricke to ſtir
vs vp to follow that which God hath commaunded vs. For the cheefe
thing which ſtaieth vs from ruling and ordering our life to the obedience
of God, is this, that being to much wedded to our ſelues, wee
thinke this ſhalbe againſt our profite, and we will alwayes prouide,
howſoeuer the caſe ſtands, for our cōmodities, in thoſe thinges which
apperteine vnto the world. Behold how men can not followe God,
but rather forſake him, and drawe cleane backward from his lawe:
for that they thinke, if they ſerue God, they ſhall neuer thriue.
Now this is ſo wicked an vnthankfulneſſe, that it ſerueth to aggranate
an hundred times more our rebellion. What muſt we then doe?
Let vs note well, that we ſhall not be able to ſerue God with a frank

and free courage, except wee bee reſolued, that he prouideth for our
whole life, and that he will not forgette vs, as it is ſpoken in the perſon
of Ioſue.Ioſu
                     •
                  . 1. 9. Heb. 13. 5. For the Apoſtle in the Epiſtle to the Hebrews applieth
this doctrine to all the faithfull. Yea, to drawe them from ouermuch
care and carcking, he ſaith, Thy God will not faile thee, he will not
forget thee. So if once we can be perſuaded that God watcheth ouer
vs, & that he will liberally prouide for our neceſſities, it is certeine
we ſhall not bee ſo 
                  •
               uſied in our earthlie affections, wee ſhall not
bee ſo eaſilie turned from ſeruing of GOD, we ſhall not be hindered
to meditate and thinke on the heauenlie life, we ſhall ſo paſſe
through this world, as to vſe the creatures thereof, as if we vſed them
not, becauſe wee know alwayes, that we ought to make our race further.
Loe, in ſumme, what we haue to beare in mind of this doctrine,
wherein our Lord ſheweth, that albeit this which he commaundeth
of obſeruing the Sabbaoth day bee ſpirituall: yet notwithſtanding,
that men ſhall perceiue herein their gaine and profite, 
                  〈◊〉
                that God
will bleſſe them, when they ſhall haue a reſpect vnto him, and ſhall
not ouer buſilie & gredilie ſeeke after that which belongeth to their
temporall and earthlie commodities. Now withall we are warned,
that if any beare rule ouer others, they ought not to deſpiſe their
neighbours, although they be inferiour to them. And this extendeth
it ſelfe verie farre. For we ought not onely to expound it of men ſeruantes,
and of maides: but of the poore, of them which are neither in
authoritie, credite, nor eſtimation: of all ſubiectes, of them whiche
in the eye of the world are not worthie to be compared with vs. For
wee ſee what the pride of men is, although wee haue no occaſion to
aduaunce our ſelues aboue others, yet euerie one will deſire, and
ſeeke after ſome preeminence and ſuperioritie. Seeing then there is
ſuch an hautines in vs, that euerie one wiſheth to be lifted aboue his
neighbours: yea, though he haue nothing in him why he ſhould bee
aduanced, to what outrage will we growe when we be exalted? Behold
them which are in the ſeate of iuſtice, they would beare them
ſelues in hand, that the worlde were created onely for them, if God
held them not backe by his ſpirit, and ſhewed them, that they ought
not to oppreſſe them whiche are vnder their charge: but rather
that it belongeth vnto them to execute the office of fathers, to hold
their neighbours as their children: and that foraſmuch as GOD
hath ſo highlie honoured them, they ought to walke in ſo much the

greater humilitie. They which preach the woord of GOD, and
haue charge to guide and conduct others, if they thinke they ought
to bee exempted out of the common ranke, and deſpiſe others, woe
come to them. For it were better they brake their necke going vp
into the pulpit, if they take not paines them ſelues, firſt to walke after
God, and to liue peaceably with their neighbours, and to ſhewe
that they are ſheepe of the flocke of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. Nowe,
for all this it is true, that the rich may well bee ſerued of the poorer
ſort, and when a man hireth men ſeruantes and maides for his monie,
he will not ſet his ſeruant aboue him ſelfe at the table, he will not
haue him lie in the ſame bedde with him. Yet notwithſtanding,
though he haue ſome ſuperioritie ouer him, yet ought we alwayes to
beare in minde this point, that we are vnited together as it were in
one fleſh, and that we are all formed to the image of God. If we conſider
that they, which are deſcended from the race of Adam, bee our
fleſh and our bone, this ought to frame vs to all gentleneſſe, although
wee are as brute and ſauage beaſtes one ſet againſt an other. When
the Prophete Eſaie would put men in minde of their baſe eſtate,Eſaie. 58. 7. to
induce them to relieue their poore brethren, he ſaith: Thou ſhalt not
deſpiſe thine owne fleſh. See where I ought to viewe, and beholde
my ſelfe as in a looking glaſſe: namelie, in as many creatures as are
in the world. Marke wee this for one point. But yet there remaineth
more, that is, that the image of God is imprinted in all men. Then
I deſpiſe not onely mine owne fleſhe: when I ſhall oppreſſe any one,
but I violate the image of God aſmuch as lieth in me. So then let
vs diligentlie note, that God would in this place declare vnto them
which are in authoritie, and credit, to them which are rich, and to ſuch
as bee in ſome degree of honour aboue others, that they ought not
to abuſe thoſe whiche are vnder their handes, that they ought
not to trouble and torment them aboue meaſure, that they ought
alwayes to thinke on this, that wee are all deſcended from the
line of Adam, that wee haue one common nature, that the image
of GOD is imprinted in vs all. Loe, what wee haue
to note, and aboue all other thinges to beare in minde, ſeeing
Ieſus Chriſt is deſcended hither belowe to bee made of no reputation,
to condemne our pride and lofteneſſe, and to ſhewe vs,
that there is no way to ſerue GOD but in humilitie, and that

he hath made vs all members of his bodie, as well ſeruantes, as
thoſe whiche are maiſters and ſuperiours, ſhewing that there is
no difference, when the queſtion is of comming vnto GOD,
and hauing reſpecte vnto him, and his ſeruice. Wee muſt therefore
bee folowers of him. And becauſe wee are all, both ſmall
and great, members of his bodie, and that he is our head, there
is greate reaſon, that euerie one applie him ſelfe to his neighbours.
And ſithence GOD hath declared him ſelfe our father,
in more familiar wiſe than he did vnto them whiche liued vnder
the Lawe, let vs bee ſo much the more perſuaded to mainteine
a fraternitie and brotherhood among vs. And this haue wee further
to beare in minde vppon this place. There reſteth yet one
point to be obſerued touching this, that GOD hath ordeined
a memoriall and remembraunce to the Iewes, that they were
ſometimes in Egypt as poore ſlaues and bondmen. Nowe wee
knowe, that in that place they were euill and cruellie handled. But
for that, they then ſighed and cried vnto God, and he heard them,
for that they then deſired to bee borne withall, and to bee releaſed
from ſome of their miſerie, GOD ſheweth that they ought alſo to
doe the like. And this conteineth a good and profitable doctrine:
namelie, that when we looke vnto our ſelues, we may the better bee
induced to acquite our ſelues of our dutie: and contrarie wiſe, when
wee become cruell towardes our neighbours, this is becauſe wee
are beecome dronken with our owne eaſe, and conſider not the
pouertie and miſerie wee haue bene in, or happilie may come
vnto. He whiche hath bene hungrie and thirſtie, in ſuch ſorte,
that he hath deſired that ſome one woulde ſuccour him in his neceſſitie,
when he ſeeth a poore man, and thinketh: Well, I haue
bene in the like neceſſitie, when I could haue bene willing to bee
aided and relieued: yea, me thought ſome ſhould haue had pitie
on mee to ſuccour me: he (I ſay) which thinketh of theſe thinges,
when hee ſeeth a poore man in neede, ſhall he not haue his
hearte mollified and ſoftened? But what? When wee are
at our eaſe, there is no talke of remembring our 
                  •
               eede and
pouertie, but rather we imagine and ſuppoſe, that we are herein
exempted, and not to bee numbered in the common 
                  〈◊〉
                of
men. And that is the cauſe why wee forgette our ſelues, and
take no pitie and compaſſion vppon our neighbours in any

miſerie they ſuffer. With ſo much greater heede then wee ought to
beare in minde this place, wherein the Lord ſeeing vs ſo blinde, ſo
giuen to the loue of our ſelues, ſo well contented to be plunged in our
owne delights & pleaſures, ſo careleſſe of them which endure penurie,
and are in neceſſitie, expoſtulateth with vs in this wiſe: And what
are you? Haue you neuer bene in any neceſſitie? And when you ouerflowe
your bankes in your wicked dealinges againſt them, haue
you no care to thinke: Behold, theſe creatures are formed to the image
of God, if we committe any outrage againſt them, ſhall God
take pitie of vs? Let vs then practiſe this doctrine in our whole life:
and as often as we ſhall ſee any oppreſſed with miſerie, let vs remember
to ſay, Goe to, haue not I bene in neceſſitie aſwell as
they? And if nowe I were in the ſame eſtate, would I not deſire to bee
ſuccoured? Seeing then it is ſo, ought wee to exempt our ſelues
out of ſuch a condition? At leaſt let vs doe to an other as wee would
that one ſhould doe vnto vs: for nature hath taught vs this, and
wee neede not to goe to ſchole to learne it. There ſhall neede then
no other euidence to condemne vs, than this whiche our Lorde
hath alreadie ſhewen vs by experience. When wee ſhall beare
in minde to commen thus with our owne heartes, without all
doubt wee ſhalbe touched with ſome pitie to helpe them whiche
ſtand in neede and neceſſitie: and that we ſhalbe moued to compaſſion,
ſeeing them endure miſerie: ſo that if wee haue the power
and abilitie to ſuccour and relieue them, euerie one of vs will employ
him ſelfe herein. Yee ſee then what wee haue to note vppon
this place, when it is ſaid, Thou waſt a ſtraunger in the land
of Egypt: It behoueth therefore that nowe thou alſo eaſe them
whiche are vnder thy hande: for when thou waſt a ſeruant, thou
couldeſt haue bene verie willing that one ſhould haue borne with
thee, and releaſed thee of ſome part of thy miſerie. But nowe let
vs come vnto them which were not of the people of God, but did
onely traffike, and had entercourſe of merchandize among them.
GOD willeth that they alſo aſwell obſerue the reſt: and yet
they were not ſanctified of GOD, and this ſigne could not apperteine
vnto them (as wee haue alreadie ſaid.) It ſeemeth then
that GOD vnhalloweth the ſacrament, when he communicateth
it vnto the vnfaithfull, and thoſe which were not circumciſed, to
beare the marke and ſigne of the couenaunt, to them whiche had

neither the lawe nor the promiſes. But we are to obſerue, that this
which God ſpeaketh here of ſtraungers, extendeth it ſelfe onely, and
belongeth vnto this people which he had choſen and adopted. For we
know that if thinges contrarie to the ſeruice of God bee permitted,
although one ſhall happily ſaie, Theſe which offende, are not of our
ſocietie and companie, we ſhall notwithſtanding be induced by their
euill examples to follow them. If the ſtraungers had bene permitted
to labour among the people of the Iewes, what might haue happened
hereby? The Iewes would haue had dealings with them, and ſo
haue defiled themſelues: they would haue made ſmall difference betwene
this day & others. For when examples are ſet before our eyes,
we are eaſilie led away to that which is euill. And albeit there ſhould
be no great occaſion of turning vs aſide, yet is our nature ſo inclined
vnto euill, that we are eaſily induced herevnto. And how would we reſiſt
them when we ſhold be altogether drawen forward into wickedneſſe?
Thus if libertie ſhould haue bene permitted vnto ſtrangers to
labour, and to doe their buſineſſe among the people of Iſrael, they
would ſoone haue bene corrupted, euerie one would haue diſpenſed
with himſelfe for this libertie to violate the Sabbaoth day, vtterly
neglecting the obſeruation thereof. So then, to the end all ſuch occaſion
of tranſgreſſing againſt this reſt, might bee remoued, and that
this day might bee obſerued with greater reuerence, as God willed
that the beaſtes and cattell ſhould reſt: ſo commaundeth he that the
ſtrangers do the like. Now this ought to ſerue for our inſtruction.
For it is to teach vs, that vices ought not to be tolerated among thoſe
which make profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, but that men ought to puniſh
the offenders: yea, though they be but ſtrangers and wayfaring men.
As how? When blaſphemies are condemned among vs, if a man
heare a ſtranger to blaſpheme, to make a ſcorne of God, and yet hee
ſuffer him and diſſemble the matter, is not this to ſuffer a ſtinking
ſore to feſter, to the corrupting and rotting of all the reſt? See I ſay,
what is done when blaſphemers ſhall be ſo borne withall, when they
ſhall haue their flote and full ſaile in their wickedneſſe, and that men
will not repreſſe them, albeit they be ſo open and manifeſt, that men
may heare and ſee them. But it is to euident, that we are ſo farre from
puniſhing the blaſphemies of them as they deſerue, which are not of
our religion: that it is to be ſeene how we ſuffer them in thoſe, which
are together among vs, & make profeſſion of Chriſtianitie. And this

is to our greater confuſion. For when we ſuffer among vs either Papiſtes
or Iewes, or other like (as at this day the world is full ſtuffed
with contemners of God) when we ſuffer them (I ſay) to raile on the
doctrine of the Goſpell, and to blaſpheme the name of God, ſhall we
not breede vp ſo daungerous a diſeaſe, as after ſhort time ſhalbe incurable
and paſt all remedie? If we ſuffer wicked and diſſolute ſtraungers
to make here an open ſale of their outrages and diſſolute behauiours,
muſt it not needes be that we bee drawen with them into the
like wickedneſſe, and ſo be altogether corrupted? So then let vs diligentlie
note, that God will haue his people exerciſed in ſuch puritie,
that not onely they which make profeſſion of being Chriſtians abſteine,
and keepe them ſelues from euill, but alſo that they ſuffer not,
as farre as ſhall lie in them, others among them, to liue inordinatelie.
For we muſt remember that the earth is, as it were vnhallowed
and defiled, when the ſeruice of God is defiled, and his holie name
diſhonored: the earth (I ſay) in the which by his pleaſure we dwell,
is defiled and accurſſed, or at leaſt is nothing beholding vnto vs, if it
be not. So then when God hath giuen this priuilege to his children,
that they may remoue all idolatrie out of the land wherein they dwel,
without all doubt if they doe it not, they ſhall prouoke the anger of
God, and his vengeaunce vpon them ſelues. If now wee would permit,
that the abhominations of Poperie ſhuld be mingled among vs,
if by ſome ſpeciall priuiledge one would graunt a maſſe to obſtinate
Papiſtes, which would liue here, if one would yeald them ſome corner
of the land to committe their idolatries and ſuperſtitions therin,
can it be, but we ſhould drawe on vs the wrath and anger of God, &
kindle the fire of his vengeaunce againſt vs? And why? Sithence
God hath giuen to them which haue the ſword of iuſtice in their hand
and the adminiſtration thereof, ſeing that he hath giuen them (I ſay)
all power and authoritie to chace, and put away from out of the land
all idolatries, and infections of Papiſtrie, certeinelie if they allowe
and mainteine them, this ſhalbe euen to driue God away, that he
dwell not, nor beare rule among them. So then let vs note, that not
without great cauſe our Lorde woulde, that the ſtraungers whiche
dwelt among the people of Iſrael, although they were of an other
faith and religion, ſhould be conſtreined to obſerue the ſeuenth day.
Not for any cauſe touching them ſelues, or for their inſtruction. For
they were not capable hereof, but becauſe they ſhould not bee an occaſion

of offence to draw the people into ſinne, and becauſe the ſeruice
of God ſhould not be violated, and that the land which he had giuen
to his ſeruant Abraham for an inheritance, might be wholie dedicated
vnto him. We are therefore hereby warned, not only to ſanctifie
our ſelues by Gods worde, but alſo not to ſuffer any diſorder among
vs, but that all ſuch thinges be remoued cleane away. Now further
note, that when our Lord wil that we haue ſuch a zeale to mainteſne
his ſeruice, that euen they which profeſſe not themſelues to bee of the
Church, ſhould be conſtreined to order & conforme themſelues to vs
when they liue in our companie, that we ſhal want all excuſe, if we on
our part be not wholie geuen vnto him, & be as mirrors & ſpectacles
to draw & allure the vnfaithfull, & to win them vnto God. For if we,
when they ſhall erre, wil reprehend them, & in the meane while they
may perceiue the like or greater vices in vs, ſhall they not haue iuſt
occaſion to mocke & deſpiſe all our admonitions? So then, ſeeing it
hath bene cōmanded, not to permit ſtrangers to do things contrarie
to the ſeruice of God, let vs know that we are in double maner cō
               manded
to walk warilie & in all carefulnes, & in ſuch humilitie & ſobrietie,
that ſtrangers may be cōpelled & forced to confeſſe, that our
chief deſire is willingly & vnfeignedly to honor God, & that we cānot
ſuffer any reprochfullie to abuſe his maieſtie. Thus ye ſee what we
haue to beare in minde vpon this place, which we ought at this day
with all diligence to obſerue, albeit it be preciſelie geuen in commā
               dement
to the Iewes: for in ſubſtance & truth it belongeth vnto vs.
For as in old time our lord brought this people out of Egypt: ſo at
this day hath he drawen vs out of the gulfe of hell, & hath deliuered vs
from eternal death, & from thoſe deepe and darke dongeons wherein
we were plunged, to bring vs into his heauenlie kingdome, hauing
redeemed and purchaſed vs to himſelfe by the bloud of his welbeloued
ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe
before the face of our good God with acknowledging our faults, praiing
him to make vs feele them better than we haue done, that labouring
to reforme our ſelues more and more to his iuſtice, we fight daily
againſt the luſtes and deſires of our fleſh, and continue ſo long in this
combate, vntill he hath fullie freed vs from it, and reformed vs vnto
his image, in the which we were firſt created. That hee will graunt
this grace not only to vs, but to al people and nations of the earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 7. Sermon, wherein it is
entreated of the ſecond Table.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               16 Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lorde thy God
hath commaunded thee, that thy dayes may bee prolonged,
and that it may be well with thee in the land which the Lorde
thy God geueth thee.
            
            
               WE are now come vnto the ſecond Table
of the lawe, wherein God ſheweth vs,
how we ought all to liue here together.
For (as it hath bene aboue touched)
there are two principall thinges required
in our life. The one, that wee ſerue
God purelie and ſincerelie: The other,
that we liue with men in all integritie
and vprightneſſe, rendring vnto euerie
one that which apperteineth and belongeth
vnto him. Now as the honour of God is more excellent than all
that which concerneth men, ſo it behoued that in the firſt and principall
place, the rule of honouring God, as we ought, ſhould be geuen.
And this is handled & diſpatched in the firſt Table. Here then God
beginneth to declare vnto vs, in what ſort our life ought to be ordered,
if we wil applie our ſelues vnto the dutie we owe vnto men. Now we
haue alſo declared, that God requireth no honour of vs for any neede
he hath of it, or for any profite it bringeth vnto him, but it is for our
welfare and ſaluation, that he requireth it. So then he will proue our
obedience, and the loue we beare him, when he commaundeth vs to
walke in all equitie and vprightneſſe with our neighbours, and that
we liue together in ſuch concord and fellowſhip, that any one bee not
geuen vnto himſelfe, but that we communicate together, and that euerie
one according to his abilitie and power to do well, employ and
force himſelfe therevnto. This ſay I, is the proofe which God maketh,
to knowe whether we worſhip him vnfeignedly and from our
heart. For we might make many faire countenances, and vſe great

ceremonies, but God ſhall not content himſelfe with it. And this is
the cauſe why our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſaith,Math. 23. 23. that the principall point
of the law is iuſtice, iudgement, vprightneſſe, faith, which worde importeth
here fidelitie or faithfulneſſe. Therefore when we liue with
men without hypocriſie and diſſimulation, when we are not geuen to
our ſubtile ſleightes, nor malicious practiſes, wee ſtudie to miniſter
vnto, and to ſerue euerie one in his commoditie: we mainteine right,
& reſiſt wrong as much as lieth in vs: loe the chiefe and principal part
of the lawe. Not that the ſeruice of God ought in the meane while to
be forgotten, or that it is of leſſe importance, but becauſe it is vnpoſſible,
that men acquite themſelues in their duetie toward their neighbours,
except they be led herevnto by the feare of God. Now let vs
handle this commaundement laſt recited, which concerneth the honouring
of father and mother. And here, although expreſſelie mention
be made of the father and the mother, there is no doubt but GOD
meant to deliuer a generall doctrine, of hauing all ſuperioritie in honour.
For graunt we, which muſt needes be confeſſed, that the lawe
conteineth a perfect rule of doctrine, wherein nothing is wanting:
and this which we haue ſaid, muſt needes be ſo. For if it hath not touched
any thing of the duetie we owe to other ſuperiours, as princes
and magiſtrates, and thoſe which haue the ſworde of iuſtice: if it
hath deliuered nothing concerning maiſters, it ſhould haue ſome default
in it. Therefore we muſt conclude, that God hath commaunded
that all they which are in any degree of honour and authoritie be honoured
and obeyed. Moreouer, ſeing all preeminence and ſuperioritie
commeth from God, and that this order is eſtabliſhed and appointed
by him, without the which the world could not ſtande: what might
be thought if God made no account of this, when he gaue forth a certeine
forme of liuing well, and in all holineſſe? Neither ought we to
account it ſtraunge, that vnder one ſpeciall kind of obedience to bee
yelded to all ſuperiours, the whole is compriſed. For we haue alreadie
touched, how this ought to be obſerued in the law, and we ſhall ſee
it more plainlie hereafter. And this was not done, becauſe God could
ſpeake in no other manner, but for our better profite and inſtruction.
For we know, that albeit men deſire to ſeeme ſubtile and ſharpe witted,
yet ceaſe they not alwayes to couer themſelues with the buckler
of ignorance. If we might eſpie that the law of God preſſeth vs ouer
ſore, we would feigne haue ſome excuſe to exempt our ſelues from the

ſubiection of it. And if the lawe of God were not apt and conuenient
to inſtruct the rude and ignoraunt, many would alledge that they are
no great Clerkes, that they neuer went to ſchoole. It ſhould ſeeme
then, that the law of God might not bind them. But when we ſee that
God abaſeth himſelfe to our rudeneſſe, and that he ſpeaketh groſſelie
according to our capacitie, this taketh from vs all excuſe, this remoueth
all pretences whatſoeuer: and euerie one is bound to order him
ſelfe aright, and we all muſt confeſſe, that there is nothing which hindereth
vs from doing our dueties, but that we be rebellious againſt
God, and will not beare his yoke. Lo, why vnder one kind God comprehendeth
the whole, that he might inſtruct & traine vs vp like yong
children, whiche are not capable nor apt to be taught after ſome abſolute
and perfect maner. This therfore is the true and naturall ſenſe
of the place, as we ſhall ſee hereafter. For as God deliuered the ten
commaundementes or wordes, as he calleth them, ſo he annexed alſo
the expoſition of them, to the end nothing might be obſcure, and that
men might not doubt or diſpute of that which they had vnderſtoode.
We ſee then that God hath fulile declared himſelfe, and ſhewed that
not onely his will is we obey father and mother, but all ſuperiours
without exception. And let vs note that God ſpeaketh here of honouring
fathers and mothers, becauſe he would draw and allure vs by
ſuch meanes as were moſt conuenient and agreeing with our nature.
We knowe that there is ſuch pride in men, that willinglie
they bende not the necke to bee ſubiect to others. Euerie one thinketh
he ought to bee a maiſter. How euer it be, it is hard for men to
liue vnder, vntill God order them to this humilitie, to ſubmit themſelues
in all ſimplicitie of obedience vnto them, which haue any authoritie
ouer them. God then ſeeing nothing more contrarie vnto
our nature than ſubiection, that he might winne and allure vs herevnto
after a moſt milde and louing maner, nameth in this commandement
of obedience, the father and the mother. Now this is an execrable
thing, and contrarie to all nature, if the childe forget his dutie
towards them, by whom he is come into this world, and by whom
he hath bene nouriſhed and ſuſteined. Therefore, when the childe
knoweth not his father and mother, he is taken for a monſter, euerie
one holdeth him for execrable and accurſed. And why? Though
GOD ſaith nothing hereof, though wee had no holy Scripture to
this purpoſe, though no man preached this vnto vs, nature hath alreadie

taught vs, that this duetie which the child oweth to the father
& the mother, without deteſtable wickedneſſe cannot be broken off.
We ſee then the intent and meaning of our GOD: namelie, that in
propoſing vnto vs the termes of father and mother, he might winne
vs to himſelfe, that we might not bee as wilde and vntamed horſes,
to drawe backe, but ſhould in all gentleneſſe come vnto him, to receiue
the ſubiection which he laieth vpon vs. And foraſmuch as all
authoritie which men haue, proceedeth from him (I ſpeake of that
which is according to lawfull gouernment) let vs giue all diligence
to yelde him the honour which is due vnto him, and let euerie one in
his order obey them which haue ſuperioritie ouer him, let euerie one
conſider of his eſtate and condition, let children honour their father
and mother, let all the people honour them which ſit in the ſeate of
iuſtice, let ſeruauntes doe the like towardes their maiſters. Brieflie,
let there bee an harmonie and conſent of agreeing in duetie among
vs, according to the order our Lorde hath appointed, which
ought to be inuiolable. Moreouer, when here is mention made of
honouring, this is not that children onely vſe ſome courteous embracing
of their fathers and mothers, that they put off their hatte before
them, bend the knee vnto them: God ſtaieth not himſelfe on this, but
the honor he requireth, importeth much more: namely, that children
folow the counſell of their fathers and mothers, that they leaue them
ſelues to bee gouerned by them, that they beſtowe all paine to diſcharge
themſelues of their duetie towardes them: briefly, that the
childe knowe hee is not at his owne libertie as long as hee hath father
and mother. Ye ſee in effect what God meant by this word of
honour. To proue this to be ſo, can we haue a better and more faithfull
expoſitor of the law, than the holy ghoſt, which ſpeaketh by the
mouth of Moſes, and of all the Prophetes: and namelie, by Saint
Paule? For we ſhall ſee hereafter, that GOD hath declared the
ſummarie and contentes of this ſentence: namelie, that it ſufficeth
not that the children yelde ſome reuerence to their fathers
and mothers with cappe and knee, but that they bee ſubiect vnto
them, and emploie themſelues to ſerue and obey them, as
much as they ſhall be able. And Saint Paule alledgeth not this,
to exhort vs to ſome ceremonie of duetie, but hee ſaith: Let the
children bee ſubiect to their fathers and mothers,1. Tim. 3. 4. where purpoſelie
he placeth this worde of ſubiection. So then wee ſee, what this

importeth, and what is the naturall ſenſe and meaning of the place.
Now returne we to that which we haue ſhortly touched, to make our
profite thereby, and to gather thence ſome doctrine and inſtruction,
which may be for our commoditie. Firſt of all then, let children know,
that ſeing God hath geuen them fathers and mothers, it is great reaſon
they obey them, or otherwiſe they ſhew, that they are contemners
of GOD. And this rebellion they make, is not raiſed againſt men,
nor againſt creatures: but this is as much as if the maieſtie of God
and his glorie were troden vnder foote. It is ſaid, that we haue but
one father which is in heauen,Math. 23. 9. to ſpeake properlie: and this is not
vnderſtood concerning the ſoules onely, but touching the bodies alſo
of men. This honour then is proper to God alone, to be called father,
neither can it agree vnto men, but ſo farre as it pleaſeth him to communicate
this name vnto them. Now ſeeing this title of father is as
a marke which God hath imprinted in men, we ſee, that if children
make no account of fathers and mothers, they do wrong and iniurie
vnto God. As much is to bee ſaid of them which obey not their princes
and magiſtrates. Of ſeruants likewiſe which would all degrees
were confounded, and that they might beare rule without all order.
And ſee why the Ethnikes and Painims haue applied this worde of
Pietie or Godlineſſe, to the honour which we geue to fathers & mothers,
and to all them which are in authoritie ouer vs. Pietie or godlineſſe,
to ſpeake properlie, is the reuerence which wee owe vnto
GOD. But the Painims, albeit they were poore blinde wretches,
knew that God will not be ſerued only in his owne maieſtie, but then
alſo, when we obey thoſe which beare rule and exerciſe authoritie ouer
vs. In ſumme, he will proue our obedience in this behalfe. And
therefore, ſeeing parentes and magiſtrates are lieftenantes of God,
and all thoſe which haue any maiſterſhip repreſent his perſon: it is
certeine, that if one ſette them at naught, it is as muche as
if hee declared that hee will not obey GOD. A man may make
ſome faire proteſtation to the contrarie, but the thing notwithſtanding
is ſo for all that. If the poore vnfaithfull and vnbeeleuing ones
knew this, and that GOD left vnto them ſuch an affection, what
excuſe ſhall there be left for vs, if we vnderſtand it not much better?
When we heare that all parentage or fatherhoode proceedeth from
God (as Saint Paule pronounceth)Epheſ. 3. 15. and that by this vnion of Ieſus
Chriſt, we are put in minde hereof, haue we not a more expreſſe and

manifeſt declaration of it? Muſt the Painims be yet our doctors and
teachers? But when they which name themſelues Chriſtians ſhall
here bee ouerblinde, or ſhall ſtoppe vp their eares not to heare and
knowe that which God hath declared by poore ignorant wretches,
woe be vnto them: for their condemnation is ſo much more horrible
and grieuous. Let vs therefore briefely note, that we cannot like here
together beeneath, except this order which God hath ordeined bee
holilie kept and obſerued: namely, except thoſe which haue ſuperioritie
bee had in honour, bee had in eſtimation, and be obeyed. For
without this, there ſhalbe an horrible confuſion. All they then which
cannot ſubmit themſelues vnto Magiſtrates, they which are rebellious
to fathers and to mothers, they which cannot beare the yoke of
Maiſters and Miſtreſſes, declare ſufficiently, that (as much as in
them lieth) they peruert and ouerthrowe all order of nature, that
they mingle and confound the heauens with the earth, as wee ſay.
For beholde the onely meane by which God would mainteine and
preſerue mankind. Let vs adde further to that we haue ſaid, the conſideration
of this which is elſwhere mentioned, that when God ſendeth
Magiſtrates and Princes, he bringeth the feare of them, not onlie
vpon men, but alſo on brute beaſtes. For ſo ſpeaketh he hereof in
Daniel:Dan 
                     •
                   38▪
                and of this we may gather that they which lift themſelues
vp againſt the rule of gouernment appointed by God, are worſe than
the brute beaſtes, & deſerue to be ſent to ſuch a ſchole as theirs. For
our Lorde, to make men aſhamed which are reaſonable creatures,
ſaith: That the feare of Princes & Magiſtrates ought to be extended
euen to the brute beaſtes. May not a man then ſee that the diuell poſſeſſeth
alſo them which cannot order themſelues in all modeſtie to the
ſubiection which God hath eſtabliſhed, & without the which it muſt
needes be that all come to ruine & confuſion in this world, as we haue
alreadie declared? Yes. And therefore if we feele and perceiue in our
ſelues ſuch an hautineſſe as maketh vs worſe ſubiects to them which
beare rule ouer vs, let vs fight againſt this pride of ours, & let the authoritie
of God ſuffice vs for a bridle. For were we more wilde & ſauage
by nature than we are, yet this ought (as I may ſo ſay) enchaine
and fetter vs herein, that God declareth that he is diſhonoured by vs,
except we doe him homage in the perſons of them, whom he hath placed
in his roome, & in whom he hath imprinted his image. To ſpeake
briefly, we ſee that charitie beginneth at this end, that we be humble

and modeſt, and that none lift vp themſelues arrogantlie & preſumptuouſly,
that none eſteeme of themſelues aboue meſure, but that we be
redie to humble our ſelues, to the end we may be ruled & gouerned in
whatſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe God to require our obedience.Rom. 13. 7. See why in
this ſort S. Paul leadeth vs to charitie, when he expoundeth this cō
               mandement
of obeying magiſtrates. For he ſheweth that if we haue
not this mildneſſe & gentlenes in vs, to bow the neck when our Lord
putteth on the yoke, we beare no charitie towards our neighbors. If
we deſire ſuch a confuſion & meddlie in the world, that we would that
rules & ſuperiors haue no dutie & reuerence done them, it muſt needs
come to paſſe that all be ſet out to the ſpoile of the robber, and it were
much better that euerie one liued apart & without companie, than in
the ſocietie of men, to ſee ſuch a confuſion as ſhould be, if we keepe not
the rule of gouernment which God hath appointed. Let vs then well
remember, that to the end we may liue with our neighbours, it behoueth
euerie one to correct in himſelfe this hautineſſe & preſumption,
and not reteine & keepe it in our hearts. But let vs learne to be humble
& lowlie, knowing that this is to order & make our ſelues equal to
them of the lower ſort (as S. Paule ſpeaketh.)Rom. 12. 16. That we may ſo do,
let vs conſider our ſelues what we are. For behold what abuſeth vs:
euen this, that euerie one would haue greater preeminence than God
hath geuen him, & being (as we are) blind, we forget our ſelues, and
know not our own pouertie, our own faults & vices. Euerie one will
thinke himſelf a maruelous man when he is nothing. And herehence
iſſueth this, that we make no account of our neighbors: yea, that we
deſpiſe all the vertues & good gifts which God ſhal haue beſtowed on
them. It is then ſpitefulnes & vnthankefulnes which ſtirreth vs vp
vnto pride, in ſuch ſorte, that euerie one yeeldeth vnto himſelfe more
than apperteineth vnto him, & this is the cauſe why we cannot frame
our ſelues vnto obedience, as we ought. But in ſteede of this let vs
learne by our dutifulnes to doe homage vnto God, when we ſee that
he hath commanded vs to obey our ſuperiours. And beſides let vs
know, that ſuch as they are, he hath placed them ouer vs. If a childe
haue a father or mother, he muſt not ſay: O, loe my father is not at all
ſuch a one as he ought to be, I haue iuſt cauſe to withdrawe my ſelfe
from his obedience: yea, but if he be thy father, it behoueth that this
worde content thee, if thou wilt not aboliſh and bring to naught the
order of nature, either this which God hath ordeined muſt be made

of no value, or thou muſt honour thy father what a one ſo euer he be▪
And why? Becauſe euen he which hath communded thee to honour
thy father & thy mother, hath giuen thee ſuch a father as thou haſt. As
much is to be ſaid of maiſters, of Princes, & all other ſuperiours. For
they came not at all auenture or by chance, it is God, it is God which
ſendeth them, (as S. Paule hereof ſpeaketh)Rom. 13. 1. 2. 3. 4. as all the holie Scripture
giueth ſufficient teſtimonie. Yea, preciſely we are alſo ledde to
know by experience the prouidence of God, & the fatherly care which
he hath of vs, when he appointeth Magiſtrates. Let vs learne then
wiſely to conſider Gods goodneſſe in all thoſe which are in ſuperioritie
ouer vs, that we may therby be moued to orderour ſelues to their
obedience. Thus ye ſee what we haue to beare in mind in this place.
Now ſeeing it is ſo, that God hath compriſed in a word, & ſet downe
vnto vs in a ſhort ſummarie, the rule of obeying all ſuperiours, let vs
note, that by this he reſigneth not his owne right, nor bereaueth him
ſelfe of that which is proper & belonging vnto him. It behoueth therfore
that God be honoured aboue all others: yea, and ſo, that the
honour we yeeld vnto mortall men hinder not, but that we geue him
the ſeruice we owe him, and that euerie one ſtudie to acquite his duetie
principallie towardes him. Shal not he (thinke you) diſcharge his
duetie of obedience fairely, which obeyeth an vnder officer, & in the
meane while ſpitteth in the face of the Iudge, or the Prince? What
madneſſe were in this? Now the like is done when wee will debarre
God of his preeminence, and ſo obey men, that wee make no account
of him which is aboue all. For this is againſt nature, that the
authoritie which is giuen vnto men, ſhould darken and diminiſh in
any part the glorie of God. Let vs therefore diligently note, that
when we are commanded to obey our ſuperiours, there is alwayes
this exception vnder it: ſo that this derogate nothing from the right
which apperteineth vnto GOD: of which it hath bene alreadie
handled in the firſt table. For wee knowe, that the ſeruice by the
which God is worſhipped, ought to goe before all other thinges.
And ſee why Saint Paule,Epheſ. 6. 1. alſo willing to geue vs the expoſition of
this place expreſſely, addeth, that the children ought to obey their
fathers and mothers, howbeit in the Lorde. And we haue ſaid, that
the foundation wherevppon wee ought to builde, is, when wee
will bee obedient, humble, and ſubiect to our ſuperiours: namelie,
to knowe that almightie GOD is repreſented in their perſons.

Now take away the foundation, and muſt not the whole building
totter and fall vnto the ground? But all they which haue not reſpect
vnto God, take away the foundation of this doctrine. So then the
going forward is peruerſe and wicked. Now this ought to admoniſhe
aſwell them which bee in authoritie, as thoſe which are ſubiect
vnto them. If then men and women haue children, they ought to
knowe, that no ſubiection is due vnto them, except God beare rule
aboue all. What is then behoofull and neceſſarie to bee done? It
behoueth a father diligently to inſtruct and bring vp his children in
the feare of God, and that he beginne himſelfe to ſhewe them the way
herevnto. The mother muſt doe the like, that God may haue his honour
aboue all, both ſmall & great, old and young. Let Magiſtrates
in like manner ſeeke by all meanes they may, that God be ſerued and
honoured, let them mainteine aſmuch as lieth in them, all that which
apperteineth vnto this end: & ſith he vouchſafeth to doe them this honour
which they deſerue not, to ſit in the ſeate which is dedicated to
his maieſtie, & to carrie the ſword, which as a thing ſacred and holie
apperteineth onelie vnto him: let them ſhew that they are in deede
his officers. Seeing then it is ſo, that he hath lifted them vp vnto ſuch
a dignitie, of which they were in no reſpect worthie, let them at leaſt
ſhew this, that in his name it is, that they haue all authoritie, & that
they referre it vnto him. Ye ſee then how Princes ought to diſcharge
themſelues of their dutie, euerie one ought to doe the like in his familie
& houſhold. Let thoſe vnto whom God of his goodneſſe hath
graunted to haue men ſeruantes & maides, conſider well that there is
a Maiſter aboue them all, who ought ſo to be obeyed, that his right
alwayes be reſerued vnto him wholy & entirely. Loe what inſtruction
al ſuperiors, in what degree ſoeuer they be, ought to learne, the inſtruction,
I ſay, which they are taught & commaunded of obedience to
God. Moreouer, when fathers & mothers, & Magiſtrates will raiſe
vp themſelues againſt God, and be lifted vp with ſuch tyrannie, as to
challenge to themſelues that which perteineth vnto God alone, when
they will turne vs from his obedience, ye ſee an exception which before
we haue put downe, which maketh that they ought not to be obeyed.
It behoueth therefore that God goe before, and then that the
creatures followe after in their ſubalterne, as wee may ſay, that is
their ſeuerall & ſucceſſiue order. And in verie deede the cauſe why, for
the moſt part, that meekeneſſe & humilitie is ſo little regarded in the

world, that the children arme themſelues againſt fathers & mothers,
and behaue themſelues as wilde beaſtes, that the people are full of
wickedneſſe and rebellion, that ſeruantes alſo are full of diſloyaltie
and diſobedience, that there is no dealing with any of theſe to reclaime
them in what ſort ſoeuer, is the iuſt puniſhment of God vpon
them, which abuſe the dignitie which he hath geuen them. For oftentimes
wee ſee that the Princes beare not rule to magnifie and ſet
foorth the name and glorie of God, to cauſe that he bee honoured as
he deſerueth: but they drawe cleane backeward herein, they will ſet
vp and make themſelues idols, euen to plucke God as it were cut of
his ſeate, to place themſelues therein. One ſhall ſee this, at the leaſt,
one ſhall ſee the Princes reigne and beare rule licentiouſly, euen with
all the raines of the bridle looſed: and God therefore muſt needes reuenge
himſelfe of them. As for fathers and mothers what zeale haue
they to inſtruct their children in the feare of God? All is one with
them, ſo they may aduaunce and ſet them vp in the world: yea, it ſeemeth
they are diſpoſed to bring them vp in all impietie and vngodlines,
in all contempt of God and of this word. If the fathers be wolues
themſelues, they would haue their children wolues whelpes: if they
be old foxes, they would haue yong cubs to their children: if they be
ſerpents themſelues, they would haue alſo a ſerpents broode. We ſee
this to be ſo. It is therefore good reaſon, that God aduenge himſelfe,
when the creatures of forget themſelues, and eſpecially, when men
know not, and acknowledge that God hath ſtretched forth his hand to
lift them vp, & to communicate vnto them part of his honour, euen in
a degree right vnderneath him. It behoueth we beare this always in
mind. But what? Is not this a wicked & villanous vnthankfulneſſe,
when a man, which is in authoritie of iuſtice, knowes not to ſay, Who
am I? Loe I am a poore worme of the earth, & yet God vouchſafeth
that I beare his name, as in his behalfe: withall, that I execute the
authoritie which he hath giuen me. When a man forgetteth thus to
reaſon with himſelfe, is he not ouermuch vnthankful? Againe, when
fathers conſider not to ſay: Lo, God which is only father of all mankind,
yet notwithſtanding he yeldeth vnto me this ſo honourable a title,
it is then great reaſon that I aduiſe my ſelfe wel to render an account
hereof. When maiſters & miſtreſſes know not to thinke thus,
We are no better than others, yet God hath honoured vs, not onely
in creating vs after his owne image & likenes, but in geuing vs this

preeminence aboue them which are vnder our ſubiection, when I ſay
men will not knowe & thinke thus, muſt we not ſay, that they are become
altogether brutiſh & beaſtlie? Let vs therefore diligently note,
that rebellions often times proceede from them which are in authoritie,
which know not their office: namely, that they ought aboue all
to procure that God haue his honor, that he be ſerued, & worſhipped,
that men yeeld ſubiection & obedience vnto him. True it is, that the
rebellious children, people, & ſeruants, ſhal not be excuſed for all this:
but yet we ſee that this is a iuſt vengeance of God, & by ſo much the
more we ought to be ſtirred vp to followe this which is declared vnto
vs, both in this place, & in all the holie ſcripture, where this commandement
is alledged. Let euerie one of vs then haue a reſpect vnto his
vocation, and conſider to diſcharge our duetie in our ſtate & calling.
Let them whom God hath honored ſo much, as to geue them the ſcepter
of iuſtice, & to place them in his ſeate, take good heede they rule &
exerciſe their authoritie in the name of God, & procure that he be ſerued
& honoured of all: let them bee as mirrours & ſpectacles to ſhew
good example, let them hold their ſubiectes in ſuch good awe, & rule
them in ſuch order, that the name of God be bleſſed, & the mouth of all
euill ſpeakers cloſed vp & ſtopped. Loe one point for them. Let fathers
& mothers haue the care of well inſtructing their children, let
them ſtudie to make them to knowe God for their onelie father: and
touching their men ſeruantes and maides, let them ſo ſerue themſelues
with them, that God haue alwayes the principall place. Let
them not doe, as accuſtomablie men are woont, who, ſo they be ſerued
to their owne profite and contentation, care not if God be forgotten.
But let maiſters knowe that God muſt beare rule ouer them: as alſo
ouer thoſe, which are vnder their ſubiection. And this is ſpoken and
noted touching them which are in authoritie. Now on our part let vs
conſider, that when we haue Magiſtrates ſet ouer vs, if we be rebellious,
if we preſume to arme our ſelues againſt the rule of gouernment,
if we ſeeke to ſubuert the order which God hath ſet, that wee commit
not this outrage againſt men onelie, but that we aſſaile & bidde battell
vnto God. And what can we winne by warring with him? Can
we he the ſtronger in this conflict? No: but he will reuenge himſelfe
without ſtriking any blowe, ſo that we ſhalbe aſtonniſhed to beholde
how he ſhall mainteine that which by his owne mouth he hath
ordeined, euen by a power admirable and wonderfull. Thus much

touching the firſt point. And againe, let children alſo conſider and
take heede they be not ouer arrogant and preſumptuous, they be not
headſtrong & geuen to their luſtes and appetites: but that they order
themſelues quetly to the obedience of their fathers, knowing that
they are in combate againſt God, when they cānot ſubiect themſelues
vnder the yoke which God putteth vpon them. Let men ſeruants and
maides knowe, that if they refuſe to be ſubiect vnto men whom they
ſerue, that God is thereby offended, and that they in the end ſhall be
found guiltie of ſo great a fault as this, that they would not be gouerned
by his hand. Now in the meane time let vs note, that God muſt
be obeyed firſt of all, that the people ſo obey their princes and magiſtrates,
that this derogate & take away nothing from the right which
God reſerueth vnto himſelf, as he is alſo worthie thereof. If Princes
will induce vs to do euill, if they will ouerthrow the pure doctrine of
God (as we ſee ouermuch in the world that this furie and madnes is
in many, which would haue religion bended at their luſt, making it
but an image of waxe, which would haue the ſeruice and worſhip of
God ordered according to their fantaſies) it pleaſeth not God that we
be obedient vnto them in that behalfe. For who are they? They haue
loſt all authoritie when they reuolt from the obedience of him, who
hath the chiefe and ſouereigne empire. Muſt the diuels be forced to
bend the knee before God,Phil. 2. 10. & our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and ſhal there be
men found which would vſurpe ſuch maiſterſhip, that in the meane
time the honour of God ſhall bee ouerthrowen, and all religion caſt
downe to the ground? So then let vs learne ſo to obey both Princes,
fathers, and mothers, that God reteine his entier right, fullie & wholie:
and that we be not hindered, to yeld him the honour which apperteineth
vnto him: but as farre as we may, without wounding our cō
               ſcience,
we muſt obey them in all quietneſſe. And though they which
haue authoritie ouer vs, acquite not themſelues of their dutie: yet we
owe them obedience, ſo that the children ought not deſpitefully to behaue
themſelues, when their fathers ſhalbe ouer ſharpe & bitter vnto
them, & ſhal exerciſe too great rigor againſt them. True it is, that fathers
are forbidden to vſe crueltie againſt their children: yea, forbidden
to diſcourage them. But yet, although the fathers conſider not
to gouerne their children by gentleneſſe:Epheſ. 6. 4. yet ought the children to
beare with it patientlie. Briefly, we ought to beare the iniuries
quietlie and patientlie of all thoſe which haue authoritie ouer vs

And thus yee ſee what God would giue vs to vnderſtand in this commandement.
Now he addeth alſo the promiſe: That thy dayes, ſaith
he, may bee prolonged, & that thou maiſt proſper vpon the land which
the Lorde thy God giueth thee. But there reſteth yet a clauſe in the
commaundement, which for that we are hardlie ordered to humilitie,
God placeth for a ſpurre to quicken vs forward, ſaying: Thy God
commandeth thee this. And it ſerueth to the confirmation of the doctrine
we haue aboue touched: namelie, that theſe ſhalbe vaine & friuolous
ſhiftes, to call into queſtion, whether they which are in degree of
honour aboue vs, deſerue ſo or no: whether they diſcharge their dutie
in ttah office & authoritie wherevnto they are called, all this ſhifting
to excuſe our diſobedience muſt be laid aſide. And why? For we muſt
content our ſelues with this, which God hath appointed, we muſt reſt
altogether vpon his good pleaſure.
            Loe, for what cauſe Moſes here addeth in expreſſe termes, The
eternall or euerliuing, thy GOD hath ſo commaunded thee: As if
he did ſay: True it is, that men wil kicke and fling, when they ſhalbe
rained with any bridle of obedience, one ſhall neuer haue their good
will and leaue, to haue them in ſubiection. Againe, their pride and arrogancie
alwayes ſtirreth them vp to a deſire of lifting them ſelues
ouer high. So then there ſhall bee no voluntarie ſubiection, before
God beginne to worke, and to put therevnto his hand. But will you
be rebellious vnto God (ſaith he) when you enter into theſe diſputes?
Muſt he beare rule ouer me? And muſt I obey him, when he is no better
than I? If you ſo enuie at men, ſee God oppoſeth him ſelfe, and he
will know whether he ſhalbe obeied & ſerued of you or no. And when
he ſendeth you his lieftenants, & you wil not receiue them, it is a ſure
& certein ſigne, that you refuſe alſo his yoke, in ſuch wiſe, that his iuſtice
is violated, & he perceiueth that he is deſpitefullie entreated of
you. Sithence it is ſo, know ye (ſaith Moſes) that the children which
are rebellious to fathers & mothers, ſhall haue happily to alledge this
or that: and the people which are occaſions of ſeditions and troubles,
ſhal wel haue ſome faire tale for their defence, but this ſhal ſerue them
to no purpoſe. And why? Becauſe that God, which hath eſtabliſhed
rules & ſuperiorities in the world, will alſo that we mainteine them.
He hath pronounced the ſentence herein which cannot be called back
& retracted. When God hath geuen forth his ordinance & decree, we
muſt make no queſtiō of our dutie, but reſt therin, & haue our mouthes

ſtopped. Now beſides all this, our Lord vſeth much goodnes & kindneſſe
towards vs, to winne vs the better to our dutie, & to allure vs to
obey our ſuperiors, when he adioyneth in the end a ſpeciall promiſe.
It is true, that we haue aboue ſeene, that God ſheweth mercie in a
thouſande generations vppon them which loue him: and this was
annexed vnto the commaundement, where God declared vnto vs,
that he would his ſeruice ſhould bee kepte in all puritie, that wee decline
not to idolatrie and ſuperſtition. But the promiſe whiche is
there, is extended to the whole lawe, as wee haue ſeene: but this is
belonging only to the commaundement of obeying of fathers & mothers.
Therefore when we ſee that this is a ſacrifice agreeable vnto
God, let thoſe which are vnder ſubiection hold themſelues therin, let
them not ſhew themſelues outragious & rebellious, but let them bend
their necke to be ordered in all obedience, and let them ſhew that indeede
they are willing to yeald obedience vnto God: foraſmuch as
they refuſe not to bee ſubiect vnto mortall men, whom hee hath ſene
and ſet ouer them in his owne name. Yee ſee then to what purpoſe
this promiſe is giuen: namelie, that God ſeeing how hard and dull
wee are at ſpurre, would hereby mollifie our heartes, and winne vs
by all mildneſſe and gentleneſſe, that wee take it not in euill part to
bee in ſubiection, and that it ſeeme not an harde and grieuous thing
vnto vs to obey our ſuperiours. But becauſe the whole can not
nowe be diſpatched, let vs brieflie beare in minde, that for to ſerue
God the better, wee muſt beate dawne all pride and preſumption
which is in vs. And albeit by nature we haue this curſed roote of deſire
to be lifted vp aboue others, though ambition reigneth both in
ſmall and great: yet ought we notwithſtanding for preparing of our
ſelues to the ſeruice of God, remoue this wholie from vs. And why?
Becauſe humilitie is the firſt & principall ſtep to all true obedience.
Now touching men, let vs note well, that wee can not liue together
in vnitie and concord, except they whom God hath placed in dignitie
and authoritie be obeyed, except they be receiued in his name, except
men be ſubiect vnto them. Otherwiſe, it muſt needes come to
paſſe, that all order and policie being peruerted and ouerthrowen,
our condition become worſe than the ſtate of brute and ſauage beaſts
amiddeſt the wild forreſtes. And ſo all they which are rebelles, and
reſiſt lawefull authoritie, are enimies of GOD, of nature, and of
all mankind: theſe are monſters, whom wee ought to abhorre and

deteſt. Now when we ſhall haue ſhewed our obedience in ſubiecting
our ſelues vnto them, whom God hath ſet ouer vs, let vs learne alſo,
that we haue great reaſon to humble our ſelues vnder him, and that
in ſuch ſorte, that he bee ſerued and worſhipped of vs, not by ceremonies,
but in trueth, and in a pure conſcience, with the honour which
apperteineth to him. And herevnto are wee lead by all the rules and
principalities in the world, knowing that God ought to haue his authoritie
and preeminence ſo farre aboue them, as his ſeate aboue the
heauens, is higher than theirs vppon the earth. So then, as we are
to remember that the children muſt obey their fathers and mothers,
that the people muſt yeald all dutifull ſubiection to their magiſtrats,
that in euerie familie and houſhold, ſuch order as God hath eſtabliſhed,
muſt bee obſerued: as he will there bee ſuch degrees among men:
ſo let vs beare in minde, that this ought to drawe vs higher: namelie,
to knowe that God, who hath ſouereigne empire and authoritie
ouer the world, ought to beare rule ouer all creatures: briefly, ouer
our whole life. And by ſo much the more we ſee how this curſed Papaſie
ought to be deteſted of vs. For ſee there an hautie empire lifted
vp ouer the whole world, but to what other end, than to thruſt
God beſide his throne, and to bereaue him of the honour which pertenieth
vnto him? For the Pope will readilie alledge vs, that men
ought to bee ſubiect to their ſuperiours. But what? Maketh he any
account either of the order of God, or of nature? None at all, but contrariwiſe,
ſpitefullie raging againſt all authoritie of holy ſcripture,
he ouerthroweth all order and rule of policie, which God hath commaunded
vs. He will call him ſelfe, The vicar of Ieſus Chriſt: and
yet wee ſee howe he plucketh God out of his throne, and will not
ſuffer him to bee head of the Church. Let vs therefore learne to haue
in deteſtation this rule and authoritie, which the diuell hath ſet vp in
this worlde, oppoſite altogether and cleane contrarie to that which
God hath commaunded. And in the meane time, albeit wee ſee that
thinges haue not the courſe they ought to haue, ſo that ſuperiours
abuſe their power, let vs knowe, that they can not peruert, and take
away this, which God hath inſtituted, concerning empires and
kingdomes. As for the authoritie of iuſtice, it muſt bee mainteined
and preſerued: for it hath his foundation of God: it is not with it as
with this diueliſh Papaſie, which had no foundatiō: but let vs know,
that GOD will alwayes haue in this world Kings, Princes, and

other Iuſticiaries. This order therefore muſt be kept and obſerued,
and when they acquite not them ſelues of their dutie, when fathers
ſhall vſe tyrannie towardes their children, let vs bewaile our ſelues,
being certeinelie perſuaded, that this proceedeth from our ſinnes: &
when God ſuffereth, that the order which he hath inſtituted be not obſerued,
but that all is confuſed and diſordered, let vs know, that with
ſo much greater diligence we ought to haue recourſe vnto him, praying
him that he will reſtore things to ſuch an eſtate, that all may ſee
that we deſire no other thing than to bee gouerned by him, as by the
which meane he procureth our ſaluation.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our God, with
acknowledging of our faultes, praying him to make vs feele them
better than wee haue done, to the end that in true repentaunce wee
learne to diſpleaſe our ſelues for to returne vnto him, profiting herein
dailie more and more, vntill the time, that being ridde of all our
vices, wee be fullie reformed vnto his iuſtice. And ſo let vs all ſay,
Almightie God, &c.
         
         
            The. 8. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               17 Thou ſhalt doe no murder.
            
            
               WE haue alredie ſene how, for the better
ordring of our life with men, we ought
to yeald obedience to thoſe which haue
any ſuperioritie ouer vs. For this is
the firſt thing which God commaundeth
vs in the ſecond table of the lawe:
and euen comming from him ſelfe vnto
men, he placeth this as the meane
betwene both, to honor them, whom he
hath appointed ouer vs. It is true, that
when we ſpeake of men, we vnderſtand ſome like and equall fellowſhip.
For wee are all deſcended from the ſtocke of Adam, wee are
of the ſame nature, and all this importeth that men are of like
equalitie. But this notwithſtanding, ſeeing it hath pleaſed almightie
GOD, to appoint certeine degrees, wee muſt returne vnto

this point, and obſerue this order, that he which hath any preeminence,
be ſo eſteemed & accounted of amongeſt men. And we ought
not here to make this allegation: Why? Is he better than I? For
this difference of degrees proceedeth not from this, that one is better
than another: but this is, becauſe it pleaſeth God to giue preeminence
vnto ſome, whom he will alſo haue honored. Now this is not
ſufficient, that childrē honor their fathers by bearing ſom reuerence
to them: but they muſt ſuccour them, they muſt employ them ſelues
for their behoofe and commoditie, as much as ſhalbe poſſible. And in
verie deed Ieſus Chriſt ſheweth,Marc. 7. 11▪
                that there is nothing but meere hypocriſie,
when the children ſhall onely make ſome ſigne of loue or honour
to fathers and mothers, & in the meane while leaue them helpleſſe
in neede and neceſſitie. This is to defraude parentes of their
right, this is to mocke the lawe of God, when men will ſo obſerue
it by way of outward ceremonies. As much is to be ſaid of all ſubiection.
For it is required that we make not ſome ſigne only of honor,
but that wee render all the right of dutifullneſſe which apperteineth
vnto him, which is in any preeminence aboue vs: yea, and that wee
doe this of our owne accorde and goodwill. Men trulie would be exempted
from all kinde of bondage and ſubiection: but ſeeing God
hath ordeined ſo diuerſſe an order, we muſt frame our ſelues therevnto,
and that not by force and conſtraint. For what account ſhall be
made of this, if we obey God in deſpite of our teeth, and our hearte
driue alwayes the contrarie way, and drawe cleane backward? Our
will therefore muſt bee preſent in this behalfe, and we muſt account
it as ſweete and pleaſaunt, whatſoeuer our Lord hath commaunded
vs. You ſee then wherein conſiſteth the firſt ſtep and degree of honeſt
and vpright walking with men: namelie, that wee knowe, that fathers
and mothers, and all others which are lifted vp to any dignitie
aboue vs, muſt haue the honour and obedience which apperteineth
vnto them, otherwiſe God is diſhonoured in their perſons: and this is
as much, as if we refuſed to do him homage, & to yeld our ſelues ſubiect
to him. Now in the next place after this fift cōmandement, Moſes
addeth, That we cōmit no murder. It is true, that at the firſt ſight
it would ſeme, God ſhould preſcribe vs no great perfection in forbidding
vs murders. But we haue to note that God would compriſe in
ſome ſhort ſentence, all that whiche were requiſite to the well ordering
of our whole life. And therefore it was not for him to forget or

leaue any thing behinde. Now we muſt knowe, that the life of men
ſhall then bee well ordered, when they abſteine from doing of euill,
from all wrong, and violence: againe, when they walke honeſtlie, in
all chaſtitie, when they doe no hurt one to an other, when they ſhall
keepe their tongues alſo from harming their neighbors, by lying, or
any ſlaunderous ſpeaking. All theſe good properties ought to bee in
vs, if we will conforme our ſelues to the will and iuſtice of God. So
then wee ought not to maruell that God ſpeaketh here expreſſely of
murders. For this is the better to bridle vs, that wee preſume not to
commit any outrage, or attempt any way to harme our neighbours.
But for all this, let vs beare in minde, that whiche before we haue
touched: namelie, that God hath ſpoken after a groſſe & rude manner,
to applie him ſelfe to all ſortes of men, and to be vnderſtood euen
of the moſt idiotes. For wee ſee how euerie one excuſeth him ſelfe of
ignoraunce: and if a thing be ſomwhat hard and obſcure, it ſeemeth to
vs, that wee may waſh our handes as innocent and guiltleſſe, if we
ſhall haue failed in our dutie: and if wee can ſay, Oh this was ouer
high, and to profound for me, and I could neuer come to any vnderſtanding
of the matter: we thinke all is cockſure. To the end therfore
that men might no longer haue ſuch ſhiftes, God would ſpeake in
ſuch ſorte, that euen little children might vnderſtand what he ſaith.
That is the cauſe, why in ſo ſhorte and plaine wiſe he ſaith,
Thou ſhalt doe no murder. Moreouer, let vs note, that God, to bring
vs by little and little to liue well, propoſeth vnto vs thoſe thinges,
which are moſt deteſtable, & moſt to be abhorred: that we might lerne
thereby to take heede of doing euill. For example in this place, he
might well haue ſaid: Ye ſhall doe no iniurie, ye ſhall vſe no violence
with your neighbours. Hee might well haue ſpoken thus. But he
woulde rather ſpeake in this place of murder. And why? Becauſe
this is a thing contrarie to nature, when men aduaunce them ſelues
to deface the image of God. We muſt then needes haue murders in
horrour and deteſtation, except we be altogether brutiſh and beaſtlie.
How euer it bee, this teacheth vs, that the thing is ouer enormous
and outragious, and which wee ought to deteſt and haue in execratiō,
which is as murder. God therfore, to the end he might hold vs in
more ſtrong and ſure bondes, and the better withdrawe vs from all
harme doing, and from all wrong and iniurie, ſheweth vs, that wee
ought not to pollute and defile our handes in the bloud of our neighbours.

Well then: when one abſteineth from murder, is this all
which is required? Nay, there wanteth yet verie much, as anon ſhall
appeare, when we haue more fullie declared this matter. For God
will hold both our heartes, and our thoughtes in ſubiection he will be
ſerued in ſuch pure and ſincere manner, that we nouriſh within vs no
euill will againſt our neighbours. Therefore, when he ſpeaketh of
murder, it is as if he ſaid: Marke ye, and be heedfull in this matter:
If you had not the written lawe, if you were altogether as the Painims:
yet ſhould you haue this imprinted in your heartes, that murder
is a thing wicked and deteſtable. Now I declare to you, that I
hold & condemne for murderers all thoſe which commit any outrage
againſt their neighbours, all thoſe which deuiſe any thing againſt
them, all thoſe which nouriſh within their heartes hatred and rancour.
Loe how God interpreteth him ſelfe. Now let vs diligentlie
note, that not without great cauſe, our Lorde hath forbidden ſuch
murders. And why? Becauſe we can not dwell with men, but in abſteining
from all iniurie and violence. Howbeit, vnder one ſpeciall
kinde, he hath forbidden the whole. And why? For if he had vſed
many woordes, and made ſome long diſcourſe, one might haue ſaid:
I remember not ſo long a leſſon, and it was to hard for me. Loe why
God would ſpeake in one word, euen to the end his doctrine might
by and by be learned, & that his lawe might eaſily bee imprinted in
memorie. We neede not turne ouer many leaues, wee neede not haue
any great regiſters, and volumes: this ſufficeth, that God hath in ten
woordes compriſed the rule of well liuing. What ſhall he now be,
which may alledge, and ſay: I haue forgotten ſuch an article, I haue
not vnderſtood it. For can we not beare in minde ten woordes? Wee
ſee then now, how God would hold men conuicted of ſhamleſneſſe,
when they haue not well vnderſtood that, which they ought to doe.
Yee ſee then why God hath ſpoken after ſo briefe and ſhort a maner.
Moreouer, he hath ſo chewed theſe things, as the Prouerbe is, that
digeſting of them, we might learne to order our ſelues peceably to
him: yea, that the moſt idiotes might knowe, that it needeth not
to bee any great Clerke to vnderſtand the lawe of God, ſeeing he
hath deſcended ſo lowe, and framed him ſelfe ſo to our capacitie,
that there is no poore wretch ſo ignorant, whiche may not comprehend
and vnderſtand that which is conteined in the lawe. Loe,
what wee haue briefly to beare in minde. Nowe ſeeing it is ſo, that

God hath forbidden murder, as a wicked and deteſtable thing, wee
haue to knowe firſt of all, that he which lifteth himſelfe vp to kill
and murder his neighbours, is not worthie to bee nouriſhed on
the earth, as beeing worſe natured than the brute beaſtes. For
wee ſee how the Beares, the Lions, and other wilde and ſauage
beaſtes, ſpare thoſe which are of their owne kinde, & are like them
ſelues. And why? Although they want all reaſon to diſcerne good
from euill, albeit they haue neither lawe nor equitie: yet notwithſtanding,
euen this acknowledging of a common and like
nature betweene them ſelues, withholdeth them from all crueltie.
Shall then the brute beaſtes knowe well, howe to liue without
hurting of their owne kinde: and ſhall it not bee an ouergreat
ſhame, that men may not bee withhelde by ſome conſideration,
ſeeing that God hath imprinted in their heartes, howe
wicked and execrable a thing murder is? They ſee they are all
of the ſame nature, euerie one doth behold the image of GOD
in his neighbour, and ſhould not this ſerue them for a bridle to
withhold them from all violence and wrong doing? Whither might
our furie further leade vs? So then let vs remember, that albeit
God had not ſpoken, wee are alreadie conuicted by the teſtimonie
of our owne conſ
                  •
               ience, That who ſo armeth him ſelfe againſt his
neighbour, deſpiteth nature, and is not worthie to bee accounted
in the number of men. But now, ſith the authoritie of GOD is
matched with that, which alreadie wee knowe, by the guide and
direction of nature: and ſeeing he ſheweth vs, that the bloud of men
can not bee ſhedde, but wee ſhall bee accountable thereof vnto
him: when wee heare this, let vs learne to walke without
iniuring of any: or otherwiſe let vs knowe, that GOD will
bee our mortall enimie, as hauing alreadie declared, that all
men are vnder his garde and protection. It is true, that this
threate is not here expreſſed: but it is ſufficient, that he hath
ſpoken hereof in other places. For when he ſaith: That man
is created to the image of GOD,Gen. 1. 27. it is not lawefull to make
any aſſault vppon him. For it is aſmuch, as if our Lorde did
ſay, You wage battell with mee, when you doe thus ſeeke to
hurt one an other. For I haue imprinted mine image and likeneſſe
in you.
            If one deface the armes of ſome Prince, it is an iniurie

ſo great, that it ſhalbe reuenged and puniſhed as murder. And why?
For this in like ſort tendeth to the confuſion of all order and policie.
But loe the image of God, which is imprinted in men, and one deſpiſeth
it: muſt not ſuch an outragious villaine bee double puniſhed?
So then note we, that God, in declaring that it is againſt him that
men arme them ſelues, when they doe iniurie to men, would ſhewe
vs, that this ought to withhold vs from doing them wrong, except
we be beereaued of all ſenſe, & beecome mad & furious. And further,
to the end we might better aduiſe our ſelues in this thing, our Lorde
declareth, there can not bee a murder committed, but the earth therewith
muſt needes bee polluted and defiled. As it is handled hereof in
an other place, where it is ſaid, That the effuſion of mans bloud in it
ſelfe importeth a filth,Num. 35. 33 and vncleaneſſe and ſuch a blot, which ſcarſe
can bee wiped out.1. Chro. 22. 8 When mention is made of killing, euen in a battell
allowed and approued, yet is it ſaid: That a man thereby is become
vncleane. And why? Becauſe wee might learne thereby, to
haue in greater horror and deteſtation the effuſion of bloud. If an enimie
be killed in open battell, although God pardon this, becauſe he
which ſtaieth him, hath iuſt and lawfull cauſe thereof, and doth it for
neceſſitie: yet notwithſtanding it is ſaid, That the man which hath
ſlaine him is polluted and made vncleane. And why? To the end we
might knowe, that God hath created vs to liue together in peace, and
that wee can not geue one fillippe (as they ſay) but that wee defile
our ſelues, and wee beecome by and by vncleane before the face of
God. Therefore, when the holie ſcripture vſeth all theſe formes of
ſpeaking, ought we not ſo much the better be withholden from doing
of iniurie to any of our neighbours? Yes verily. Now withall, ſeeing
God hath handled theſe thinges according to our rudeneſſe and infirmitie,
let vs note, that albeit we ſhed not bloud: yet this ſufficeth
not, except wee abſteine from all outragious and violent dealing.
Briefly, let vs vnderſtand, that the perſons of men muſt bee accounted
deare and pretious in our eyes. For, vntill wee be come to
ſuch perfection, God ſhall alwayes account vs for murderers. If
any one ſtrike his neighbour, albeit he ſlaie him not, loe he is alreadie
a murderer before God. And why? We haue alreadie ſaid, that
God hath purpoſely vſed that word, to the end he might declare to vs,
that howe euer wee eſteeme them as light and little faultes, to bee
the occaſion of tumultes, and ſeditions, to haue giuen ſome croſſe-blowe,

that he notwithſtanding ſhall not account ſo of theſe things,
as wee doe. Wherefore? They are all as weightie as murder. Ye ſee
then why God hath thus ſpoke. Therefore, as he hath forbidden vs
murder: ſo let vs knowe, that he hath interdicted vs to doe any iniurie,
or vſe any violence towardes our neighbours. When wee haue
done nothing, but lifted vp our dagger againſt any one, and haue
touched him in anger and indignation, behold a murder is committed
in the ſight of God. If wee would well conſider of this, ſhoulde
wee not bee much more ſober in our dealinges than wee are? Wee
ſhall ſee ſome ſo cholerike, that if one diſpleſe them, but with a word,
loe forthwith the dagger is drawen to ſtrike and to beate him. For
it ſeemeth vnto them, that ſo there be no bloud drawen, the matter is
not great: but howe eaſie ſoeuer they bee in their iudgementes, the
ſentence of God can not bee retracted, when he declareth, That all
murders are mutinies and ſeditions, and all mutinies murders. So
then let vs learne to laie aſide our owne fantaſies, when we will be
iudges of our owne faults, & let vs quietlie and peaceably receiue the
ſentence which God hath giuen: and knowe we, that all thoſe which
violentlie attempt any thing againſt their neighbours, are alreadie
guiltie of murder before God. Loe what we haue briefly to beare in
minde. But now, to make a triall whether wee abſteine from all
harme doing, from committing any outrage againſt the perſons
of our neighbours, wee muſt come to the examining of our heartes
and ſecrete thoughtes. For God hath not giuen ſome ciuil lawe onely,
to cauſe vs to liue honeſtlie:Iohn. 4. 2
                     •
                  . but he hath giuen a lawe conuenient
& agreeable to his owne nature. We know that he is a ſpirit, & will
be worſhipped in ſpirit and truth. Seeing it is ſo, it behoueth vs to
knowe, that he hath preſcribed a rule, not only for our hands & feete,
but for our thoughtes alſo & affections. It is true, that men, as they
are carnall, when firſt the lawe of God is pronounced to them, they
thinke they haue well acquited them ſelues, when they are faultleſſe
before the world. On the other ſide, they are verie readie, by enlarging
their conſcience, to diſpenſe with them ſelues, & to take all libertie
of doing euill. And this is the cauſe why euen the Iewes,
which ought to haue bene nouriſhed from their infancie in the lawe
of GOD,Mat. 5. 2
                     •
                  . they tooke this commaundement, Thou ſhalt not kill,
ouer groſſelie, vnderſtanding that they offended not GOD in this
pointe, if ſo be they had not openlie ſet on their neighbour, to wound

and to hurte him. Therefore, except the fault were euident and
apparant to the eyes of men, it ſeemed vnto them that it ought not to
bee imputed vnto them before the face of GOD. But our Lord
Ieſus reproueth them of this, ſhewing them, that the lawe is ſpirituall,
and expounded of them verie ſottiſhlie. When it is ſaide,
Thou ſhalt not kill: you thinke (ſaith he) that you ſhalbe abſolued
as guiltleſſe before GOD, when men can not bring you to the
barre for it: But I tell you, that whoſoeuer ſhall call his neighbour
Foole: that is to ſay, doth but declare any token of indignation
againſt him, is worthie to bee puniſhed with hell
fire: Whoſoeuer iniurieth an other, is culpable of a Councell and
conſtitution from heauen, ſo that GOD and all his Angels
ſhall arme them ſelues againſt him: Whoſoeuer murmureth againſt
his neighbour, who ſo muttereth and grummeleth (I
knowe not what) betweene his teeth: although he doe not open iniurie,
is in daunger of iudgement. Wee ſee to what point our
Lorde Ieſus leadeth vs: namelie, to ſhew that albeit wee ſhalbe
able to proteſt, that wee haue committed no outrage, that wee
haue not lifted vp our fiſt to giue one blowe, much leſſe drawen
our ſworde againſt our neighbour, and that wee haue not wounded
him, that yet this is not enough: But know yee, ſaith he, that
GOD will beare rule ouer your tongues, ouer your thoughtes,
and ouer all your affections, as by good reaſon he ought. Seeing
it is ſo, who ſo euer ſhall haue ſpoken euill of his neighbour, the
ſame is alreadie a murderer: for the tongue is as a ſharpe
ſwoorde. Therefore, albeit you ſhoulde haue neither ſworde nor
dagger to ſtrike withall, when the tongue is ſo armed, to ſpeake
euill againſt your neighbours, when you abuſe their perſons, it
is a kinde of murder in the ſight and iudgement of GOD: and
although you haue done no open and manifeſt iniurie, yet thinke
yee not to bee quited for all this: for when you ſhall haue but muttered
and mumbled ſomething betweene your lippes againſt them,
it ſufficeth to make you culpable and guiltie before GOD, you
ſhalbe condemned from the highe throne of the heauens, albeit
you bee abſolued before men, and that earthlie iudgement proceede
not againſt you. When we heare this, let vs knowe, that
it is he, whom GOD the father hath giuen to iudge the world,

who ſpeaketh vnto vs. We ought not therefore here to diſpenſe
more largelie with our ſelues:1. Pet▪ 4. 5. for wee ſhall gaine nothing by all
our cauilling ſhiftes: but let vs learne to haue reſpect alwayes vnto
GOD, to haue a right and true expoſition of the lawe. For what
is he whiche ſpeaketh? He whiche beareth rule ouer our heartes
and thoughtes, he which will not bee ſerued of vs with eye ſeruice,
he which is not contented that before men we abſteine from doing
of euill, but will bee worſhipped in ſpirit and trueth: who will haue
that our conſciences bee chaſte and pure, that we bee purged from
all wickedneſſe. Thus when wee ſhall haue reſpect vnto the nature
of GOD, wee muſt no longer extend the lawe of GOD
to the outwarde woorkes: but wee ought to conclude, that when
God ſpeaketh of murders, he vnderſtandeth all enimitie, he ſpeaketh
of all anger & indignation, of all rancour & malice againſt our neighbours.
And in deede,1▪ Iohn. 3. 15. that is the verie cauſe, why expreſlie S. Iohn
ſaith, that he whiche hateth his brother in his hearte, is a manſtear.
As if he did ſay: You may make many faire countenaunces, but
albeit the hatreds you conceiue, bee verie hidden and ſecret, and that
you diſſemble ſo deepelie, that you ſhewe no token of malice againſt
your neighbours: thinke yee not for all this, that GOD
hath his eyes ſhut and cloſed vp. Well it may bee hidden and
priuie from men, whiche you haue not made open and manifeſt:
but when you hated your neighbours in your heartes, that is
to ſay, moſt ſecretelie, in ſuch ſorte, that none bee able to perceiue
it: yet loe notwithſtanding a murder committed before God.
And in verie deede, the reaſon of this is moſt euident and manifeſt.
It is true, that when the Princes and Magiſtrates of
this worlde make lawes, it is not after the manner and faſhion
of GOD: but to this end onely, that euerie one rule and gouerne
him ſelfe according to outwarde order and policie, that
none bee openlie iniuried, but that euerie one haue his right, and
that peace and concord bee mainteined among men.
            That is the intent and meaning of Magiſtrates, when
they make their lawes. And why? They are mortall men,
they can not refourme the inwarde and hidden affections:Act. 
                     •
                  . 24. this
apperteineth vnto GOD, they ſound not the hearte: for this
is the proper office of GOD, as the holie ſcripture attributeth

it vnto him. But yet this notwithſtanding, when a ciuil lawe
is made, although one ſhedde not one droppe of bloud: yet is he adiudged
worthie to bee led to the gallowes, if it ſhall bee knowen and
proued, that he endeuored with all his might to haue murdered one.
If a man hath drawen his ſword vppon one who wardeth off the
blowes, in ſuch ſort, that he touched not his ſkinne: yet notwithſtanding,
the lawes, euen of the Painims, condemne ſuch a man to the
gibbet, as well worthie thereof. And why? For the lawe regardeth
not what is happened, but reſpecteth the counſell and purpoſe of
men. Seeing then earthlie Princes and Magiſtrates puniſh him,
which endeuoureth with all his might to doe euill, although beeing
hindered, he bee not come to the full end of his enterpriſe, what
ſhalbe thought of God? Shall he haue leſſe authoritie than a mortall
creature? Beholde (I ſay) to what point wee ought to come, if wee
will knowe, that of good right God condemneth all them, whiche
hate their neighbours. And why? Conſider wee (I ſay) what his nature
is. Will wee therefore obſerue this commaundement? Wee
muſt beginne in ſhort and ſummarie wiſe with murder. And why?
For God would haue vs preuented and foretaken with ſome fright
and horror, that when we thinke of hurting our neighbors, of committing
any violence, of doing any iniurie, wee remember that this
is an horrible and deteſtable thing, which he can by no meanes bee
able to ſuffer. And why? Becauſe this is a kinde of murder. Yee ſee
then howe GOD at the firſt would daunt vs, and this is the point
whereat we ought to beginne. And if we thinke it a ſtraunge thing,
that God condemneth one boxe on the eare for murder: nay, one verball
iniurie, as we may terme it, which is done but in a woord: yea,
one wayward grudging, be it neuer ſo ſecretlie hidden within vs,
if wee account it ſtraunge, that this bee condemned as murder before
God, let vs conſider what his nature is, and that he deſerueth to haue
more yealded vnto him than vnto mortall men. But earthlie Iudges
puniſh an euill and wicked affection, when it ſheweth it ſelfe: what
ſhall then God doe, vnto whom nothing is hidden? And againe, we
haue to note that, which the Apoſtle ſaith in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,Heb. 4. 12.
That the woord of GOD reſembleth him which is the
authour thereof, ſo that it muſt bee as a two edged ſword, whiche
pearceth euen to the marrowe of the bones, that there is no thought
in vs whiche it ſearcheth not. And why? For nothing is hidden in

the preſence of God. Seeing it is ſo, that nothing is hidden before
GOD, it behoueth that this woord proue and ſound the depth of
our heartes. So then it is neceſſarie, that all that which is ſecrete and
vnknowen vnto men, come into account before God: and by this
wee bee admoniſhed to walke in ſuch ſorte, that wee beare no enimitie
nor euill will vnto our neighbours. But yet notwithſtanding,
wee muſt proceede further. For this is not enough, that men
abſteine from doing of euill, ſeeing they are created to aid and helpe
one an other, and to mainteine and defende one an other. God therefore,
in forbidding of murders, ſheweth on the contrarie ſide, that the
life of our neighbours ought to bee deare vnto vs, that we ought to
employ all our trauell and paine, to preſerue and mainteine it, as
much as in vs lieth. But he would beginne at the negatiue point,
the better to declare vnto vs, that whiche he commaundeth. And
why? For we ſee how vicious and wicked we are: as many thoughts
as are in vs, ſo many thornes & briers are there within vs: as many
affections as wee haue, ſo many brambles and thiſtles: & ſuch like
thinges growe in vs. GOD therefore, not without great cauſe,
would plucke out of our heartes, and out of our thoughtes, the wickedneſſe
and the vice wherewith they are ouergrowen: yea, he
would correct euerie euill and corrupt part of vs. For without
this,Iere. 4. 4▪
                it is not poſſible to moue one finger to that whiche is good,
nay: it is impoſſible to haue one good thought. This is the cauſe,
why the Prophete ſaith, That men muſt breake vp their fallowe
ground, and not ſowe among the thornes, as if he ſaid: I ſee
well what you doe: when one telleth you, that you haue offended
God, you counterfeite ſome faire countenaunce, and it ſeemeth
that you bee as it were reformed, and yet you alwayes continue
the ſame you were. But it is not enough to ſowe in a field, but
one muſt ridde the grounde of rootes and thiſtles, and firſt breake
vp the ground, whiche hath lien fallowe. But while you doe nothing
elſe, but endeuour to appeare faire vnto the eye, the thornes,
the brambles, the nettles, and ſuch other like euill weedes
remaine ſtill within. Yee ſhall not therefore haue any good ſeede,
ſo farre ſhall yee bee from bearing of good fruite. And for the
ſame cauſe our Lorde ſaith here, Thou ſhalt not kill: in ſteede of
ſaying: Take ye heede ye defend and preſerue the life of your neighbours.
And verilie we ſee, by common experience, how men would

acquite them ſelues before GOD, with ſome faire ſhewe and appearaunce,
when notwithſtanding they reteine ſtill their vices and
corruptions, according to that which wee haue alledged of the
Prophete. For if one exhort vs to doe well vnto our neighbours,
true it is, wee knowe not how wee might altogether contradict and
gainſaie him. Wee would therefore acquite our ſelues in ſome ſorte,
but yet our filthie corruptions remaine ſtill within vs, and wee doe
but plaſter and white lime them ouer, as they which would bee at no
great coſt doe, when their houſes are ruinous and full of cleftes. For
what doe they? They ſtop vp the holes and creuiſes with morter,
and plaſter them ouer, and all this while the runious and decaide
places of their houſes remaine ſtill vurepaired. So is it with vs,
wee plaſter and parget ouer, and ſo wee would lightlie diſcharge
our ſelues in our dutie. And yet nature teacheth vs the contrarie: for
if one will ſowe a field, will he caſt his corne among briers and
thornes? No: but when he ſeeth his ground, after it hath bene laide
fallowe, to bee couered with thiſtles and thornes, he breaketh it vp
with the plough, he grubbeth vp the brambles, he manureth and tilleth
it.
            Let vs then learne, that not without great cauſe GOD condemneth
firſt of all the vices which are in vs. For he ſeeth well, that
they haue taken deepe roote, and that he ſhall neuer bee able to
hold vs in ſuch a ſtay, as to cauſe vs to walke according to the rule
of his iuſtice, except he firſt plucke vp this curſed roote of euill
which he knoweth to bee within vs. Loe, why he ſaith: Thou ſhalt
not kill, as if he ſaid: Will you liue in mutuall loue and charitie one
with an other? It behoueth that euerie one enter into himſelfe, you
muſt all diligentlie examine your owne heartes, whether you beare
any hatred, any enimitie, any euill will againſt your neighbours,
whiche may occaſion you to attempt any one thing againſt
them.
            Let vs then beare in minde all theſe thinges: and let vs knowe,
that when wee ſhalbe purged from all anger and choler, from all hatred,
from all iniuries and wronges, wee muſt then come to this
point, to vnderſtand, that it ſufficeth not that we abſtaine from all
harme and iniurie, from all violence and oppreſſion, that we haue
attempted nothing againſt the perſons of our neighbours, that

wee nouriſh no hatred nor malice in our heartes, againſt them,
whome wee haue borne euill will vnto: but wee muſt liue in all
loue and charitie, wee muſt bee as brethren ioyned and vnited
together, to woorſhippe GOD as our common father. Yee ſee
what the point is wherevnto wee muſt come in this commaundement.
            So then let vs note, that when wee will profite in the lawe of
GOD, wee muſt haue reſpect vnto the vices and imperfections,
whiche are within vs, diſpleaſing our ſelues in them, and endeuouring
by all our might and power to roote them out of vs.
Haue we done this? This is not yet all: for GOD will not haue
vs to bee idle in this worlde, he hath created vs not onely to abſtaine
from all euill: (for the ſtones, and blockes, and other inſenſible
creatures doe ſo much as that is:) but he hath made vs to
doe well, and therefore men muſt applie and endeuour them ſelues
herevnto.
            Knowe wee therefore, that when our Lorde will, that the
life of our neighbours bee deare and pretious vnto vs, he teacheth
vs withall, that he whiche ſhall not aide and helpe his
neighbours in their neceſſitie, ſlaieth them, as much as in him
lieth. And ſo let vs remember, that we ſhall not onelie then bee
guiltie of murder, when wee beare ſome priuie rancour and euill
will againſt our neighbours: but that then alſo, when wee ſhall
not haue relieued, and ſuccoured them in their needes and extremities,
when wee ſhall not haue employed all our paines for them
when they ſtande in neede of our helpe: wee ſhalbe culpable of
manſlaughter before the face of GOD. Seeing it is ſo, wee
muſt not in this place ſeeke howe to flatter our ſelues: for wee ſee
what the rigour of the lawe is, albeit in no point exceſſiue. For
can wee ſo refuſe and take our leaue of GOD, as not to bee
knitte and vnited together with men, whom he hath created to
his owne image and likeneſſe? Shall wee not beare this reuerence
to him, who is our father, that wee liue in a fraternitie and brotherhod
one with an other, ſeeing he hath lincked vs together in ſuch
a bond? Shall we ſay that God preſſeth vs ouermuch, that he laieth
vpon vs to heauie a burthen, when he leadeth and directeth vs to
ſuch equitie and vprighteneſſe? Howſoeuer the caſe ſtandeth,

let vs take heede wee flatter not our ſelues, when wee haue intelligence
of the minde of our Lorde, who will haue vs employ
our ſelues, & beſtowe all our aides to aide and helpe one another, ſeeing
the life of our neighbours ought to be ſo pretious vnto vs, as it
is deare vnto him. Now haue wee the expoſition and meaning of
this commaundement, Thou ſhalt do no murder. What reſteth then,
but that we pray vnto God, ſo to guide and conduct vs, that wee may
as we ought, frame and conforme our ſelues vnto his will? For it is
to no purpoſe to alledge that his wordes are obſcure and hard, or to
alledge that there are ſo many commaundementes, that wee cannot
beare them in minde. For God hath ſpoken and declared his minde
in one worde, and vſed ſuch breuitie, euen for this cauſe onely, to bereaue
vs of all excuſe. Againe, that we might not alledge that wee
know not at which end, or where to beginne, the better to vnderſtand
the meaning of this commaundement, he teacheth vs this point alſo:
namelie, that we muſt not, as our woont is, geue our ſelues leaue
to do euill vnder this colour of perſuading with our conſcience, that
it is no mortall and deadlie ſinne which we attempt: but we muſt alwayes
thinke the contrarie, to ſay thus: If I doe the leaſt harme a
man may poſſiblie name vnto my neighbour, I am a murderer before
God. This we ought to thinke: for when we are willing to doe
euill, loe the diuell is at hand to blinde vs herein, to be willing at the
firſt to kill, and to cut a mans throte. This (as I haue ſaid) ſeemeth
vnto vs a fearefull and cruell thing: for nature withholdeth vs from
ſuch rage and furie, as to ſaie: I will kill and murder. But when
one ſhall haue grieued and angred vs: well, wee fume and fret with
him, and this ſeemeth nothing. But are we deſpitefullie handled?
We will endeuor, as farre as we are able, to quite him with the like:
and if we vſe no extreame and violent ſterceneſſe, we thinke we may
well be pardoned. Are we more abuſed? We drawe our dagger, and
wee ſtrike our neighbour: but it ſhall bee but one blowe, and no
deadlie wound geuen, and then wee thinke there is no murder committed.
Behold how men diſpenſe with themſelues. And why is
this? Becauſe they thinke of no other thing, but how to diminiſhe
their faultes. But it behooueth vs, as God hath taught and inſtructed
vs, to followe a contrarie order to this: that is, that when wee think
of doing wrong, of ſtriking and beating our neighbours, of conceiuing
any hate or deſpite againſt them, wee ſet murder alwayes

before our eyes, and thinke: Poore and wretched creature, whither
runneſt thou, whither doeſt thou caſt thy ſelfe headlong, when thou
ſeekeſt to be culpable and guiltie of murder before God? So then
let vs not make this vaine allegatiō, that we know not how or where
to begin, for God teacheth and ſheweth vs, & we cannot be ignorant
of any thing, but wilfullie and wittingly: and it cannot but appeare
manifeſt in the end, that wee would not caſt aſide our eyes to ſee and
knowe that which might haue beene viſible and apparant vnto vs.
Loe what we haue to beare in mind in this place. And withall let vs
remember, that God hath firſt forbidden murders, not mentioning
any thing of charitie, and not ſhewing vs before that we are bounde
to ſuccour one another as neede and neceſſitie requireth. And why?
For wee are full fraughted with wicked luſtes and affections, which
of neceſſitie muſt firſt bee rooted out, as a ground which is full of
thornes and briers, muſt firſt before it can bee ſowed be ploughed vp,
and ridde of all his weedes, as wee haue aboue ſaide. So is it behoofull
and expedient, that wee bee purged of the vices which by nature
are in vs, or otherwiſe wee ſhall neuer bee diſpoſed to walke in
true and perfect loue one with another. So then now it remaineth,
that euerie one conſider of his owne abilitie and power, and ſo bethinke
himſelfe of diſcharging his duetie towardes his neighbours.
If I ſhall haue wherewith to aide them, I muſt conclude and reſolue
my ſelfe on this, that whatſoeuer God hath beſtowed on me, it is
not for my ſelfe, that is to ſay: that I ſhould onelie loue and tender
mine owne perſon, but I muſt haue an eye vnto others: and
when I haue the meanes whereby to ſuccour and helpe them which
ſtand in neede of mine aide, I muſt diligently employ my ſelfe herein.
For there is a communitie and fellowſhippe betweene men.
God would not create ſo many ſeuerall worldes as perſons, but hee
hath lincked vs all together. Seeing therefore it is ſo, that God
hath placed vs one ſo neare another, wee muſt obſerue and keepe
this communion wherein God hath ioyned vs, and not forget that
it is againſt nature for vs to hate our owne fleſh. But now betweene
the faithfull there is another greater regard and conſideration to be
had, than this wee haue ſpoken of. For they ought to knowe, that
they are not onelie formed to the image of God, but they muſt alſo
conſider,Epheſ. 5. 3
                     •
                  . that they are all members of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and
that there is a more ſtreight and ſurer band wherwith they are coupled,

than this of nature which is common and apperteineth alike to
all mankinde. And by ſo much the more ought wee to deteſt thoſe
which ſo forget all the vnion and coniunction which God hath ſet among
his people, and all thoſe which deſire nothing els but to bring
to vtter ruine and deſtruction that which God hath vnited and coupled,
and to teare aſunder the bodie of the Church. As we ſee the miniſters
of Sathan doe, which are wholie ſet on euill and miſchiefe,
that it ſemeth they would deſpite God, how they ſeparate themſelues
from them by whom they thinke they can receiue no profit, and who
ſerue not for their luſt and fanſie. When ſo brutiſh and enormious
an affection ſhall be in vs, is it not a ſigne that the diuell poſſeſſeth
vs, and that the ſpirit of God dwelleth not within vs: yea, that wee
haue not one droppe thereof? Now therefore let vs learne ſo to rule
our ſelues to this commaundement, that being purged from all rancour
all malice, and euill will, we haue diligent conſideration of employing
our ſelues to ſerue and miniſter to our neighbours, and to
acquite our ſelues of our duetie towardes them, according to the
meane and abilitie which God hath geuen vs. And if euill thoughts
and affections, although they be very ſecret and hidden, are accounted
for murders before GOD: what ſhall bee ſaid of the violent
dealinges, of the oppreſſions, and exceſſiue demeanours of them
which ouerflow their bankes ſo farre, as that they are redie to beate
and to kill their neighbours, as much as lieth in them? Muſt wee
not account them worſe than all the Painims in the worlde? But
how euer it bee, let vs on our part conſider, that wee ſhall haue euill
pro
                  •
               ited in the ſchoole of GOD, if we keepe our handes onely
from doing of euill, and our hearts in the meane time be not corrected
and reformed. And further, they which will ſhewe what is the
true perfection of Chriſtians, muſt not onely abſtaine from nouriſhing
any ſecrete malice and euill will in their heartes,1. Pet. 2. 17. but they
muſt declare themſelues to bee brethren truelie, and in deede, by
employing themſelues for the behalf and commoditie of their neighboures,
as much as ſhall be poſſible for them. Now if it bee not
lawfull to nouriſh any ſecrete euill will, much leſſe is it permitted
to behaue our ſelues ſo inordinatelie, as to ſtrike, and to kill, and to
exerciſe any violence. And who ſo order themſelues ſo, are as wilde
and ſauage beaſtes. And if this affection and deſire of euill doing
hath bene condemned by mans lawes, what ſhall this be, when the

lawe of GOD condemneth vs? Let vs therefore learne to haue
an eye vnto him and not conſider of our faultes but according to his
nature. And becauſe he is a ſpirite, and will bee ſerued of vs in all
integritie and vprightneſſe,Ioh. 4. 24. let vs remember, that when wee ſhall
haue withhelde our handes and feete from doing of euill, we muſt alſo
haue our hearts pliable vnto him: yea, and that in ſuch ſubiection
and obedience, that we deſire nothing, but by our deeds to ſhew and
proue, that we are truely and in deede his children, liuing in true fraternitie
and brotherlie loue, with all them which are called with vs
into the ſame coniunction and fellowſhip.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good
God, with acknowledging of our faultes, praying that it will pleaſe
him to make vs feele them better than we haue done: and that knowing
how hee hath bounde vs to our neighboures, and will haue vs
make proofe of the feare wee beare him in withdrawing our ſelues
from all euill, from all iniurie and violence: let vs pray him to
graunt vs the grace to walke in ſuch brotherlie loue and charitie one
with an other, that wee all ſhoote at this eſpeciall and principall
marke: namelie, to honour him as our father, and to leaue our
ſelues to bee gouerned by him and his holie ſpirite, according
vnto his worde: and pray wee that we bee more and more
confirmed in this, knowing that hee hath reached
forth his hande, euen to conduct and holde vs vnder
his protection. That it will pleaſe him
to graunt this grace not onely vnto vs,
but to all people and nations of the
earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 9. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               18. Thou ſhalt not committe adulterie.
            
            
               SAint Paule ſpeaking of the life of
Chriſtians,Tit. 2. 12. hauing exhorted them to
the feare of God, addeth that they muſt
walke righteouſly and ſoberly. Now,
there is no doubt, but that this apperteineth
to the ſecond table of the lawe.
Will wee then obſerue that which
God commaundeth vs in the ſeconde
table? It ſufficeth not that wee doe
not any wrong or iniurie vnto any, either
in his perſon, or in his goodes: but beſides this doctrine, it is
further required, that wee liue in all temperance and honeſtie. And
to this purpoſe mention is made hereof, in this former place which
I haue alledged to Titus, where it is ſaid, That wee haue beene redeemed
by the grace of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, to the end we ſhould
liue in this world in the feare of God, and ſoberlie and righteouſlie.
In another place to Timothie he ſaith,1. Tim. 2. 2. That if there be a good policie
and rule of gouernment obſerued, wee ſhall walke iuſtlie and honeſtly
in all godlineſſe. Now, touching the feare of God, this is
that ſpirituall ſeruice whereof wee haue ſpoken heretofore, that God
bee purely and ſincerelie worſhipped of vs, that wee put our whole
truſt and confidence in him, that wee call vppon him, that we beare
him the reuerence which he deſerueth. But come wee to our neighbours.
Will wee learne how wee ought to bee conuerſant with
men? Loe two articles or pointes to bee obſerued, which he placeth
to this purpoſe. The firſt is integritie and vprightneſſe, that
is, iuſt dealing, that wee vſe no violence, no extortion, no deceite in
the goodes of our neighbours. The ſecond followeth: that wee bee
not diſſolute in life and conuerſation, that wee ſhewe no villainous
and vnchaſt behauiour, that our liuing bee not inordinate. And this
is that which he vnderſtandeth by honeſtie or ſobrietie. Wee haue

ſeene, when God did forbid murder, how in expounding this worde
we ſaid, that God meant thereby to deterre vs from doing any outrage
or iniurie: and not onely this, but he would warne vs thereof,
that wee ſhould ſeeke to liue in peace with our neighbours, and not
ſuffer any to bee troubled and moleſted by vs. It ſhall bee further
handled hereafter touching the goodes alſo of our neighbours, that
we ought not to beare falſe witneſſe againſt them: and this apperteineth
in like ſort to the iuſtice and vprightneſſe which muſt bee in
vs. So then, if we will reſerue vnto euerie one his right, we ſhall vſe
no violence or iniurie in the perſons or goodes of our neighbours,
we ſhall not attempt to ſpoile any one of his ſubſtaunce. But here
God enterlaceth another precept, That we commit no fornication,
which is comprehended vnder the word of ſobrietie or temperance.
For, albeit we robbe not any one of his ſubſtaunce, although wee be
no murderers nor barreters: yet beeing vnchaſt, diſſolute, brutiſh,
and beaſtly in our life, we may not thinke that God is pleaſed with
vs. For no thing is ſo inſeparable as vprightneſſe, and ſobrietie, ſeeing
God hath ioyned them together in his lawe, and that we ſee how
he hath confirmed the ſame by his Apoſtle, expounding by him this
which is here briefely touched. And therefore, if we will haue the naturall
ſenſe and meaning of this place, let vs knowe, that God here
commaundeth vs to leade ſuch an honeſt and chaſt life, that there appeare
no filthineſſe, no looſeneſſe of behauiour, no vncleanneſſe in vs.
Loe what is the ſumme and contents of this precept. It is true, that
expreſſely hee forbiddeth vs, in this place, to be adulterers, that is
to ſay, to violate and breake the faith plighted in marriage, that none
entiſe and allure the wife of another: but let vs diligently note that
which alreadie we haue touched, that God vnder one forme or kinde
comprehendeth the whole, and ſetteth before vs that which by nature
ought to bee abhorred and deteſted, to the end wee might the more
abhorre all fornication and vncleanneſſe. Wee declared yeſterday,
that when men are tempted to doe euill, they ſeeke to beguile and
deceiue themſelues, thinking the fault ſhall be but light. And ſo
from the leſſer they proceede to the greater: God contrariwiſe, to
holde vs in a ſtreighter bridle, ſetteth downe vnto vs the ſinnes which
are more enormious, to the end that being preuented with a greater
feare, wee might not ſo eaſily bee induced to committe any fault.
As if he ſaied, Take heede how you fall, for this might be to breake

your necke. Perſuade not with your ſelues that you ſhall ſlide but
a little aſide, for you ſhall haue a deadlie fall: and therefore take ye
diligent heede. Loe in effect why God proceedeth after this manner
in his lawe, and why nowe hee ſpeaketh not in generall of all
fornication, but of adulterie, which is to breake wedlocke. Now
we know, that if any thing muſt bee kept holie and inuiolable in the
whole life of man, it is the faith which the huſband plighteth vnto
the wife, and the wife promiſeth vnto the huſband. True it is, that
all contractes and promiſes wee make, muſt faithfullie be obſerued:
but if we make compariſon, we ſhall finde that marriage not without
great cauſe is named the couenaunt of God.Pro. 2. 17. Solomon ſheweth
by this worde, that GOD beareth rule ouer marriage, hauing
it vnder his garde and protection. And for this cauſe, if the huſband
breake his promiſe which he hath made vnto his wife, hee is
not periured onelie towardes her, but towardes GOD. As much
is to bee ſaid of the woman, that ſhe doth not onely wrong vnto her
huſband, but to the liuing GOD. For vnto him is ſhe bounde, in
as much as God alſo will haue the care of mainteining marriage,
whereas it is ordeined by him, and he himſelfe the author thereof.
Therefore, when wee heare this worde of adulterie, wee ought to
holde it as execrable and accurſed: as if men would in expreſſe
termes deſpite God, when they will as enraged and furious beaſts,
breake the holie and ſacred bond which he hath eſtabliſhed in marriage.
            Now then we ſee how highlie God eſtemeth of honeſtie and chaſtitie.
And why? When he will that we be ſober, continent, chaſte,
and modeſt, he ſaith vnto vs, Except you be honeſt and ſober, you be
as adulterers: that is to ſay, What ſo euer excuſe you ſhall pretend
before men to make your faultes light and little, I haue you in great
hatred: for all your life is infected before me, you are corrupt & ſtinking
in my ſight. We ſee then, as I haue alreadie touched, that here
is a ſtreight commaundement to holde vs in all honeſtie and modeſtie.
And by this we ſee, how the excuſe of them which ſay, They do
none any wrong, when they are inordinate in their liuing, and full of
many outragious enormities, how vaine (I ſay) and friuolous this
excuſe of theirs is. For our Lord knoweth well why he vſed this maner
of ſpeaking. For it is not becauſe he is tongue tied, and cannot
ſpeake otherwiſe, or that he knew not in what order to ſet and digeſt

his matters: but becauſe hee would ſhewe, that albeit men will
make the matter very ſmall, when they are diſſolute and diſordered
in liuing, hee hath an other balance than ſo, wherein to weigh their
offences, and will condemne all of them as adulterers which abuſe
themſelues to all villanies and vnchaſt dealinges. So much the more
therefore ought wee to weigh this worde which is here mentioned,
when it is ſaid, Thou ſhalt not bee an adulterer. But all this notwithſtanding,
wee muſt conſider of the degrees which are conteined
vnder this commaundement.
            In the firſt place then let vs know, that God wil haue the holy coniunction
in wedlocke kept pure & vndefiled. For if our perſones are
counted pretious, & our liues held deare in his ſight, he will alſo that
the loyaltie and mutuall faith which ought to be betweene the huſband
and the wife, be in price and eſtimation, that ſuch an holy thing
as marriage is, be not ſet forth to all reproch and villanie. And this
ought to teach vs, that GOD will not haue a man caſt an vnchaſte
eye on the wife of his neighbour. And why? For our Lorde hath alreadie
coupled her vnto her huſband. Hee will that her huſband bee
her ſhadow: & that when we thinke on euill, and ſet our minds on any
vile luſt, we ought to ſtande in feare of that which is declared vnto
vs: namelie, that God will wreake himſelfe on all them which violate
and defile the holy coniunction which hee hath ſet foorth in his
owne name. And this in like ſort perteineth vnto wiues touching
their huſbandes: namelie, that the wife ought not to geue her ſelfe
ouer to wicked deſires, when ſhee beholdeth a married man. And
why? God himſelfe hath aſſigned vnto her her mate. It behooueth
then, that except wee will bid battell to our Creatour, euerie
one liue in his houſhold, as he is matched, that this order bee inuiolablie
kept, ſeeing God is the authour thereof. This is one point to
be obſerued.
            Moreouer, we muſt alwayes returne to this point, to conſider of
the nature of God, that he is not an earthly Lawgeuer, that he forbiddeth
not onelie the exteriour acte, and permitteth vs in the
meane while to bee geuen vnto our wicked luſtes and affections.
For GOD will not bee ſerued with eye ſeruice, and forbiddeth
not onelie the acte it ſelfe when marriage ſhall be broken and violated,
but he interdicteth all wicked deſires and affections. And this

is the cauſe why Ieſus Chriſt ſaith,Math. 5. 28 That he which loketh but awrie
on the wife of another, that euen he is an adulterer before God: and
albeit he be not culpable by the lawes of men, and that he may bee
accounted chaſt, as not hauing committed any whoredome: yet notwithſtanding,
before God he is alreadie condemned, as if he had
committed fornication. Therefore, when wee heare this worde of
adulterie, which is ſo condemned, let vs learne to abſteine from all
fornication, not onelie touching the act thereof, but to keepe and reteine
all our ſenſes chaſt, that chaſtitie & continencie be both in our
eyes and in our heart.1. Cor. 7. 34. For behold how S. Paule hath defined true
chaſtitie when he ſaith, That all which are vnmaried, ought to ſtudie
how they may obey God, by keeping their bodies & their minds pure
& cleane. He ſaith not, That they who haue not defiled their bodies wt
fornications, remaine chaſte: but they which tooke paines to keepe
both their bodies and ſoules vndefiled. And when we ſhall haue conſidered,
how God abhorreth and deteſteth all adulteries, we muſt yet
go further, applying and extending the ſame to all fornication & vncleanneſſe.
True it is, that he which breake
                  •
                the faith and truth of
marriage, committeth a double offence, and much more enormious
(as I haue alreadie ſaid:) but we muſt alwaies remember this, that
God will not haue men only, not to attempt any thing againſt mariage,
but he commandeth alſo that men lead not a brutiſh life, that they
ſuffer not fornications to haue their ful flote. Hee forbids them which
are not maried, to wander hither and thither in their concupiſcences,
and to abandon themſelues to all luſtfull meetinges, willing them to
be pure and cleane both in bodies and minds. For he ſaith, That not
onely their ſoules, but alſo their bodies are the temples of the holy
ghoſt, as it hath bene alreadie recited. And theſe are the wordes of
S. Paul, when he warneth the Corinthians, that this were a wicked
and infamous thing for them to ſuffer, as they had alreadie ſuffred fornications
among them.1. Cor. 6. 15. Knowe ye not (ſaith hee) that your bodies
are the temples of the holy ghoſt? Loe then, ſeing God doth vs this
honor, to chooſe our vile bodies, which are not only britle veſſels, but
carions, euen earth and rottennes, & yet notwithſtanding God honoreth
them ſo far, as to make them temples of his holy ſpirit, to dwell
therin, & ſhal we venter ſo to moil them in al filth & infectiō? Shal we
make them as ſtables and ſties for hogs? What a trecherie is that?

What an abhominable wickedneſſe? Neither is this all. For let vs
conſider whither S. Paule leadeth vs.1. Cor. 6. 15. Our bodies (ſaith he) are the
members of Ieſus Chriſt. This is then all one, as if a man ſhoulde
rent in peeces the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, when he abandoneth his bodie
vnto fornication and vncleanneſſe. For it is certeine that we cannot
intermingle the ſonne of God with our filthes & abhominations,
he being the fountaine of all puritie. So then, when a man yeldeth
himſelfe vnto fornication, he doth as it were teare in ſunder the bodie
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, as much as lieth in him: not that we may
do it, for the ſonne of God is not ſubiect vnto vs, to be ſo diſhonoured,
but we notwithſtanding ſhalbe culpable of ſuch a blaſphemie as this,
we ſhall be guiltie of ſuch an iniurie done vnto him. Therefore let vs
lerne that God will, that not only euerie one for his part obſerue the
loyaltie and faithfulnes required in mariage, but in generall, that we
be ſober, and chaſt, to walke in all puritie of life, & not to giue the bridle
to all filthineſſe and vncleanneſſe. The reaſons which I haue alreadie
alledged ought well to moue vs herevnto: and this alſo which
I haue alreadie touched of adulteries, beeing applied of vs to this
purpoſe, may lead vs to all ſober and chaſt liuing. Let vs therefore
haue all our ſenſes tied vnder ſuch temperance and ſobrietie, that
when the diuell ſhall ſollicite vs to anie vncleanneſſe, wee may alwayes
giue him the repulſe, that hee finde no acceſſe vnto vs, beeing
excluded from all enteraunce.Cicero. off. A certeine Painime knewe well to
ſay, That it is not ynough for a man to haue his handes abſtinent:
that is, that he be not giuen to rapine and ſpoile, to wrong and iniurie
any one: but hee muſt alſo haue his eyes continent, that is to
ſay, he muſt not be giuen to vnchaſte and wanton lookes. If this
hath beene taught by thoſe poore, ignoraunt, and blinde wretches,
what ſhall become of vs, if wee remember it not, when we are warned
(as I haue alreadie ſaide) that God hath ſhewed vs this honour,
not onely to refourme our ſoules vnto him, but our bodies alſo,
although they bee mortall, and that we ſee they haue nothing in
them but rottenneſſe and corruption? Seeing then it is ſo, that
God accounteth our bodies as his, and that he will dwell in them,
let vs learne to walke warily, that wee committe no vncleanneſſe,
and bee giuen to no kinde of filthineſſe, to driue God from out of
vs, who would poſſeſſe vs for his dwelling place, and for his holie
Temple. And withall wee muſt remember that which Saint

Paule ſaith,1. Cor. 6. 18. That other ſinnes which a man doth, are cōmitted without
the bodie, but fornication is committed in the bodie. For it is certeine,
that by thefts and oppreſſions we defile our bodies, and our
handes (as the holie Scripture in this ſenſe ſpeaketh) that when we
violently oppreſſe anie, we haue our handes full of bloud, as the Prophet
Eſaie ſpeaketh.Eſaie. 1. 15. and 59. 3. But Saint Paule conſidering well, that fornication
is more ſhamefull and ignominious, and that men ought ſpecially
to keepe themſelues from it, declareth that fornication leaueth a
marke behinde, which remaineth imprinted in the bodie, whereby it
is open to all infamie and reproch. We are verie deſirous to conſerue
our honor and eſtimation vnſpotted, it would grieue vs much that any
one ſhould ſtaine vs with ſome euill & infamous note: why then will
we runne hedlong into ſuch vncleanneſſe, as to draw on vs a marke &
impreſſion of infamie and reproch in the ſight of God, before his Angels,
and in the face of al men? So then let vs diligently note this, and
we ſhall the better be withheld from ſuch corruption & filthineſſe. For
albeit our frailtie be ſuch, that the diuell tempteth & allureth vs herevnto:
yet ſhall this ſerue vs for a bridle, to reſtraine vs to this puritie
which I haue mentioned, not onely of bodie, but alſo of minde. And
moreouer, let vs heedfully note that which Saint Paule annexeth to
the threat he remembreth of wicked perſons, when he ſaith: Let no
man deceiue you with vaine wordes: for,Ephe. 5. 7. for ſuch things commeth
the wrath of God vpon the vnfaithfull and diſobedient. For men flatter
themſelues at this day, as they haue done heretofore: and it ſeemeth
vnto them, that fornication is not ſo great and deadly a ſinne.
Yea, ſee ſome ieaſters and ſcoffers which ſcorne God, and call whordome
but a naturall ſinne, & ſay that fornication is but a ſmall matter.
There are ſuch filthie ſwine which will ſpeake thus. Now for this
cauſe Saint Paul ſaith: Let no man deceiue you. Theſe ſcoffes and
floutes were euen in his time verie rife, in the mouth of the contemners
of God, and manie blinded themſelues, as we knowe the world
is much inclined to flatter it ſelfe. Let none deceiue you, ſaith Saint
Paule, by ſuch lying wordes. And why? For fornication is a deteſtable
thing in the ſight of God, as hee ſheweth by the puniſhment
which he hath ſent vpon fornicatours: as Saint Paule noteth in the
tenth of the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians,1▪ Cor▪ 10. 8. where he bringeth in
an example of a mightie armie which was ſlaine for this ſinne. And
by this, is it not manifeſtly knowne, that God can not tollerate and

beare with fornications? For the life of man (as we yeſterday declared)
is deare and pretious vnto him, they are creatures made and
reformed to his image and likeneſſe. Nowe, when there are one,
two, three thouſand men diſpatched, ſo that God deſtroyeth ſo great
a number of his owne images, that is, of creatures which he hath formed,
muſt we not ſay that there was kindled ſome terrible fire of his
vengeance? And what? Fornication was the cauſe hereof. Conclude
we therefore, that we muſt no longer ſeeke to deceiue our ſelues, as
if our faultes were light and eaſie to bee pardoned, ſeeing our Lorde
which exceedeth not, or paſſeth meaſure in his iudgementes, hath
reuenged it with ſo ſharpe a puniſhment. But rather let vs knowe
and remember, that we ſhall bee called to our account before the
heauenlie Iudge, when happilie men haue abſolued and pardoned
vs, and that when wee haue thought there is in vs no infection and
filthineſſe, God ſhall put vnto his hande and declare it. So then
let vs haue an eye vnto him, and the examples which he giueth vs,
that wee may remaine vnder his feare, and endeuour with greater
diligence to abſteine from all pollutions and ſpottes of filthineſſe.
Ye ſee in effect howe wee ought to vnderſtand this ſeuenth
commaundement of the Lawe, that we defile not our ſelues with
anie vncleanneſſe or intemperaunce. Nowe, if wee ought to keepe
our bodies and ſoules vndefiled, muſt wee not withall warilie auoyde
all the occaſions which might induce and leade vs vnto
fornication? Yes verilie. Let vs therefore note, that they which
abandon and giue ouer themſelues to anie looſeneſſe, ſeeke nothing
elſe than to entrappe themſelues in the lines and ſnares of
Satan: and although they are faultleſſe in the eyes of the worlde,
and none reprehende them: yet are they fornicatours in the ſight
of God. If this were well conſidered, wee ſhoulde not ſee anie
longer ſuch diſſoluteneſſe in apparell, in geſtures, and in wordes,
as the worlde herein at this day vſeth an enormous and outragious
libertie. What if men and women ſo attire themſelues to
ſeduce and deceiue one another, and to laie their baites for fornication:
are there not ſo manie bawdries and fornications wrought?
It is true, they will alledge: O, as for mee, I haue not plaied
the fornicatour or adulterer. But yet notwithſtanding, they
will make them ſelues a preie for Satan, and will drawe others,
as much as in them is, into the ſame caſe. All theſe

enormities therefore, and ſuperfluities, which are committed in
apparell, which are vſed as ſnares to entrappe others, are reckoned
for fornications, and are conteined vnder them before God. The like
is to be ſaid of vnchaſt geſtures and behauiours, of ribaldrie, and filthie
ſpeeches. When a man and woman ſhall ſo frequent one the other,
that they giue place vnto Satan, and ſo tame themſelues to his
ſubiection, as to be helde ſnared in his ginnes, and that they yeelde
themſelues bond and thrall vnto him: loe fornication committed before
God. And albeit there hath beene no acte committed, no
through promiſe made thereof, yet ſhall not God leaue to puniſhe
theſe thinges: for hee is manifeſtly tempted. And hereby wee ſee
howe childiſh and friuolous the ſhiftes and eſcapings of them are,
which will excuſe this or that not to bee euill done, ſobeit there be
nothing meant or intended: as they which woulde that daunſes,
and ſuch other diſorders bee permitted. What? So, that no fornication
bee committed, is this euill and wicked? This is, as if
in plaine tearmes they woulde mocke God, and hoodwinke him, to
buffette him, and cauſe him to propheſie who did him the harme.
Wee knowe well that daunſes can bee but the forerunners of fornications,
that they are to open the gate wide vnto Satan, and
to call him to come and to enter in boldely, and without all feare.
Loe, what daunſes do alwayes bring with them. If one ſay, I
meant no euill thereby: hee maketh God a lier. Saint Paule
ſaieth,1. Cor. 15. 33. Menander. That euill ſpeakings corrupt good manners. And 
                  •
               oe
why hee alledgeth this from a Painime, that wee might haue ſo
much the greater ſhame. If wee accept not of the doctrine and
inſtruction which is giuen vs by Saint Paule, let vs bee taught
in the ſchoole of poore vnfaithfull ones, and of idolaters. For
they knewe well to alledge, That euill woordes corrupt good
manners. Nowe, when the tongue ſhall bee infected with wicked
and vnchaſte ſpeakinges, that in geſtures and wordes there
ſhall bee nothing but ſignes and markes of all wickedneſſe and
villanie, if men ſay (as aboue we mentioned,) They haue no euill
meaning: is not this to lie openlie and manifeſtlie vnto the
holie Ghoſt? So then, let vs note, that when all fornication
is forbidden, it is to the end that wee ſhoulde walke modeſtlie, and
behaue our ſelues ſoberlie, both in our geſtures and ſpeakings, and
that no diſſoluteneſſe, & vnrulie behauior be found in vs, which may

tend anie way vnto fornication. I graunt that all things are pure to
them which haue their conſcience pure,Tit. 1. 1
                     •
                  . but this notwithſtanding
we muſt take heed, that Satan by his wilineſſe preuent vs not, and
make ſome breach in vs. Ye ſee in what ſort this commandement
ought to be conſidered, that we take heede, not onelie of the act of fornication,
but of all that which is linckt thereto, of all that which hangeth
on, and is acceſſarie therevnto: of all that which dwelleth neere
it, of all that which may induce and lead vs vnto it. Brieflie, we muſt
beare in minde that which latelie I touched out of Paule, that as we
ought not to do anie wrong vnto our neighbours, touching their perſons
and their goods: ſo muſt we alſo walke in all honeſ
                  •
               ie, and ſobrietie,
cutting off, and remouing farre from vs all thoſe behauiours
and intemperancies. Now, as all filthie ſpeakings, as daunſes, and
other like vnchaſt diſorders are condemned before God, as conteined
vnder fornication, ſo are other intemperate and riotous demeanors.
Yee ſhal ſee theſe dronkards which glut themſelues as brute beaſts,
when they are well whitled, not ſticke to giue them ſelues ouer vnto
all vncleanneſſe & filthineſſe: they are then ſo beſotted, that they know
not their owne ſhame. Therefore, when men leade ſo brutiſh & beaſtlie
a life, drinking exceſſiuelie, and ouercharging them ſelues with
meat, and after this proſtitute their bodies, and abandon them to all
filthineſſe and villanie, albeit they commit not fornication in act and
deede, thinke we that they ſhall eſcape the hand of God, and not haue
a malediction and curſe fall on them as vpon fornicatours? Yee ſee
then how the ſobrtetie whereof Saint Paul ſpeaketh, is ſo to be vnderſtood,
that if we will be chaſt and continent before God, we muſt
not onelie abſteine from fornication, and from all wicked luſtes and
concupiſcences: but we muſt vſe our meate and drinke ſoberlie for
our nouriſhment, and not to exceſſe and intemperance, ſo that hereby
all modeſtie and ſobrietie be laid aſide and neglected. Loe what wee
haue further to beare in minde. Now, if one obiect & ſaie: And howe
ſhall we be able, ſeeing the frailtie of our fleſhe is ſuch, to abſteine
from al pollution & vncleaneſſe? For we ſee the incontiuencie which
is in men, & in this thing aſmuch as in anie: ſo vicious and corrupt
their nature is. In deede it is true, that men ſhall not be able to bee
continent, for our Lord will that euen in this behalfe we feele the malediction
& curſe of the ſinne of Adam: namelie, in this vnrulineſſe of
our fleſh, except he by an eſpeciall gift vphold and preſarue vs, as it

is ſaid, all haue not this gift, ſo that euerie one muſt conſider of that
which God hath giuen him. But how euer we feele our ſelues diſpoſed
herein, God hath appointed a remedie for them which can not
abſteine. God therefore, albeit his pleaſure is to leaue this marke
and ſigne of infirmitie abiding in vs, yet in the meane time hath hee
aſſigned vs a conuenient remedie. Shall ſome man perceiue this
frailetie in his fleſh? Shall ſome woman feele the like? It can not
be denied but that this is a ſinne: and although it bee an inclination
as proceeding from nature, I meane from this corrupt nature
which we haue of Adam: yet is it in it ſelfe to be condemned. For,
all ſuch vnrulineſſe of the fleſhe, is farre from ſo excellent dignitie,
as GOD gaue vnto mankinde, that we ſhoulde nowe beare
ſuch markes, in ſteade of being as we ſhould haue bene, as Angels
of heauen. So then, all vnrulineſſe of the fleſhe is a wee: but yet
ſo the Lorde beareth with vs, that hee hath ordeined ſuch a meane,
as whereby this vice ſhall not bee imputed vnto vs for a vice, whereby
this vnrulineſſe of the fleſhe, being in it ſelfe vicious and damnable,
ſhall not be imputed before GOD, when it ſhall haue
this cloake and couerture. And when a man, ſeeing that he can not
abſteine, after he hath prayed to God, & recommended himſelfe vnto
him, taketh a wife, to the ende hee leade not a diſſolute life, to exerciſe
his luſtes here and there as chaunce ſerueth, as dogges,
and bulles, and other like brute beaſtes doe: when he ſhall (I ſay)
haue his recourſe vnto marriage, as GOD hath ordeined: loe,
this vice is hidden and couered, and commeth not to account. And in
this wee ſee the ineſtimable bountie and goodneſſe of GOD, that
when he leaueth in vs this vice, ſuch a one as ought to ſhame vs:
yet notwithſtanding, hee ordeineth a good meane, whereby it is
buried and appeareth not. And albeit men bee incontinent: yet are
they not accuſed before God, nor brought before his throne of iudgement,
if ſo bee they keepe them ſelues within the boundes of marriage:
for all vnchaſtitie is not lawfull, as if a man would graunt
him ſelfe an outragious libertie herein, and a wife likewiſe toward
her huſbande: for we muſt take heede we make not of our houſe a
ſtewes. But when a man ſhall liue with his wife in the feare of
GOD, albeit the companie of the bedde be ſhamefull: yet before
God and his Angels it wanteth nowe all reproche and infamie.
And why? The couerture of marriage ſanctifieth that which is

polluted and vnhallowed, it ſerueth to purge and make cleane that
which in it ſelfe is filthie and vncleane. Therefore, when wee ſee
that our Lorde is ſo bountifull and gentle vnto vs, that hee hath ordeined
ſuch a remedie, are we not by ſo much the more wicked and
vnthankfull, if we vſe it not, and if all excuſes which men alledge,
be not hereby remoued and taken away? As who ſhould ſay, That
GOD had not prouided for their neceſſitie, and that hee had not
ſhewed him ſelfe ſo louing a Phyſician, to heale that euill diſeaſe
which was in vs, as though hee had not at all interpoſed him
ſelfe for our health, as wee ſee nowe he hath. Therefore, let vs laie aſide
all thoſe excuſes of frailetie and weakeneſſe, ſeeing that our
Lorde would aide vs in this behalfe, and hath ordeined this holie
eſtate of marriage, that all they which haue not the gift of continencie,
giue not them ſelues ouer notwithſtanding to anie filthineſſe
and vncleanneſſe. Yee then ſee what we haue to beare in mind, and
withall let vs further note that which the Apoſtle ſaieth, That the
bedde of marriage, as long as men and women keepe them ſelues
together in the feare of God,Heb. 13. 4. and in all modeſtie and ſobrietie, that
euen this bedde is honourable. So that, albeit by great reaſon it bee
in it ſelfe ſhamefull: yet God turneth it all into honour. It is not
lightlie to be conſidered, that the Apoſtle calleth that honourable before
God, which except he did pardon it, were ſhamefull euen before
men. But he pronounceth malediction and vengeance vpon all
adulterers and fornicatours. When wee heare ſuch a ſentence pronounced
of marriage, let vs learne to ſhrowde our ſelues vnder ſo
honourable a ſhadowe, if wee haue neede thereof, that our luſtfull
deſire bee not condemned before GOD, and before his Angels.
And they which ſhalbe able to abſteine from marriage, let
them ſo conſider of their abſteining for a time, that if neede ſhall require,
they reiect not, but haue recourſe vnto this remedie, which
GOD hath appointed: and let them ſo loue out of marriage from
day to day, that they be alwayes preſt and readie to order themſelues
to the rule of GOD, when hee ſhall call them vnto this
eſtate. But nowe, here wee may ſee, howe Sathan hath euerthrowen
the whole order which GOD hath aſſigned: yea, (euen vnder
the colour of holineſſe and religion) we ſee what abhominations are
hereof proceeded: as among the Papiſtes it ſeemeth that it is the
moſt Angelical vertue that may be, to liue ſingle & not to be maried.

Loe, an eſtate of all perfection, will the Monkes ſay, when they are
not married. The Prieſtes will ſay, that hauing ſollemnized their
vowes, they are dedicated to God. Againe they will ſay, We are of
his Clergie, we are as the floure of his Church, wee muſt be ſeparated
from the common filthes and pollutions of the world. So then among
the Papiſtes one ſhalbe thought to come neere the ſtate of the
Angels in heauen, when he is not married. Nowe in the meane time
we ſee how God is mocked with ſo wicked and diueliſh a preſumption:
for conſider wee what beaſtlie abhominations haue followed of
this, that marriage hath bene ſo contemned and deſpiſed. See theſe
Prieſtes, theſe Monkes, theſe Nonnes, which deſpitefullie reiecte
this benefit which God preſenteth vnto them: namelie, that if there
be anie infirmitie in them, they may matrie: but they deſpiſe and diſdaine
it as a thing filthie & defiled. And this is euen to warre againſt
nature. And therefore was it not neceſſarie that God ſhould reuenge
him ſelfe of ſo preſumptuous a pride, when men ſo deſpitefully trample
vnder foote a remedie which he giueth them? Shall we not think
that diſeaſed perſon out of his wittes, which in ſtead of receiuing the
potion which is giuen him for his helth, tumbleth it to the ground in
deſpite of his Phyſician? ſo enraged are al theſe angels of hell of the
Papaſie, all this peſtilent vermine of Prieſtes, of Monkes, and of
Nonnes, which haue reiected holie marriage: in which deede of
theirs, they bidde battell openlie to God. And not contenting them
ſelues with this, they ouerflowe their bankes in ſuch ſorte, that they
dare vtter with full mouth thoſe blaſphemies, which ought to make
the haires of all men, which heare them, to ſtande on ende. Were
there no more but this, yet hereby might we ſee, that the diuell hath
gotten there all the rule into his hand, and that this is the vſe of Antichriſt,
and of this Apoſtolical ſeate of Rome, to ſpue out ſuch blaſphemies:
as when it hath bene there pronounced, That they which
are in the fleſh, can not pleaſe God: that we muſt be ſeparated from
all vncleanneſſe, and therefore that Prieſts muſt be forbidden to marie.
Loe,Syricius. the verie words of a Pope, which notwithſtanding haue bin
regiſtred to poſteritie, as if it had bene an oracle comming from heauen.
Nowe, if the diuell ſhould haue all the ſwinge hee might wiſh:
yea, ſhould be vnchained and let looſe in the world, could hee ſpeake
after a more deteſtable maner, to deſpite God, for inſtituting of marriage,
than to ſay: That they which are in the fleſhe can not pleaſe

God? This is, as if he did condemne all mankinde: for in this hee
condemneth, not onelie them which liue at this day, but all the holie
fathers which haue liued vnder the lawe, all the holie Patriarches,
all the Apoſtles, and the holie Martyrs: ſo behold a diuell of Rome,
which will baniſh out of the kingdome of heauen, both the Apoſtles,
the Martyrs, & all the holie Fathers. Thus he which wilbe in the
Paradiſe of the Pope, muſt be a companion of the diuell of hell: for
albeit this be an enormous and outragious thing, that this miſcreant
Syrice hath pronounced ſuch a blaſphemie, as therby to exclude
the greter part of the holieſt perſonages, which euer haue liued from
the kingdome of heauen: yet would GOD neuer haue ſuffered, that
ſuch an horrible blaſphemie ſhould haue bene pronounced, but that
thereby he would make manifeſt this abhominable ſeate of Rome,
when he would permit theſe diuels ſo farre, as vnder a colour of holineſſe,
to reiect marriage, and ſuffer them for a iuſt vengeance, to looſe
the bridle to all wicked and infectious luſtes, and to inſect the world
with their deteſtable Sodomitries: in ſo much that they exceede in
that wickedneſſe, which the Painims (men without God) haue had
in horrour and execration. Now, by this we are warned (as I haue
alreadie ſaid) not to ſet light by the giftes and benefites of God, but
to vſe them with al ſobrietie, ſo that they which cannot conteine them
ſelues, bend their neckes, and receiue with all gentleneſſe, the yoke
of marriage, ſubiecting them ſelues therevnto: knowing, that when
the huſbandes ſhall beare with the wiues, and the wiues ſhall ſeeke
to liue in peace and good quietneſſe with their huſbands, this ſhalbe a
ſacrifice acceptable vnto God. If they haue a great charge of children,
let them take heede to nouriſh and bring them vp, be they poore
or rich, knowing that God accepteth & receiueth in good part, this
ſeruice. Let women alſo, when they ſhall haue much trouble & griefe
in caring for their houſhold, knowe, that theſe are ſo manie ſacrifices
acceptable vnto God. And albeit marriage be contemned by theſe
diuels, which (for to deſpite God) imagine it an Angelicall perfection,
to abſteine from it: let them notwithſtanding, which are in this
holie eſtate, knowe, that God accepteth of them, that hee receiueth
them, that hee gardeth and protecteth their houſe and familie. For,
ſeeing he ſaith, That he is the authour of marriage, he will bleſſe it,
when we ſhall proceede therein, according to his will and pleaſure.
Let them which are not married, take diligent heede notwithſtanding,

to walke in the feare of God, and to eſteeme and honour marriage
as it behoueth. Let both the one and the other endeuour to
keepe them ſelues in all puritie, both of bodie and of minde, as S.
Paule hereof ſpeaketh,1. Cor. 7. 34. in the ſeuenth of the firſt to the Corinthians,
where he condemneth not the widowes and the reſt which abſteine
from marriage, but hee exhorteth them to doe their dueties. For, the
virgins, and widowes, and ſuch as are not married, ought ſo much
the more to cleaue vnto God, and to walke in his feare, as being
leſſe hindered to dedicate them ſelues wholie vnto him. And why?
For they are not diſtracted with ſo many cares of the worlde. They
which are married haue more incomberances: howbeit, they muſt
alſo take heede, that they permit not themſelues to much libertie,
but that they walke in feare, and in all carefulneſſe of their duetie.
Loe then, howe in all eſtates we muſt haue ſobrietie and honeſtie in
our perſons, in ſuch ſort, that we may preſent & offer vp as liuelie ſacrifices
vnto God, both our bodies and our ſoules, ſeeing hee hath
redeemed them ſo dearelie with the bloud of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
and that he would haue them dedicated vnto him ſelfe, to dwell in
them, as in his temples.
            Nowe let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good
God, with acknowledging of our faultes: praying him, that he will
make vs feele them better than we haue done: yea, in ſuch ſorte, that
vnfeignedlie diſpleaſing our ſelnes in them, wee learne to haue recourſe
vnto him, acknowledging the faultes and offences whereof
we are culpable, that we deſire nothing elſe but to giue our ſelues ouer
vnto his ſeruice, and to pleaſe him in all, and through all, vntill
we haue accompliſhed this courſe of ours, & ended this
earthlie pilgrimage, to come to that ſaluation, which
he hath prepared for vs, and reſerueth vnto vs in
the kingdome of heauen. That it will pleaſe
him to graunt this grace not onelie vnto
vs, but to all people and nations
of the earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 10. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               19. Thou ſhalt not ſteale.
            
            
               IF we well vnderſtood but in one word
the will of God, which hee plainlie inough
declareth vnto vs, we ſhould not
neede to ſtudie much for the right
knowledge of ordering our ſelues, and
of leading an holie and righteous life.
But no ſuch ignorant perſon, as hee
who wil not vnderſtand: none ſo deafe,
as he which will not heare (as we ſay
in common prouerbe.) And this is the
cauſe why we are ſo blinde, albeit our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhined
before vs with his brightneſſe, and hath made vs priuie of his
will and meaning, as well in this precept of the lawe, as in all the
reſt we haue aboue handled: for if euerie one would enter into his
owne conſcience, to make a iuſt and true examination of his faultes,
ſhould he not finde that it is eaſie to iudge, that when we do our neighbour
anie wrong, when we deceiue him in his goods, what couerture
ſoeuer and cloake we haue for it, that we be culpable of theft before
God? But what? If ſo be we may hide our ſhame before the
world, it ſufficeth vs: and the iudgement of God in the meane time is
troden vnder foote, and we care not for it: but yet all theſe fig leaues,
with the which we couer our ſelues, ſhall ſerue vs to no purpoſe, wee
muſt in the end come to our account before the heauenlie Iudge, and
then ſhall we finde, that it is not ſpoken in vaine which he hath pronounced
by Zacharie,Zacha. 5. 3. That his malediction and curſe ſhall come
vpon him which ſweareth, and vpon him which ſtealeth, that is, that
in what matter ſoeuer of the lawe, and in what point ſoeuer we ſhall
haue offended, he ſhall not faile to take vengeance thereon. Men
therefore may well iuſtifie them ſelues, or flatter them ſelues:
yet God in the ende ſhall diſplaie and ſhewe foorth his indignation,
both againſt ſwearers, and againſt theeues. But the better to vnderſtande
the will of the Lorde, let vs knowe, that hee hath vſed this

word of theft, or ſtealing, to make vs haue in greater hatred all deceite
and all rapine, in all kinde of wrong which we are able to deuiſe
againſt our neighbours: as we haue alreadie aboue declared of
murder and adulterie. If one call a man theefe, he wilbe grieuouſlie
offended, for this is a woorde of infamie and reproche, and therefore
he will not ſuffer him ſelfe to be ſo diſhonoured in the face of the
whole world. God then, to the end he might induce vs to hate all deceitfulneſſe,
all harme doing, all extortion, that we might vſe in the
goods of our neighbours, vſeth this word in ſteade of all other. He
might well haue ſpoken after ſome other manner: hee might haue
ſaid: Take heede how you do pull vnto your ſelues the goods of an other:
take heede you make not your gaine by the loſſe and damage
of your neighbour: take heede of vſing anie ſuch violence: but in a
word he ſaieth: Steale not. And why? Euen to this end, that deceits,
rapines, and pillages, and all harme doing, be had of vs in greater
deteſtation: that we be aſhamed to do wrong vnto anie, that we ſtand
(I ſay) in greate feare hereof, when wee ſee that wee are guiltie of
theft before God. Moreouer, let vs note, that there are manie kindes
of theeueries: for ſome vſe priuie and ſecret ſleights, when they draw
to them ſelues by ſubtile meanes and practiſes, the ſubſtance of another:
others vſe open force or violence, and this is properlie called
rapine, pillage, extortion: others vſe yet more ſlie feates, and cloſer
conueyance: yea, a man ſhall thinke they moue not a finger to touche
anie thing of their neighbours, a man ſhal not be able to accuſe them
before the world: and yet becauſe they walke not in all ſimplicitie &
vprightneſſe, they are theeues before God. Ye ſee then, how we muſt
conſider of the kindes of the euerie, when we will vnderſtand what is
forbidden in this place. But in the meane time we haue to note, that
God iudgeth not of theftes after the manner of men: for they which
liue in great credit and reputation before men, ſhall not ceaſe to bee
condemned before God: yea, albeit none accuſe them, but that the
poore whom they haue eaten and deuoured ſhall crie for vengeance:
and although none of them ſpeake one word, yet the afflictions which
they endure, crie alowde in the eares of God, and ſue proceſſe againſt
their oppreſſours, without ſounding one woorde. So then, we muſt
not bring our owne fanſies to iudge of theftes, thinking to eſcape the
hand of God when we ſhall not be cōdemned of men, nor puniſhed by
earthly iudgment: for God proceedeth in this much further & higher,

Let vs therfore briefly beare in mind, that touching God, all kind of
harme doing, when wee deſire to plucke vnto vs that which is not
ours, is named theft throughout the holie ſcripture. And in deede,
when God manaceth a woe by the prophet Eſaie,Eſaie. 33. 1. that he which hath
pilled and ſpoyled others, ſhall be rewarded with the like, he ſpeaketh
not of pettie theeues, which we lead to the gallowes: but he ſpeaketh
of great Princes and Monarchs, which bare then the ſway through
out the whole worlde. And againe in the firſt Chapter, when he addreſſeth
his talke againſt the holie people, which was the Church of
God,Eſaie. 1. 23. Thy princes and gouernours are companions and Princes of
theeues, ſaieth he. Now certeine it is, that none charged theſe of
theft: nay theſe ſat as Iudges & condemners of other pettie theeues,
and yet failed they not to be condemned before God. And thus the
theeues which are honourable here belowe on earth, are notwithſtanding
accurſed by the lawe of God, and he hath pronounced on them
his determinate ſentence, in this text. Wee muſt therefore humble
our ſelues vnder the iudgment of God, and know that we ſhall gaine
litle, albeit our theueries be excuſable before men, although we couer
them and colour them. For in the meane time, the lawe of God ſhall
haue his full courſe, and the execution thereof ſhall be readie at hande
for our condemnation. God hath forbidden nothing which he will not
call into account. Ye ſee then, what we haue to beare in minde, concerning
this place. Now it reſteth, that that which wee haue briefly
touched, we handle more amply, and as we may ſay by peecemeales,
ſpecifying it by examples, to the end it may be better vnderſtood, as
I haue alreadie ſaid: if we were diligent and attentiue to hearken vnto
that which God declareth vnto vs, we need not make here any long
expoſition. But what? We ſeeke nothing elſe but to cloke and hide
our ſelues with ſome diſſimulation: and albeit the thing be cleare ynough
to be knowne, alwayes to make ſome doubt. And this is the
cauſe why we muſt be ſo preciſely charged, and more neerely preſſed
in all things. We haue alredie ſaid, that there is more than one kind
of theft. For ſome rob openly, as when one ſpoileth ſo manifeſtly, that
one may put out his finger, and ſay, This man hath ſtolen an horſe, he
hath robbed one of ſo much monie, he hath ſtolen a bed, a diſh, or ſuch
like thinges. Well: theſe theeueries are ſufficiently iudged of the
worlde. But when a merchant hath counterfeite wares to ſell, and
knoweth not how to rid his handes of them, loe a ſimple man, whom

he will intrap and deceiue with them. Now happily this, men count
not theft, and yet ſuch a man is a theefe for vſing ſo euill a conſcience,
albeit no man condemne him. It is true, that he whoſe profite it ſhall
concerne, will be a good and vpright Iudge in this matter: and if he
know the deceit and couin which is vſed, he will ſay, Such a one doth
me wrong. We neede not go to anie great Doctour or Clearke, to
ſhew vs that one hath done vs wrong, euerie one knoweth it himſelfe
well inough, and yet we thinke not on this kinde of theft, and wee
knowe it not ſufficiently. But God ſhall not faile to iudge and condemne
him for a theefe, which hath ſo abuſed a simple man, and ſhall
haue deliuered him counterfeite merchandize, ſeeing hee hath deceiued
him which wanted all ſkill and iudgement. He in like manner
which ſhall ouerſell his ware to him which is altogether ignorant, is
in like fault, and both theſe are theeues and robbers. Againe, a lewd
and wicked man maketh a counterfeite peece of worke, and the fault
thereof is not eſpied, or how euer it be, he taketh for it as much as he
may poſſibly catche, without anie reckoning of ſelling it, as it is
worth: notwithſtanding, being charged therewith, he will ſay, Tuſh,
I had to deale with a rich cobbe, the matter is not great, he hath a
good purſe to beare it. Wel, the man which vſeth this, albeit he haue
his ſhifting windlaces before men: yet the iudgement of God hath alwayes
his courſe. If one demaunded euerie man his opinion herein,
and all anſwered, We holde not this for theft: God notwithſtanding
ſhall not retract his iudgement after our fantaſies. Ye ſee then the
theeueries which ſhalbe accountable before God, which we notwithſtanding
let ſlppe: and no thanke to them which haue graunted them
ſelues ſuch a libertie, if the euill be not pardoned. But what? Behold,
the law of God is inuiolable, as we haue ſaid: and it ſhalbe hereafter
declared, that it alwayes bringeth his execution with it. It reſteth
then, that ſeeing we muſt not walke deceitfully, nor vſe any ſubtile
practiſes, we returne vnto this equitie, which nature preſcribeth vs:
namely, that we doe not vnto an other that which we would not haue
men to do vnto vs. When we ſhall haue ſuch a rule, it ſhall not neede
that we haue anie great volumes, to learne what it is to ſteale. For
in one word, euerie one ſhalbe able to knowe how to walke with his
neighbours: namely, that he vndermine not his neighbours maliciouſly,
that he ſeeke not to enrich himſelf at the coſt and charges of an
other, that he pull not vnto him the ſubſtaunce and goods which are

not his owne. There ſhall not need then but this worde, and behold all
the faire couertures, & beſt appearances we haue, ſhall vaniſh away,
and come to nothing. For when we ſhall haue deceiued men, we think
wee haue alſo forthwith blinded Gods eyes. Let vs take an example
in this place, wherby this point ſhalbe fully & perfectly vnderſtood.
He which by lawe ſhall haue gained the goods and poſſeſſions of another,
thinketh that he is the iuſteſt poſſeſſor in the whole world. And
why? Forſooth iuſtice hath paſſed on his ſide. Now, not to ſay that iuſtice
was peruerted (as it is to true that many by their corruptions &
wicked practiſes, make of iuſtice a mere ſpoile & robberie, ouerthrowing
all right and equitie) that Courts of iuſtice ſhalbe ofttimes as
Faires to ſell the right of an other, & to peruert all equitie. But be it
that no ſuch thing hath bene in this caſe, but ſome man by his craft &
ſubtiltie hath found the meane so to drawe vnto him the goodes of an
other, that he will boldly ſay, All iuſtice & right hath iudged me this,
ſo that there is no better or more iuſt title in al the world, than is this.
Loe a double theefe before God. It had bene better by many degrees
that hee had ſpoyled and robbed the houſe of his neighbour, than by
law ſo vniuſtly to haue gaind the goods of an other. And why? There
is theft committed: and againe, this theft is done vnder the colour of
iuſtice, which is a ſacred and holie thing. Verily God can not be able
to ſuffer ſuch a trecherie. Sure burglarie is worthie to be more grieuouſly
puniſhed than other theft: but when we approch vnto the feate
which God hath dedicated vnto his maieſtie, there to ouerthrowe &
confound all equitie, behold, is not this an heinouſer offence than anie
robberie? So then, let vs diligently note, that what cloke ſoeuer wee
may take to couer our ſelues before men, the law of God always ſhall
haue his foree: that is, if we vſe deceite or malieious witnes, if we vſe
extortion & violence, we ſhalbe condemned for theeues & robbers. If
a man vnder this ſhadow, that he is in authoritie, ſhal vſe anie violence
againſt his poore neighbour, and that by this meanes he oppreſſeth
him, this man is a theefe, & halfe a murtherer: ſo that he is no ſimple
theefe, but qualified beſide with manſlaughter: & yet notwithſtāding,
this is paſſed ouer and pardoned. It is true, that one ſometime murmureth
hereat, but it is but betwene th lips. And all this while this
outragious oppreſſor ioyeth in his doings, pleaſing himſelfe well in
them: and which worſe is, the greater thefe he is, the more he ſhall be
honored. For as a man by ſcraping all vnto himſelfe becommeth very

wealthie and rich, ſo ſhall he be preferred and aduaunced higher. Beholde
then, howe by theftes one ſhall come to great honour, touching
the worlde. So then let vs not take theſe bandes to couer our eyes
withall, but let vs rather knowe that which is conteined in the holie
Scripture, that is: that we ſhall alwayes be theeues, when we ſhall
not do vnto an other, which we would that one do vnto vs: and when
we render not vnto euerie one his right. For we muſt define a vice by
the oppoſite & contrarie vertue. If we will well vnderſtand what it is
to ſteale, we muſt conſider what it is to doe right to our neighbours.
But when we ſpoyle them of their goods, when we rake them to our
ſelues in what maner ſoeuer, when we vſe anie cloſe deceite, or open
violence, we are ſufficiently conuicted of theeuerie. By this we ſee,
that theft is not committed onelie by handes, when one ſtealeth away
anothers monie, or ſome part thereof: but theft is committed, when a
man hath not that which is his, and that we ſeeke not to conſerue and
keepe vnto him that which God hath put into his handes, and will
that a man keepe that which he hath. For example: If a ſeruant riottouſly
conſume the good of his maiſter, he is a theefe. If a labouring
man, or if one of occupation ſeeke nothing but to haue his dayes hire,
and in the meane time loy
                  •
               ereth, and could wiſh his worke done, and
his potage ſupt (as we ſay,) it is certeine he is a theefe, and we ſhall
well iudge him ſo. But wee muſt proceede further to other the like
kindes of theft, and make this compariſon. When we render not vnto
a man that which of right apperteineth vnto him, let vs know that
this iniquitie ſhall be accounted as theft before God, and we ſhall be
condemned therefore. But now it remaineth, that we conſider howe
we ſhall walke in ſuch ſort that God accuſe vs not as theeues. This
ſhall be, if firſt of all we loue our neighbours, as Saint Paul declareth
in the 13.Rom. 13. 8. 9. 10. to the Romans. And this is to be maruelled at, that we
account the matter ſo ſmall, to ſpoyle another of his goodes, ſeeing
that if one ſhould demaund vs this pueſtion, whether this is to loue
our neighbours, and whether it be an harde thing to loue them, wee
would ſay no. For nature would knit men together in this vnitie, and
God hath formed them all vnto his image and likeneſſe, and therfore
this ought not to ſeeme a thing ouer hard and grieuous to loue together.
Now ſo it is, that if we haue charitie, we ſhall neuer ſteale, as
Saint Paule ſaieth: yea, if ye would conſider of that right and dutie
which we owe vnto men, and how we are bound vnto them, we needed

not all theſe admonitions & warnings, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, Thou
ſhalt not commit adulterie, Thou ſhalt not murther, as S. Paule
hath declared in that place. But what? There are verie fewe which
thinke hereon. But contrariwiſe, as I haue ſaid, we are full of vaine
excuſes: when we haue pilled one of his goods, when we haue vſed
anie fraud, anie malicious dealing, anie extortion, wee haue one excuſe
or other readie at hand to ſerue vs. But yet it appeareth by our
deedes, that we haue no charitie, that we are as brute beaſts: briefly,
that we are not worthie to be numbred among men, ſeeing we breake
the bonde of vnion, in the which God would couple together all the
children of Adam. Lo then, for the firſt note let vs learne this leſſon
of charitie, if we will not be theeues. For the ſeconde, let vs note,
that wee couet not to bee rich. For as ſoone as this deſire of gaine
ſhall bee in vs, it is certeine wee ſhall play the theeues: it can not
bee otherwiſe. One ſhall at firſt ſight thinke it ſtraunge: but yet,
when euerie one ſhall haue awakened his vnderſtanding, nature
ſhall teache vs, as the Ethnikes knewe well to ſay, that it is
impoſſible to deſire to bee riche, but wee ſhall foorthwith bee inflamed
to ſcrape vnto our ſelues by hooke or by crooke, the goodes of
an other. Will we then flie and auoyde theft? Wee muſt laie aſide
all couetouſneſſe, that is, all deſire of enriching our ſelues,
that there be founde no longer anie cauill in the worde. And howe
ſhall we do this? Let vs learne to content our ſelues with our eſtate
and condition. For he which ſhall not haue a certeine rule, but ſhalbe
always moued by ſome couetouſneſſe, his affections ſhall carrie him
from one ſide to another, in ſuch ſort that he ſhall neuer haue any reſt
to ſay: I muſt holde my ſelfe within my bounds. I ſay, the condition
and eſtate which God hath giuen vnto euerie one, ought to bee as a
liſt and border to keepe him in, as if it were ſaide vnto him: Loe, thy
God will that thou paſſe not this which he hath giuen thee. Hold thy
ſelfe content, otherwiſe thou not onely troubleſt all humane order, but
thou deſpiſeſt God, as if thou didſt make warre with him. Beholde
what we haue to note: that is, when we ſhall haue this rule of charitie
to conduct vs, that we ought to learne to content our ſelues with
our condition. And why? Let vs know that this is the will of God, &
that herein he will proue our obedience. Nowe this cannot be done
vnleſſe we obſerue withall the rule of S. Paule,Phil. 4. 
                     ••
                  . that is, that we haue
lerned to be rich & to be poore, to hunger & to thirſt, as well as to haue

abundance. Saint Paule ſaith, not onely that we ought to be patient
in pouertie, and proteſteth that he hath had his part herein, (& therefore
hath giuen vs an example hereof, & hath ſhewed vs the way) but
he ſaith that we muſt learne to be riche, and to liue in plentie & abundance.
And what meaneth this? It ſemeth a needleſſe thing to tell vs
ſo buſily of patience. When we are poore, euerie man knoweth well
that we haue neede thereof. And why? For we ſhalbe tempted to many
inconueniences. It is an hard matter and grieuous, when a man
ſhal not haue bread to eate, & albeit he hath browne bread, yet would
he full faine haue his eaſe and commoditie further. So touching pouertie,
euerie one will confeſſe that we haue need to be comforted, and
to be warned, that we muſt not be tempted to do euill. But when he
ſaith, it behoueth that wee know how to be rich: a man will ſcorne
this ſaying, as grounded vpon no reaſon: & yet this doctrine is more
neceſſarie than the firſt. And why? Let vs conſider a little what theſe
rich are: euen bottomles gulfes, which can neuer be ſatiſfied, & which
are harder to content than anie poore man, If we make compariſon
betweene the rich and poore, wee ſhall find among the poore manie
which vexe and torment themſelues, which are froward and waywardly
bent, manie which are induced to pilfering, and to exerciſe
manie wicked ſleights and practiſes: and againe, we ſhall find alſo
a great part content themſelues with that which God hath giuen
them, and keepe themſelues within their limittes and borders. But
when we come to conſider of the rich, euen as farre as vnto Kings,
and Princes, we ſhall find that they are ſo inflamed and ſet on fire,
that they burne with ſuch a deſire after the goodes of this world, that
they are neuer contented: yea, they are as it were grieued that the
Sunne ſhineth vpon the poore. Briefly, we ſhall ſee, that the moſt
part of thoſe rich men, to whom God hath giuen the whole earth in
poſſeſſion, not yet to be ſatiſfied, and to account it ynough. For (as
I haue ſaide) they are yet grieued that the poore haue one common
light of the Sunne with them, and that the poore drinke water.
And albeit the poore trauell, and labour, and doe the beſt they are
able for them, yet a rich man will enuie and alſo ſpite at them, although
he enioy the ſweate of their browes, and hath euen the fruite
of their bloud: and it ſeemeth him, that a man plucketh his heart
and guttes out of his bellie, when he eareth one morſell of meate at
his coſt and charges. Such miſerable couetouſneſſe, or rather ſuch

brutiſh crueltie a man ſhall ſee in the riche: and this is a thing ouer
rife and common. So then it is not without cauſe, that Saint Paule
ſaith we ſhall haue profited exceeding much, when we ſhal haue learned
to bee rich: that is to ſay, that we ſhall not bee ſtirred vp continually
with a deſire of getting more and more. If God giueth vs
anie abundance, let vs learne to keepe our ſelues within our bounds,
without further coueting, to ſay: O, ſuch a peece of ground would be
good & commodious for me, I muſt adioyne this to mine, & that other
alſo. And againe, this is not yet all, that a rich man deſire not to
growe further in wealth: but it behoueth that we be poore in heart,
that is to ſay, that we bee puffed vp with no ſuch pride, as to repoſe
our truſt and confidence in our riches, that wee take not an occaſion
by them to oppreſſe ſuch as are feeble and weake, ſuch as haue
no credite to vnderproppe and ſtaie them vp in this worlde: laſtly,
that we be preſt and readie to bee impoueriſhed when it ſhall pleaſe
GOD. He which at this day is verie rich, which hath his garners,
and his ſellers full, which hath his bagges fraughted and full
ſtored, which hath lands and poſſeſſions, which hath a rich trade of
merchandize: let him, when it ſhall pleaſe God to bereue him of all,
not thinke it ſtraunge: let him not be euer much grieued for it, but
let him minde the patience of Iob, to ſay:Iob. 1. 21. The Lord hath giuen, and
the Lord hath taken it, bleſſed be the name of the Lord. Ye ſee then
howe it is a verie har
                  •
                thing to be rich: yea, except we come to this
point, to order our ſelues to the wil of God, to receiue peceably what
ſoeuer hee giueth vs: that is to ſay, to beare patiently the pouertie
which he ſendeth, and to content our ſelues with that which hee ſhall
haue giuen vs into our hand, without ſetting our heart thereon. For otherwiſe
it muſt needes be, that we be alwayes theeues, whether we
abound in riches, or be in pouertie. For the poore ſhalbe prouoked to
do euill, & it ſeemeth them that God will diſpenſe with them for their
wickedneſſe: yea, oftentimes they will vſe this cauillation: O, I ſee
this man ſeeketh nothing elſe but to deuour me, euen to teare the flece
frō my back, he would deſtroy me altogether, if it were poſſible: and
why ſhall it not be permitted me to reuenge my ſelfe on him? Lo how
euerie one would pay himſelfe. But it is not for vs to take from him
that which he hath ſpoiled. So then if we be poore, wee ſhall incontinently
be driuen to ſtealing, except wee take vnto vs this bridle,
to ſay, Well: our Lord will exerciſe vs, and for this cauſe we want

the goodes of this world. We haue not that we coulde wiſh, and this
is to this end, that it pleaſeth God ſo to humble vs. Lo one thing to be
noted. And let a man labour diligently to ſurmount this temptation.
For we ſee that euen Solomon deſireth of the Lord not to be poore,Prou. 30. 9.
for feare of being prouoked to ſteale. When ſuch a perſonage feareth
yea, and maketh this requeſt vnto God in the name of all the faithfull,
ought not wee to ſtand vpon our gard? So then they which are
in neede and neceſſitie, both of bread and of drinke, and know not on
which ſide to turne them to be releued: they which lead ſo poore a life
that ofttimes they haue not ſo much bread as to ſlake halfe their hunger:
others which haue not their eaſes and commodities as they
could wiſhe and deſire: let all theſe in this caſe take heed they commit
themſelues into the hande of God, and pray him to giue them
grace to walke in ſuch ſort, that they bee not induced to wrong or
iniurie anie one vnder this colour, that neceſſitie preſſeth them ouer
ſore. And let them which haue winde and tide with them,
which flote in proſperitie and wealth, which haue their purſes full
of monie, take heede they oppreſſe not the poore: as they haue alwayes
their nettes laide to this purpoſe. For ſee howe the riche
behaue themſelues herein. If they ſee a poore man falling into decay,
they are as greedie hunters, they come incontinently to ouerthrowe
and caſt him vnder foote, and they turne themſelues hither
and thither, and make manie circuites, vntill at length they ſhall
haue entrapped the poore man. Let them therefore which haue wheron
to liue, take heed howe they ouerflowe their bankes: but let them
hold themſelues rather backe, ſo that they abuſe not their plentie and
abundance. Let them which are of greater wealth take heede, they
lift not vp themſelues to oppreſſe thoſe which haue little. Behold how
we ought to proceed in our degree and calling. Yea, when we haue
occaſions offered of doing wrong and iniurie, albeit we are of our
ſelues ſubtile ynough to ſeeke them out from farre, let vs beware
we repell all ſuch wickednes. And whereas rich men thinke that they
haue made great gaine by the loſſe of an other, let vs knowe that
they haue cutte the throte of poore men, and that they haue made
manie widowes, and orphanes, though they thinke little hereof. But
becauſe our wittes are ſo ſharpe and ſubtile to d
                  •
               uiſe all occaſions
of harme doing, let vs haue an eye vnto our God, who woulde
make a proofe and triall of our obedience in our vocation. We ſhall

happily haue the ſword in our handes, but let vs take heede of doing
any hurt: & let vs conſider, that if we were in the ſame ſtate that poore
men are, we would gladlie wiſh to be releeued and ſuccoured. Briefelie,
if we will abſteine from theft, let vs not bee either cruell wolues,
nor wilie foxes. For all they which walke deceitfully and maliciouſly,
are as wilie foxes. Truely poore men, what neede ſo euer they
are in, when they are led to doe euill, they ſhew themſelues no longer
men, if they vniuſtly rake vnto themſelues the goodes of another.
But they which commit their theeueries by violence and oppreſſion,
are as brute beaſtes, which ſeeke nothing elſe, but to conſume and deuour
al. So then, that we be not theeues, let vs not be cruel. Aboue al
let vs learne to waite for all that, which ſhall be neceſſarie for vs in
this preſent world, from the bountie and bleſſing of God. If we hold
faſt this rule, it is certeine that all couetouſneſſe, and all pillages,
and all deceites, and all ſuch like thinges, ſhall ſoone be remoued.
We ſhall not neede then any other medicine than this to heale all
our vices: namelie, that we lift our eyes from ground, to ſay: God is
our father, he will prouide vs of all that we ſtand in neede of, it is hee
from whom we muſt looke for all that apperteineth to the maintenance
of this preſent life: brieflie, it is his bleſſing which is the
fountaine of all riches. If we were well and throughlie perſuaded of
this, we ſhould not neede more preceptes in the lawe to forbid ſtealings,
we ſhould not neede anie more admonitions, wee ſhould not
neede anie more aduertiſements, this onlie word would ſuffice.
            But what? Wee demaund of GOD our dailie bread, and
while wee proteſt that hee ſuſtaineth and nouriſheth vs, wee exerciſe
our rapines, our pillinges, our deceites, and other ſuch wickednes.
Is not this euen to mocke God, when I ſay with my mouth,
Giue me my dailie bread, and in the meane while I go to ſeeke it of
the diuell? For if we vſe ſuch vnlawfull meanes, if we deceiue one, if
we ſpoile an other: from whom is it that we take our goods? Is it
from the hand of God, or rather from the hand of the diuell? Are we
not companions of theeues and of robbers? It is certeine therefore,
that we would the diuell enrich vs, when we are giuen ſo to deceite
and extortion: and which more is, it is a ſure ſigne of our infidelitie
and vnbeleefe, and that we attend not anie thing at all on the bleſſing
of God, and thinke not, that he is rich inough to ſuſteine and enriche
vs. Loe, howe wickedlie we are herein diſpoſed: and yet this wee

ought to profit our ſelues, when we heare that our Lorde accurſeth
ſtealings, and that he teacheth vs, that they are deteſtable in his
ſight, to let vs haue them in greater horrour and deteſtation. Therefore,
let vs firſt of all beare in minde, that God iudgeth not according
to the fantaſie of men, but that his will is, that we walke in all
integritie and vprightneſſe, that euerie one haue his right, that none
be moleſted and troubled for his liuing and ſubſtance, that wee
ſtreightlie withholde our ſelues from all iniurie and wrong doing.
And againe, becauſe we are ſo inclined vnto euill, let vs conſider of
thoſe meanes which may holde vs vnder the obedience of GOD,
and hinder vs from ſtealing, of which we haue alreadie ſpoken: and
let vs know, that God hath ioyned vs together, that we ſhould keepe
this lawe and rule of equitie. Moreouer, let vs not deſire to be rich,
but let vs practiſe this doctrine of bearing pouertie patientlie, that
we be not inflamed with a deſire of getting, and aduauncing, and
promoting our ſelues further. Againe, let vs abhorre and deteſt all
crueltie and deceit: and aboue all, let vs learne not to be ſo brutiſh as
to thinke, that when we haue ſcraped together on this ſide, and the
other, this may be to make vs rich. Let vs beware howe we deceiue
our ſelues in this behalfe. And why? For true riches (as I haue
ſaid) proceede from the bleſſing of God. We muſt therefore drinke
of this fountaine, and be ſatiſfied, if we will abſteine from all kindes
of theft. But nowe, let vs alſo enter into conſideration of the threats
which God ſetteth before vs. When hee hath ſufficientlie ſhewed
that this precept is of great equitie, and that he hath giuen vs the
meanes alſo whereby to walke in all integritie and vprightneſſe,
without hurting or wronging anie one: ſeeing vs yet ouer hard to bee
brought to the obſeruation hereof, and that alwayes our wicked affections
carrie vs away headlong altogether backwarde from our
dutie, he adioyneth his manaces and threates to feare vs, & to keepe
vs in greater awe. And is this a ſmall thing, and lightlie of vs to be
conſidered, when he ſaieth, That theeues and extortioners ſhall not
enter into the kingdome of heauen?1. Cor. 6. 9. Ephe. 5. 5. Loe then, howe hee expreſſelie
declareth and pronounceth vnto vs, that if we make ſo great account
of this preſent life, as that for to plucke vnto vs ſome commoditie, the
better to paſſe through this preſent worlde, wee will wittinglie prouoke
the wrath and indignation of God, we ſhall be exiled and baniſhed
his kingdome. If we had but one onelie droppe of faith, ſhould

not this threat be euen to pearce vs to the heart? But yet our Lord
paſſeth further: for ſeeing vs ſo carnall: & ſo giuen ouer to the world,
he ſheweth vs that euen in this worlde, hee will make vs goe backward;
and hee which ſhall thinke to lift vp and aduance him ſelfe by
ſubtile ſhiftes, by robberies, by extortions, that euen he ſhalbe conſumed,
he ſhall haue a ſecrete curſe and malediction, which ſhall vndermine
him, and conſume him to nothing. As in that place which
we haue alledged of Zacharie it is ſaide,Zacha. 5. 3. That the curſe of GOD
ſhall come vpon the houſe of theeues and robbers, and ſhall remaine
therein, vntill they be wholie conſumed. We ſee further, howe hee
hath ſpoken hereof by all the reſt of the Prophetes, by whom he hath
declared, that when men ſhall thinke to enriche them ſelues, when
they ſhall make their reckoning of,Mich. 6. 12. 13. 14. I know not what great wealth,
GOD ſhall blowe on them: yea, with ſuch a breath, that all their
pompe ſhall vaniſh, and that ſo ſoudeinlie, that a man could not perceiue
their fall and conſumption. But God paſſeth yet further. True
it is, that we may read often and in manie places, that our Lorde
ſcorneth and derideth them, which ſo torment themſelues to gather
together great ſubſtance, when in the ende all ſhall decaye and
fall away like water. But we ſhall ſee further, that great richeſſe
ſhalbe the cauſe of their deſtruction which haue liued in credit and
reputation. Beholde, a father which ſhall haue pilled one, and ſpoyled
an other, which ſhall haue the whole time of his life prouoked and
plucked on his head the vengeance of God: well, hee dieth: it ſeemeth
vnto him that his children ſhalbe young Dukes, Nowe, if hee
had left them but ſome ſmall portion, to haue beſtowed them ſelues
painfullie in ſome trade: if he had learned them honeſtlie to trauell
for their liuing, his children might haue had wherewith to haue liued
a contented life: but loe, the father hath twiſted the rope to hang his
heires. For when they repoſe their truſt in the richeſſe which ſhall
haue bene wickedlie gotten, it muſt needes be, that either they be led
to the gibbet, or otherwiſe periſh vnhappilie. And what is the cauſe
hereof? Euen the anger and indignation of God, which lighteth on
them, to conſume all that which ſhall haue bene euill gotten by pillings
and extortions. The houſe muſt needes be accurſed, God muſt
needes ſhew that he is a iuſt Iudge, both vpon theeues, and vpon all
ſuch as make a ſcorne of his diuine maieſtie, when one ſpeaketh vnto
them thereof: as we heare theſe ieſters & hickſcorners will ſay:

when the latter iudgement is denounced them: Well, well, it is long
time thither, when they oppreſſe a poore man, who ſhall haue neither
abilitie, nor credit, to mainteine his right againſt them. Nowe, in
the meane time they bath them ſelues in their iniquities, and welter
in their wickedneſſe. But what? When God ſeeth that men are ſo
ſenſleſſe, and that he can not winne them to euerlaſting life, and that
they account it nothing to be baniſhed and excluded the kingdome of
heauen: Go to (ſaith he) I ſummon you to appeare before my throne,
behold, I wil now begin to put in execution my once determined ſentence:
I will giue you to vnderſtand, that my curſe is vpon euill gotten
goods: I will ſhew you that they, which for a time poſſeſſe them,
muſt in the end forgoe them, and that they, their goods, and all their
race and poſteritie be conſumed. Nowe, when we heare all theſe
threats, ought we not to be moued with them, except the diuell haue
altogether bewitched and enchaunted vs? What reſteth then? Let
vs keepe ſo good and vpright a conſcience as God requireth of his,
let euerie one trauell faithfully in his vocation, let vs not ſeeke to
grieue and moleſt our neighbour, let our whole ſtudie bee howe to
paſſe this life ouer, without offending God: and albeit wee haue no
great reuenues, although we haue not much to diſpend, let ſobrietie
and moderation ſerue vs for a double portion. Loe howe wee are to
behaue our ſelues. But nowe, if theftes are ſo condemned of GOD,
what ſhall this be, when we robbe him of his honour? For wee muſt
make this compariſon betweene theftes and ſacrileges. Beholde,
God hath forbidden vs to be theeues. And why? Becauſe he will that
we obſerue all equitie and vprightneſſe one with another: he will alſo
that the goods he hath dedicated to our vſe, be ſo ordered among vs,
that we poſſeſſe them not by wicked practiſes, that hee which hath
ſtore of them, diſpenſe and beſtowe them ſo, as hauing but onelie the
vſe, and not the proprietie of them: that hee which hath little, content
him ſelfe therewith, as we haue ſaid. Now, if God will that we
obſerue ſuch an integritie and vprightneſſe towards our neighbours,
as to conſerue and keepe vnto them all the goods they poſſeſſe, if
thoſe things he hath created for our vſe, be ſo deare vnto him, that he
will not we defile and make them vncleane by deceites, by oppreſſions,
and ſuch like things: what ſhall be thought of this which hee eſteemeth
by manie degrees more pretious? So then, when wee ſhall
haue walked with our neighbours in all integritie, when wee ſhall

haue ſought to giue vnto euerie one, that whiche apperteineth vnto
him: let vs render alſo vnto our God his right, that is to ſay, let vs
glorifie him, let vs take heede that he alwayes remaine in his entire
maieſtie: and let vs not vſurpe more than he hath permitted vnto vs.
As we ſee howe this raſh boldneſſe is in men, that when they haue
ſhewed them ſelues madde and furious, in oppreſſing their neighbours,
they will forthwith ſharpen their hornes, and arme them
ſelues againſt God. When they haue ſpoiled men of their ſubſtaunce,
they would alſo that God ſhould bee ſubiect to their outrages, and
they will not obey him, but when they liſt, and in that ſeemeth them
good: we muſt therefore beware of all theſe thinges. And for concluſion,
let vs alſo take heede, not onely to abſtaine from all iniurie
and harme doing, but withall, not to permitte or ſuffer, as much
as ſhall lie in vs, that any one bee moleſted or indamaged. For theſe
are two thinges which God commaundeth vs, Iuſtice and Iudgment:
Iuſtice, to giue vnto euerie one his right: and Iudgment, to
the end we be not conſenting vnto euill, and ſuffer not that the poore,
which haue no meane to ſuſteine and vpholde them ſelues to bee troden
vnder feete. For when I ſhall with mine eyes ſee one oppreſſed,
and ſhall not ſeeke to aide and helpe him, behold I am conſenting to
the theefe:Pſal. 50. 18. ſo that the ſentence of the fiftie Pſalme may bee verified
of mee, When thou ſaweſt a theefe, thou diddeſt runne with him.
For is not this to runne with them which ſteale and robbe, when we
ſeeke not to repreſſe them, or cloſe vp our eyes not to ſee them, or
giue them the bridle in their neckes to paſſe further? Wee are conſenting
to a thefte which is committed, and therefore wee muſt render
an account thereof before God, as guiltie of thefte, albeit this be
nothing eſtemed of among men. Let not any therefore thinke, that it
is lawfull for him onely to keepe his owne: but let vs conſider, that
wee muſt employ our paines alſo to conſerue and increaſe the good
of our neighbours, as our owne: and ſo the rule of charitie exhorteth
vs. Loe, how we ſhall not be theeues, neither before God, nor before
men. Loe, how the goodes which he hath put into our handes ſhalbe
bleſſed of him, when he ſhall make vs proſper, and that wee ſhall
haue ſuch a contentation, that wee alwayes aſpire vnto, and haue our
mindes ſet on our heauenlie inheritance, knowing that there we ſhall
haue all fulneſſe of riches in perfection.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good

God, with acknowledging of our faultes, praying him to make vs
feele them better than wee haue done, and that more and more wee
may profite in the obſeruing of his holy lawe. And becauſe we are ſo
wicked and peruerſe, that all our thoughtes and affections drawe altogether
backward, pray wee that it will pleaſe him to reforme vs
by his holy ſpirit, & drawe vs ſo neere vnto him, that renouncing the
worlde, and deſpiſing all earthlie and tranſitorie thinges, wee may
aſpire to his heauenlie kingdome, where wee ſhall haue all contentation
and quietneſſe. And ſo let vs ſay, Almightie God and heauenlie
father, &c.
         
         
            The. 11. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               20 Thou ſhalt not beare falſe witneſſe againſt thy neighbour.
            
            
               WE haue heretofore ſeene, that it is not
lawfull, after what manner ſoeuer, to
moleſt and grieue our neighbours, either
in their perſons, or yet in their
goodes. But becauſe there is yet an other
kinde of hurting by the tongue,
God would alſo make mention hereof
in his lawe, as wee ſee in this place.
Therefore, as before he hath forbidden
vs, to commit any outrage againſt our
neighbours, which thing he hath comprehended vnder this woord of
murder, not to trouble or annoy them in what ſort ſoeuer, or to hurt
them in their goods: ſo here he ſheweth vs, that wee ought to ſpeake
no euill of them, that wee muſt vſe no talke which may bee to ſtaine
them with any blot of infamie, or any euill and wicked note. True it
is, that expreſſelie he ſpeaketh of bearing falſe witneſſe, but this is,
according to the rule we haue before ſet downe: namelie, that he propoſeth
thoſe thinges, which ought to bee moſt of all deteſted: for this
end, that wee ſhoulde abhorre thoſe ſinnes, whiche any way come
neere them. If wee therefore ſpeake euill of our neighbours, if we
ſlaunder them, albeit this bee accounted no grieuous ſinne before
men: yet God ſhall eſteme it as heinous as bearing of falſe witneſſe.
But one may make here a queſtion, why God hath in this place ſpoken

of bearing falſe witneſſe, & of periuries, ſeeing he hath ſaid before,
Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine? For
it ſeemeth hereby, that this is but a ſuperfluous repetition. And in
one ſo little ſummarie of the lawe, where there are but ten ſentences,
to reiterate, and put downe one thing twice, it ſeemeth not good or
conuenient. But we muſt note for anſwere hervnto, that the commandement
which we haue before expounded, of not taking the name of
God in vaine, was in the firſt table, where God had reſpect vnto the
maieſtie of his name, to the end wee might haue it in greater reuerence.
Therefore, when we ſpeake of God, let vs conſider of the infinite
glorie which is in him, that we open not our mouth at any time,
but in feare and humilitie. So then, be it we are to ſweare, be it that
we are to ſpeake of God in any manner, wee muſt alwayes thinke,
that his name ought to be had in reuerence, that we muſt not vſe it
at randon, raſhlie, or vnaduiſedlie. Thus much then touching that
we haue before ſeene. Now God ſpeaketh of an other thing: namelie,
of not hurting our neighbours, of not doing them any iniurie, or working
them any damage, by our wicked tongue. So then, ſeeing
theſe commaundementes haue two diuers endes, wee ſee how theſe
two ſentences are different, and that there is nothing ſuperfluous or
more than needeth. Let vs therfore diligently note, that foraſmuch as
it is in this place handled and intreated, how men ought to bee conuerſant
together in all charitie and vprightneſſe, that although the
name of God be profaned in falſe witneſſing: the lawe notwithſtanding
is not ſuperfluous, when it is commaunded, That we beare no
falſe witneſſe againſt our neighbours. Now we haue in this place to
declare, that God would in this cōmaundement generallie condeme
all ſlaunders, all falſe reportes, all defamations, and ſuch like things.
And to ſhew that this is ſo, it is ſaid expreſlie in an other place, Thou
ſhalt not walke about with tales againſt thy neighbour,Leui. 1
                     •
                  . 16. thou ſhalt
not ſpeake euill of him to defame him. And if the lawe of God conteine
a perfecte rule of well liuing, it followeth that this is therein
compriſed. Now where ſhall wee place it, but vnder this ſentence?
Wee muſt therefore conclude, that albeit GOD hath here
ſpecified the name of falſe witneſſe, that this notwithſtanding, he
woulde extend this doctrine to all ſlaunders, to all falſe reportes,
to all by tales, whiche tend to the diſcrediting of our neighbours,
or to the hurting of them in their good name and eſtimation.
            
               
Wee ſee then howe God would here ioyne vs together in loue and
friendſhip, in as much as he permitteth not any to bee hurte in his
good name, no more than in his perſon, or goodes. Wherefore,
he which defameth his neighbours, he which ſlaundereth them, in
what manner ſo euer, as much as in him lieth maketh as it were
warre with God, and breaketh the bond of charitie, which ought to
be betweene men: and when wee ſhall haue well conſidered all, it is
certeine, that falſe reportes, ſlaunders, & backbiting, doe more harme
oftentimes, than doe theftes. And ſo let vs knowe, that if wee will
obey GOD, we muſt mainteine the honour and credit of our neighbours
as much as ſhall lie in vs. For when he hath forbidden vs to
hurt his good name, he willeth alſo, on the contrarie ſide, that wee
mainteine the honour and eſtimation of all. Now it is not ſufficientlie
mainteined in his eſtate, when we harme it not, except we withall
procure the good thereof. Nowe, wee ought to proceede by the degrees
which God would here ſignifie, when he ſpeaketh of falſe witneſſe
bearing. The firſt is therefore, that when wee ſhall come into
iudgement, we take heede of hurting thoſe by any falſe report, any
lying, any forſwearing, whoſe honour and good we are bound to procure.
For he which ſhall beare falſe witneſſe againſt his neighbour,
he ſlaieth, he robbeth him as much as in him is, and he doeth all the
euill which proceedeth from periurie. True it is, that oftentimes we
ſhall not thinke hereof,Deut. 17. 7. but the thing notwithſtanding is ſo. And this
is the cauſe why GOD commaunded in his lawe, that the witneſſes
ſhould bee the firſt which ſhould laye handes to the execution of him,
which was puniſhed for any euill deede, to the end it might be knowen,
that by their voices, and by their tongues, they hadde put him to
death, and that the witneſſes ſhould be put in greater feare of ſpeaking
otherwiſe than the truth, when euerie one ſhould thinke he hath
to render an account vnto God, if he ſhall haue bene a witneſſe againſt
any. So then, when queſtion is of being a witneſſe, euerie one
muſt deepelie conſider of the matter, and take diligent heede he enlarge
not his conſcience, but that he ſpeake in pure ſimplicitie, that
which he knoweth to bee true before God. And here we are to thinke
not onely of falſe witneſſinges, whiche ſhalbe againſt the life of a
man: but of ſuch alſo, which concerne their goodes and eſtimation.
So then wee are warned in all reſpectes, to procure the honour and
profite of our neighbours, when wee are to beare witneſſe: and

yet not ſo, that vnder this ſhadowe of couering the iniurie of him
which hath offended, or of preſeruing his goodes, we lie before God.
For if the honour of men bee deare vnto vs, what ought the honour
of God to bee, if wee will make compariſon? When he forbiddeth
me to beare falſe witneſſe againſt my neighbour, it is, becauſe
God will that there bee loue betweene men, that none be iniuried
either in his good name, or in his goodes. Now, if God haue a regarde
and care of vs, which are but poore wormes of the earth, thinke
wee that in the meane time he will forgette him ſelfe? But if by falſe
witneſſe I ſeeke to beare out, and bolſter him whiche hath done
euill, if I couer the fault, if I diſſemble it, certeine it is, that I blaſpheme
God as much as in me is. And why? For I proteſt that I
will ſpeake the trueth, and in the meane while I come to lie. And
is not this to vnhallowe the name of GOD? Is not this to deface
his glorie? So let vs not thinke, that God in this place woulde
gratifie euill doers, to couer the iniquitie and wickedneſſe of men,
when he ſaith, Thou ſhalt not beare falſe witneſſe againſt thy
neighbour: but he would brieflie ſhew vs, that wee ought, as farre
as wee ſhalbe able, to procure the credit, and mainteine the good
name of our neighbours: ſo bee it, this may be done in trueth.
Moreouer, let vs note, that GOD hath reſpect here rather to the
wicked affections and deſires, which proceede from rancour and
malice, than to the deede it ſelfe: as wee ſhall better perceiue in that
which remaineth to bee handled. For wee haue alreadie touched,
that God ſpeaketh not here onely of thoſe falſe witneſſinges, whiche
are giuen in iudgement, when a ſolemne oth is taken: but withall, of
all ſlaunders and defamations. So, in what ſort ſoeuer I backbite
my neighbours, this ſhall alwayes bee accounted for falſe witneſſe
before God. If I ſhall goe and blabbe a tale in ones eare, to defame
my neighbour, loe a falſe witneſſe. It is true, that I haue not bene
called before the Iudge, I haue not put forth my hand to the booke,
I haue not vſed any of theſe ceremonies: yet wee ſee how GOD
ſpeaketh hereof; and therefore beholde howe wee ſhalbe culpable
of ſo great a fault as I haue ſaide. But nowe, if I ſhall aduertiſe
one vppon no euill will that I beare the man, that there
is ſuch and ſuch a wickedneſſe in him, ſhall I for this bee accounted
a falſe witneſſe before GOD? No. For God hath reſpect
preciſelie vnto the enimitie and euill will. If then I hate one,
and ſhall vppon this goe about to diſcredit him by falſe reportes, if

for the euill will I beare him, I ſhall ſeeke to ſlaunder him, loe, in
what I am condemned for a falſe witneſſe. If I bee led with a deſire
of euill ſpeaking, to defame my neighbour, if this vice reigne ſo in
mee, that I endeuour with all my might to ſtaine his credit, beholde
I am a falſe witneſſe. And loe for what cauſe it is ſaide, That charitie
and loue couereth a multitude of ſinnes, but hatred diſcouereth
a multitude of faultes. See howe Solomon hath briefly touched
in this ſentence,Pr
                     •
                  . 10. 12. what the roote is of ſuch falſe witneſſings, as
GOD by the lawe hath forbidden and condemned: namelie, that
wee are led herevnto by hatred. And why? For if wee loued one
an other, without all doubt, wee would endeuour to liue together
in all loue and friendſhippe. Wee knowe full well, that when we
ſpeake euill of one, to hurt his honeſt name, wee can but kindle a
fire of diſſention: for be, for the maintenaunce of his credit, muſt
needes bee forced to chafe and fret againſt vs: and then behold,
all loue and friendſhippe is broken. So then, as long as wee ſhall
haue a care to mainteine charitie, wee ſhall couer, as much as wee
may, the faultes of our neighbour. But bee wee at variaunce?
Our tongues ſhall forthwith be ouerlauiſh to ſpeake euill of them,
with whom wee diſagree: and as our heartes ſhalbe empoiſoned
with malice, ſo muſt it needes haue his vent in the tongue, that
the euill will wee haue ſmoking within vs, may bee ſet on light
fire abroade. Let vs therefore diligentlie note, that GOD in
this place hath condemned all ſlaunders, whiche proceede from enimitie
and euill will. When wee hate one, wee could with him
hanged: and if wee are not able to hurt him, neither in his perſon,
nor in his goodes, by ſpoiling him of his ſubſtaunce: yet wee
will ſeeke to ſhame him with ſome malicious ſcoffe or other: wee
will endeuour, by all the meanes we may, to defame him. Therefore,
when wee beare ſuch haired againſt any, this is ſure an euill
roote, and it muſt needes bring foorth like fruite. Yee ſee what the
point is, wherevnto wee muſt come, if wee will haue the right vnderſtanding
of this commaundement of GOD. Now withall, let
vs note by the way, that when it is ſaid, That charitie couereth the
multitude of ſinnes, that this is not ſo to bee taken, that wee muſt
flatter one an other, and by lying nouriſh the vices which are in vs:
but this is ſpoken for this purpoſe, that wee blabbe not foorth the
faultes of others; as deſirous to defame them: whereby we might

happilie diſcourage then, and bee an occaſion (peraduenture,)
that they ſhall abandon all ſhame, and giue them ſelues ouer to
vtter impudencie: as wee ſee many deſperate perſons doe. Let vs
note then, that the holy Ghoſt meaneth not to make vs flatterers,
or mainteiners of the vices whiche are in our neighboures,
or to make vs liers: but he will that wee endeuour, with all our
might, to correct and amende the faultes which are in them: and
yet ſo, that wee beare charitablie with them, without driuing
them to deſpaire, when they ſhall bee ſpotted with many vices.
For when a man ſhall ſee that one diſgraceth and ſhameth him,
and that deſpitefullie: he will deſperatelie giue him ſelfe ouer
vnto all miſchiefe, and harden him ſelfe therein. Wee are therefore
the cauſe, that thoſe which haue heretofore followed ſome euill
trade of liuing, harden them ſelues therein, and in deſpite of God
and man, perſiſt in their wickedneſſe, if rudelie and vndiſcretelie,
without any affection of charitie, wee reprehend them. Wherefore
let vs take greate heede, that when we reprehend the vices of any, we
doe it with ſuch mildneſſe and gentleneſſe, that they whiche are reproued
may know, that for a loue we beare them, we would withdraw
them from the way of deſtruction.Iam. 5. 2
                     •
                  . And loe why S. Iames hath applied
this place to them, which by gentle corrections, by ſweete and
amiable words, ſeeke to drawe and allure their neighbours to God.
Therefore, when I ſhall ſee one ledde away vnto witkedneſſe, if I
warne him of his faultes, and by admoniſhing of him, can winne him
into the right way: loe (ſaith he) howe this ſentence ſhalbe accompliſhed,
That charitie couereth the multitude of ſinnes. I graunt that
Solomon ſpeaketh hereof vnto an other end: but Saint Iames
hath not euill applied this doctrine: ſignifying, that when wee
would couer ſinnes, it muſt not bee by cloſing vp our eyes, or by
not ſpeaking one word of them. Therefore, when one ſhall haue
offended GOD by dronkenneſſe, wee muſt not diſſemble the
matter altogether, to couer it by charitie: for this were to practiſe
this doctrine verie ill: but we muſt rather vſe gentle and brotherlie
correction, and withall procure, that the vices beeing buried
before God, they be not called to remembrance before men. We
muſt then content our ſelues, to haue put our neighbours in minde
of their faultes, holding alwayes this meaſure in our reprehenſions,
that the faultes beeing corrected and amended, we defame

not (if wee may poſſibly chooſe) them, who muſt haue ſome
ſhame for their repentaunce, but in no wiſe bee caſt into deſpaire.
But this doctrine is euill practiſed. For wee ſee howe wee erre
alwayes in both theſe extremes, and that the meane is neuer kept:
namelie, to correct the vices by mildneſſe and gentleneſſe, which wee
ſee in others, and to ſeeke ſo to hide them, as yet to remember the
offenders of them: howbeit in ſuch ſort, that it bee not to their reproch
and infamie. But what? We ſeeke the loue and fauour of men, and
this wee will winne by flattering of them in their ſinnes. Wee
ſhall perceiue, howe they offend GOD in one thing or other: this
wee let paſſe. As wee would they ſhould ſpare vs, ſo we will winke
at and beare with the euill wee ſee in our friendes. Yee ſee then a
wicked couerture, wherewith Satan blindeth the eyes of wretched
ſinners. And wee are the cauſe hereof, becauſe wee diſſemble the
faultes which ought to be reproued of vs. But yet, as if this euill ſufficed
not, the worlde at this day is proceeded ſo farre herein, that we
ſhalbe thought not to bee good friends with them, with whom we are
ioyned, except wee will conſent vnto all wickedneſſe for their ſakes.
And if thoſe, whiche ſhall offend herein: yea, ſo farre that they will
not doubt to lend their friend a falſe othe for his commoditie, ſhall
be reprehended and puniſhed for their periurie: What (will one ſay)
woulde you haue me to hurt my neighbour? Am I not bound vnto
him? And would you haue me depoſe againſt him? How ſhould I doe
ſo? See, ſee, at what price we ſet the veritie and truth of God, ſee how
we turne it into a lie, ſee alſo how wee abuſe the ordinaunce and commaundement
of God, by the which he hath forbidden vs to defame
our neighbours. So let vs learne that this is a wicked extreme, into
which we fall, when wee will beare with that which is euill, when
wee will nouriſh and mainteine vices: and aboue all, when called to
giue witneſſe, and required trulie to declare, and to open the wickedneſſe,
which is to be amended, we will be culpable thereof, and partakers
as farre as we may. If I keepe cloſe murder or theft, if I conceale
treaſon, behold I am accounted acceſſarie vnto all theſe crimes
both before God & before man. So then this which we haue ſaid, that
we ought by charitie to couer the ſinnes of our neighbors, this I ſay
hindereth not, but that we may declare the euill we know by them, if
it bee needefull, and that wee ſhalbe required therevnto: yea, it
ſhall bee good for vs ſo to doe. But there is in this thing an other

vicious extreame, wherein wee offend: when we are ouermuch giuen
to blabbe forth thoſe faults, which ought quietlie to be amended
and corrected by vs, without making anie great proclamation of
them: and this ſhall proceede oftentimes from euill will, oftentimes
from ambition, and oftentimes from a fooliſh deſire of vaunting our
ſelues. From euill will (I ſay) when oftentimes vnder a colour of
zeale we will ſeeme to haue to puniſh vices, pretending that we can
not ſuffer that God be offended, we come to prie into the life of them
whom we hate, and if we finde anie thing we may grate vppon, anie
thing we may ſnappe them vp for, beholde, wee haue an accuſation
readie: and thus we falſlie abuſe the name of God, proteſting our
ſelues zealous, men, when we ſeeke nothing elſe but to catch our enimies,
tripping and failing in ſome one point of their dutie. And a
man may eaſilie eſpie our malice in this, that hauing ſharpelie reproued
a vice in ſome one, whom wee ſhall haue hated: wee will
beare with it and hide it, as much as wee may poſſible, in ſome one
of our friendes: ſuch an vnequall meaſure we will vſe. Nowe by
this, is it not euident, that there is no good affection in vs, and
that wee warre not with the ſinnes and vices, but with the perſons
in whom they are? Verilie, this caſe is cleare and eaſily to bee iudged.
Let vs therefore learne, that when we are to diſcouer the faults
and vices which are in others, that our heartes muſt bee cleane and
void of all euill will, that we may proteſt before God, that we deſire
both the profit and welfare of him whom we accuſe. Loe, one note to
be obſerued. And again, we muſt take heed of all fooliſh ambition, as
I haue touched, that is, that we make not our ſelues monſters before
men, as we ſee there are ſome which would make themſelues Saints
in crying out vpon, and ratling vp others for their faults. As ſoone as
they ſhall ſee anie thing amiſſe, they muſt by and by charge a Queſt
on it, and all the world muſt knowe he is a zealous fellow: and in the
meane time, there is nothing in him but a fooliſh deſire to ſhewe him
ſelfe. For this cauſe God oftentimes will puniſh ſuch a price, in as
much as men thinke, that if ſo they haue ſharplie reproued others, O
they are Saintes, and in a manner Angels: and in the meane while,
they diſpenſe with them ſelues for much wickedneſſe: and when they
ſhall haue offended more groſſelie than they whom they haue reprehended,
they will (forſooth) that men pardon and forgiue them.
And why? Becauſe they haue reprehended others to the quicke:

yea, a man ſhall ſee ſome of theſe which bluſhe not to ſay, What?
Haue not I reprehended euill? And when I haue behaued my ſelfe
ſo ſtoutlie, is it not ſufficient? Namelie, that when this wickedneſſe
was committed, I reproued it, I would not ſuffer it? Well, and if
thou couldeſt not anie thing tollerate it in others, how wouldeſt thou
that one ſhould ſuffer it in thee? If thou haddeſt in thee but one drop
of good affection, wouldeſt thou not hate the vice in thy ſelfe, aſwell
as in another? So then, when wee ſhall crie out againſt our neighbours
to reproue them, let vs beware we be void of al ambition, if we
will open & diſcouer the wickedneſſe we haue perceiued in another.
And let vs obſerue this rule. Firſt to beginne with our ſelues, before
we condemne the vices of others, & when we haue diligentlie ſifted &
examined what is in vs, then let vs come vnto our neighbours. This
is the order we muſt obſerue in our reprehenſions, if we will proceed
herein according vnto the will of God. And note we, that in generall
God hath in this place condemned all iniuries, all ſlaunders, ſo that
if we doe but open our mouth to ſpeake euill, in what ſort ſoeuer, of
our neighbours, we are condemned as falſe witneſſes before God.
But by this it is not meant, that we ſhould hide & keepe cloſe the wickedneſſe
which is manifeſtly knowen: for as we haue before ſhewed,
that vnder this colour of couering of ſins, we muſt not nouriſh & foſter
them by flatteries or lies ſo we muſt not vnder this ſhadowe, that we
are forbiden to hurt our neighbors by word, ſay, that black is white:
& this is diligently to be noted. For there are ſome which would haue
nothing condemned what euer it be: yea, they would haue men frame
their ſpeach ſo to colour & diſguiſe things, that if they ſaw theft cō
               mitted,
they ſhould call it by ſome other name: they would in no wiſe,
that vices ſhould be condemned by their proper titles. A man ſhal ſet
this in manie: yea, when one ſhall ſharplie reproue ſuch wicked liuers,
as ſhall not onelie haue offended God them ſelues, but ſhall be
the cauſe, that the reſt, with whom they liue, ſhalbe drawen vnto a loſe
and diſſolute life, which ſhalbe as peſtilent and infections ſores to
rot and corrupt all the reſt: when one (I ſay) ſhall reproue them, if
he touche them as he ought, to the quicke, incontinentlie there ſhall
be ſome of theſe nice and delicate felowes, to ſay, O Sir: ſhould you
ſo ſpeake in the pulpit? A man ſhall ſee blaſphemies to reigne, a
man ſhall ſee manifeſt impietie againſt God and his woorde, a man
ſhall ſee ſuch villanous rebellions, as none more, a man ſhall ſee ſuch

enormious and outragious offences, that it is not poſſible to beare
with them, except a man wilbe a traitor to God. And well, one ſhall
crie out againſt theſe things, and yee ſhall haue this replie made:
What? Doeth not the Goſpell teach you to winne all the world by
mildneſſe? Hath not Ieſus Chriſt called ſinners vnto him in all leue
and gentleneſſe, pardoning them their treſpaſſes? Muſt they then
which preach the Goſpell vſe ſuch rigour? Lo, what ſhalbe ſaid: as if
Chriſt would that his grace ſhould be abuſed, that vices ſhould haue
their flote & full ſaile, that men ſhould diſſemble & cloke them, & that
they ſhould not be reproued & condemned. Nay, contrariwiſe, it is
ſaid, that by the Goſpel he exerciſeth an authoritie & iuriſdiction to
condemne the whole world: & behold to what purpoſe this is: namelie,
that we ſhould be confounded with ſhame, & as it were ouerwhelmed
with confuſion, when our ſin ſhalbe opened & declared to vs, that
we haue no other refuge but to his meere grace & onlie mercie. Let
vs therefore diligentlie note, that wee are forbidden to defame our
neighbours of harred & for ill will. But for all this, on the contrarie
ſide, we are commaunded to blame the euill we ſee in them, and to reproue
them with ſharpneſſe, when they ſhall ouer groſſelie offende,
endeuouring with all our might (if wee may be able) to winne
them to doe well: and withall, not ceaſing to aduertiſe others, not
to bee corrupted by wicked examples. This ſhalbe better vnderſtoode,
if wee ſhall take on the one ſide the ſentence of Ieſus Chriſt,
where he ſaith, Who ſoeuer ſhall haue called his neighbour Foole,Mat. 3. 22.
ſhal be culpable of hell fire, who ſoeuer ſhall haue onelie groined againſt
him, is alreadie damnable: and on the other ſide, that ſentence
where it is ſaid,Ephe. 5. 11. That we muſt reproue the vnfruitfull workes of
darkeneſſe, that we muſt deteſt and abhorre euill: as Saint Paule
ſpeaketh hereof alſo, when he ſaith vnto the Corinthians,1. Cor. 14. 25 That if the
Goſpell be preached, as it ought, they which ſhall heare it, hauing
the ſecretes of their hearts made manifeſt, ſhalbe conſtreined to giue
glorie vnto God, caſting them ſelues to the earth, that is to ſay, being
aſhamed of their ſinnes. And why? Becauſe they are brought to
light, whereas before they were hidden, when their ſinnes were not
knowen: they ſee that they are defamed before God, and there is no
talke of hiding them ſelues anie longer. Therefore when I ſhall haue
groined of euill will againſt my neighbour: yea, albeit ſo cloſelie,
that one can not ſay, that I haue called him knaue or foole, but ſhall

onelie haue wagged my head, or bit my lippes at him. Loe, a falſe
witneſſe bearing before God. And why? For I deſpiſe my neighbour,
I deſire alſo to put him to reproch and infamie. And what
hath ſtirred me vp herevnto? Some grudge I beare him, ſome euill
will I haue conceiued againſt him. Now contrariwiſe, when I will
aduertiſe my neighbour, ſo that I ſhall ſeeke to do him good, that I
ſhalbe led by no euill affection, but that I would procure his ſaluation
as farre as lieth in me, I may ſay, Vnhappie man that thou art,
take heede to thy ſelfe, it ſeemeth thou wouldeſt ſell thy ſelfe vnto Satan,
it ſeemeth thou wouldeſt captiue thy ſelfe vnder his curſed ſeruitude
and bondage: thou ſheweſt well that thou art paſt all ſenſe, and
enraged, when thou wilt receive no admonition, regard no warning:
wilt thou needes periſh miſchieuouſlie and miſerablie? Go cayt
                  •
               e:
thou art worthie to be hated and ſpat at of all men. I may vſe to ſay
all theſe words with a man, and yet do him no iniurie. And why? For
I can not otherwiſe bring him to him ſelfe, to amend him. Therfore,
when I ſee that Sathan hath ſo hardened him, that I muſt hammer
him with great blowes to awaken him, I may here proceede with
ſuch vehemencie of words: and behold alſo, how I ſhall ſeeke hereby
to couer his faultes. For what other end and purpoſe haue I? What
other thing ſhoote I at, but that they ſhould be pardoned him of God,
and that before the world he ſhould no longer be defamed and made
a reproch? It grieueth me that men point at him with their fingers,
that he is become a reproch and byword to all, that he is as it were
on a ſcaffold or ſtage expoſed to all ignominie and ſhame. This grieueth
me (I ſay) and therfore I ſeeke to bring him into the right way,
ſo that I vſe no iniurie towards him, in this manner of proceeding
which I obſerue. Nowe, in the meane time we muſt take heede, that
we looſe not the bridle to anie exceſſiue bitterneſſe of reprehending.
For albeit we haue a good zeale, & are not moued with anie ill will:
yet notwithſtanding, we ſhal verie much offend, when we ſhalbe ouer
bitter in reprouing.Gal 6. 1. Loe, why Saint Paule expreſlie warneth vs of
this, that we reproue with all gentleneſſe thoſe which haue offended.
Conſider ſaith he, that thou maieſt alſo fall and offend. Let vs therefore
vſe ſuch mildneſſe and gentleneſſe towardes our neighours, as
we would be vſed towards vs in the like caſe. But howe euer it be, let
vs ſpeake of vices ſo, that we diſguiſe them not, to make them ſeeme
nothing, & let vs ſeke roughlie to reforme them which haue offended:

reprouing them in ſuch ſort, as they are able to beare, and as we ſee
them diſpoſed: regarding alwayes, that we be moued hereto by charitie
and brotherlie loue. And ſo, when we ſhall pray God to conduct
vs in this thing, and to gouerne vs by his holie ſpirit, a man ſhall not
be able to count it an iniurie done to him, when we ſhal haue told him
of his faultes roundly, and yet charitably. Ye ſee then what we haue
to obſerue touching this commaundement: namely, that we muſt not
open our mouth to ſpeake one worde ſlaunderouſly, and maliciouſly,
againſt our neighbour: and yet in the meane time, that we reproue
ſimply and plainly, ſuch as ſhall haue offended, as we woulde men
ſhould haue a care to correct and amend vs in the like caſe. When we
ſhall vſe ſuch equitie and diſcreete dealing: behold, we ſhall not bee
falſe witneſſes. Moreouer, let vs note, that when mention is made
here of falſhoode, we are not only forbidden to forge and inuent a lie,
in ſuch ſort, that that we ſhal ſay, be falſly contriued and deuiſed without
anie colour at all: but if we maliciouſly depraue that which in it
ſelf is not euill, we beare herein falſe witneſſe. As it is ſaid, that they
which depoſed againſt our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that he had ſaid, Deſtroy
this Temple, and in three daies I will build it vp again,Mat. 26. 6. were
falſe witneſſes, and yet it is certein, that Ieſus Chriſt had ſo ſpoken:
that is to ſay, had pronounced theſe verie wordes with his mouth.
They then which recite them, why are they called falſe witneſſes?
The reaſon is, becauſe they turned the wordes of the ſonne of God
into an other ſenſe than he had ſpoken them: and ſo ſought to bring
him into hatred, charging him with ſo wicked a ſlaunder, as if he had
ſpoken of the materiall temple of Hieruſalem, when he ſpake of his
owne body, which was the true temple, in the which dwelt all the fulneſſe
of the God head:1. Tim. 3. 16. for hee was God manifeſted in the fleſh. So
then, we ſee that the falſhoode which God here condemneth, is not
then only cōmitted, when we contriue a lie, when we forge that which
was neuer ſaid or done, when we deuiſe a tale neuer knowne or heard
of before: but then alſo, when we ſhall haue maliciouſly diſguiſed and
altered a matter which might bee well interpreted, turning it to an
euill ſenſe, when it might be well ment: and herein we bee falſe witneſſes.
For example. There are ſome ſo wayward and ouerthwart,
that as ſoone as they perceiue anie thing which diſpleaſeth them, albeit
it haue no euill at all in it, neither againſt God, neither againſt
man: yet are they readie to make an accuſation thereof, and to ſay, O

ſee ſuch a man hath ſpoken or done ſuch a thing, ſo that a man ſhall
not haue giuen, I know not what the ſmalleſt blotte that may be, but
that which was a vertue ſhalbe taken for a vice. So then, when wee
ſhall haue wreſted and depraued for one onely word, that which hath
bene well ſaid: loe, we charge a man with euill, wee hurt his good
name, and harme him in his reputation. Let vs therfore note that we
are falſe witneſſes, not only when we forge & inuent that which hath
neuer bene done or ſpoken: but when by anie ſubtile cauill, by any euill
& ſiniſter interpretation, we ſhall turne that to euill which might
haue bene well taken. Now, as I haue ſaid, this is oftentimes done,
when men are too reprehenſiue & ouer captious, when they are wayward
& frowardly bent: for then will they turne all to ill. It is ſaid,
That charitie is not ſuſpicious (as S. Paule hath ſpoken hereof) and
that we muſt know the euill before we condemne it.1. Cor. 13. 5. It is verie true,
that we may bee often times deceiued in iudging of that which is
good, and that which is euill: but when there ſhalbe ſuch ſignes and
markes, that the things ſhalbe ſo manifeſt, that we may be bolde to
ſay: Behold a wicked thing, yet if we be ouermuch bent to ſnatch at
it, we may offend. And aboue al, when we haue ſo malicious a nature,
as to backbite & to ſlander men for we know not what, know we that
we are cōdemned as falſe witneſſes before God. Now if thoſe which
on ſome occaſion giuen, haue ſhewen themſelues hardie & bold in reprehending,
are yet to be condemned, becauſe they haue proceeded
therin ouer rigorouſly: what ſhall be ſaid of them, which of manifeſt
hatred will peruert that which hath bin done or ſpoken, which ought
notwithſtanding to haue bene well taken, & wherein there ſhalbe no
manifeſt vice? If they will peruert & depraue it by their ill & wicked
handling, are they not falſe witneſſes before God? So then, let vs
lerne, ſo to procure the honor & profit of our neighbours, that alwayes
we haue a regard vnto it in our talking. Be it then that we reprehend
them, be it that we ſpeake of their vices, to the end they may be puniſhed
for them, & that they which might be ſeduced & led vnto euill by
their wicked example, be not peruerted: let vs neuertheleſſe alwayes
haue this regard, to procure their profite & welfare as much in vs lieth.
And let vs alwayes obſerue this meaſure in reprouing, that we
defame not men in ſuch ſort, that they be wholy diſcoraged to returne
to do well. For we ought rather to burie their vices aſmuch as wee
may, both before God & before men, that they may call to minde their
dutie, & not loſe all ſhame to giue ouer themſelues inordinately vnto

all wickedneſſe. Thus ye ſee in what ſort we ought to procure their
good. Now, if we will, as we ought, obſerue this which is here cōteined,
we muſt come to an higher point & principle: namely, to conſider
why God hath made our tongue, & for what cauſe he hath beſtowed on
vs the gift of ſpeking, knowing he hath granted it vs to this end, that
we might cōmunicate together. Now the cōmunication which is betwene
mankind, what other end ought it to haue than to maintein vs
in charitie? We muſt therfore briefly lerne, ſo to bridle our tongues,
that the vnitie & peace which God commandeth that we haue among
vs, be always kept & nouriſhed aſmuch as is poſſible.Iohn. 13. 6. And lo why S.
Iames vſeth ſuch vehemencie when he mentioneth euill ſpeeches: he
ſaith that the tongue which is but a ſmal portion of the bodie, & a litle
morſell of fleſh, kindleth notwithſtanding ſuch a fire, as might burne
the greateſt & thickeſt foreſts in the world. Let vs therefore returne to
this principle: namely, to know that God hath beſtowed on vs a ſingular
benefite, in giuing vs the meane to be able to cōmen & conferre
together. Lo the thoughts & affections of men are ſecret & hidden, &
the tongue which openeth and diſplayeth the ſecrets of the heart. Let
vs therfore conſider diligently how to vſe well ſo great a benefite, let
vs beware how we defile our tongue with our vices & wickednes, ſeeing
God hath giuen it to nouriſh a loue & brotherhood among vs: let
vs take heed we abuſe it not to babble & prattle of this & that, ſo as to
turne our ſpeeches to ill purpoſes, to be empoiſoned one againſt another.
Behold what is the point whervnto we muſt come. Now ſeeing
we haue in generall known how we ſhal auoid this vice of being falſe
witneſſes, becauſe this is an hard matter to bridle our tongues, let vs
trauell herein with ſo much the greater diligence. We ſee how many
ill ſpeches eaſily eſcape vs, & when we haue ſpoken at rouers, without
any thinking what we ſay, becauſe we are ſo accuſtomed herevnto
we thinke it no vice before God. But let vs note, that the more we are
by nature inclined to ſpeake vndiſcreetly, to reproch and backbite our
neighbours, the more paines we muſt beſtowe to repreſſe, and bridle
our tongues. For if we be giuen to any ſin, this inclination and accuſtoming
our ſelues vnto it, ſhal not ſerue vs for an excuſe before God.
Nay, when we ſhall haue knowne anie vice to bee in vs, wee muſt
bee ſo farre off from flattering our ſelues herein, that we ought to
ſigh and ſay: Alas, I ſee this vice reigneth ouer much in mee,
I muſt therefore more manfullie warre againſt it, and force
my ſelfe, through the grace of my GOD, ſo farre as to repreſſe

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
in me, that thing which I ſee God condemneth. And to be the more
heedfull in this thing, let vs thinke on the manace and threat he gaue
againſt it.1. Cor. 6. 10. For when Saint Paule ſaith, That neither fornicatours,
nor dronkards, nor extortioners, nor murderers, ſhall inherite the
kingdome of heauen, & numbreth alſo among them railers, euill ſpeakers,
baniſhing them in like maner from all hope of euerlaſting life
and ſaluation: when we heare this, is there any talke to be had of couering
vs with leaues, to make our ſelues beleue there is no ill done,
when we ſhall haue ſlaundered our neighbours? Thinke we that the
threat which God hath pronounced by the mouth of Saint Paule, is
onely to feare little children, and that it ſhall not bee executed vpon
them, which would exempt themſelues from it in deſpite of him? So
then let vs labour with all our diligence, to obſerue this commandement.
And aboue all (that wee may conclude herewith) let vs make
this compariſon, that if God will that the good name of our neighbours
be kept and eſteemed deare of vs, and if he ſo ſtreightly forbid
vs all ill reproches and ſlaunders, which might diſgrace and diſcredite
him, how ought we to behaue our ſelues towards him? Are wee
not an hundred times more bound to mainteine the honour of God?
And becauſe we cannot profite him any way, are we not much more
bound herevnto, than to conſerue in his entire eſtate the honour of
men? So then let vs beware of being falſe witneſſes againſt God:
as S. Paule ſaieth,1. Cor. 15. 15 That they which corrupt the puritie of the Goſpell,
are falſe witneſſes againſt God, and not againſt men. What
muſt be done then? The truth of God muſt be mainteined by vs, we
muſt proceede therein roundly and vprightly: when wee ſhall ſee a
good doctrine, we muſt defend and ſuſteine it, knowing that God appointeth
vs as his Proctors and Atturnies. Shall I then ſee a truth
borne downe and oppreſſed? I muſt not ſuffer this as much as in me
lieth. And why? For God calleth me to procure in his name, that
an vntruth be repreſſed, and borne to the ground. And this ought to
be obſerued, eſpecially when the queſtion is concerning the doctrine
of ſaluation. So that when we ſhall ſee that this doctrine ſhalbe falſified,
and that men would herein mingle their leuen, to corrupt others
with their falſhoode and lying, we muſt here ſhewe our ſelues trulie
zealous, not to ſuffer falſe witneſſes againſt God, to haue their ſway:
except we will be conſenting with them, and partakers of their wickedneſſe,
as I haue alreadie declared. And ſo let vs learne, that when

we ſhall haue liued with men in ſuch ſimplicitie, that a man ſhall not
be able to charge vs, that by backbitings, lies, or ſlaunders, we haue
diſcredited any one: we muſt alſo haue this zeale towards GOD,
that his truth remaine in his entire and perfect eſtate, and that it be
mainteined ſo, that it may reigne and beare rule among vs. Ye ſee
in effect what we haue to conſider vpon this commandement.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good
God, with acknowledging of our ſinnes, praying him to make vs
feele them better than we haue done, that we may be led further and
further vnto ſuch a repentance, as we may learne to conſider of our
vices, to be ſorie for them, and to be diſpleaſed with our ſelues, to the
end, that hauing obteined forgiueneſſe of them, we may learne to order
our life after his commandementes, that he may be honoured of
vs in all true obedience, and not onelie by confeſſion of mouth. That
it will pleaſe him to graunt his grace not onelie vnto vs, but to all
people and nations of the earth, &c.
         
         
            The. 12. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               21. Thou ſhalt not couet thy neighbours wife, neither ſhalt
thou deſire thy neighbours houſe, nor his fielde, nor his
man ſeruaunt, nor his maide, nor his oxe, nor his aſſe, nor
any thing that is his.
            
            
               IT might ſeeme at the firſt ſight, that
this commaundement is ſuperfluous,
becauſe that God hauing condemned
theft and adulterie, would there alſo
repreſſe all wicked concupiſcences
and deſires. For wee haue ſaid, that
theſe commaundementes muſt be expounded
of vs, according to the nature
of God. And we knowe, that the
proper office of God is to ſound our
heartes, that he onelie knoweth the thoughtes which are ſecret and

hid: and therefore it foloweth, that when God forbiddeth men to bee
theeues and adulterers, he would bridle their affec
                  ••
               ons and deſires.
And in verie deede if this were not, God ſhould haue no more power
in making and preſcribing of lawes than mortal men. For an earthlie
man, if he condemne adulterie, he will alſo condemne the act and
deede thereof: yea, if an euill intent and meaning appeare, it ſhall
be puniſhed. If the law of God were ſuch, it ſhould import no great
thing. For it ſhould be but a policie, that is, a rule of order to gouerne
vs honeſtlie before men. But there is in it much more. As we
ſee that S. Paule ſaith,1. Tim. 1. 5. That the law cannot bee kept and obſerued
without a pure conſcience and a faith vnfeigned. If it be then required,
that we haue ſuch a ſoundneſſe for to obſerue rightlie, and as we
ought, the lawe of God: it followeth, that vnder the name of adulterie,
all wicked luſtes and deſires are forbidden, and ſo likewiſe vnder
the name of theft. We might alſo alledge to this purpoſe the authoritie
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who is a faithfull interpreter of the
lawe. For it is by his ſpirite that. Moſes and all the Prophets haue
ſpoken. Why then is it now added, that we muſt not couet or deſire?
If mention hath bene alreadie made of all wicked deſires, was there
any neede that this ſhould be againe repeated? Wee muſt therfore
note for anſwere herevnto, that God in this place would not repreſſe
ſuch wicked affections and deſires as are alreadie reſolute and concluded
vpon of vs, but thoſe affections which do firſt pricke and ſtirre
vs vp, albeit we cleaue not, nor conſent vnto them. This requireth a
more ample and familiar expoſition. Sometimes to couet, importeth
the will which is in a man, as when I ſhall caſt mine eye on the
goodes of my neighbour, if I ſhall be tempted to couetouſneſſe, and
that I nouriſh ſuch a temptation in me, and giue my ſelfe the bridle:
loe ſinne hath wonne ſo much, that I haue a reſolute will in me, that
I could wiſh well that this ſhould be mine. Loe then one kind of deſire
which importeth withall a will, when a man ſhall conſent vnto
ſinne, and if hee had the meane, he would put in practiſe his wicked
wil and purpoſe which he hath conceiued. Now ſuch wicked deſires
haue bene alredie forbidden, when it hath bene ſaid, Thou ſhalt not
ſteale: Thou ſhalt not commit adulterie. For God hath not only forbidden
the act of fornication & ſtealing, but to deſire and luſt after, either
the wife of an other, or his goods & ſubſtaunce. But there are other
deſires and luſts, to the which we cleaue not at all, to conſent vnto

them, which oftentimes tickle and ſtirre vs vp, and we perceiue
ſome motion in vs which is againſt God, and is rebellious to the integritie
and vprightnes which is conteined in the law, and ſuch deſires
are forbidden in this place. So we ſee, that God, not without
cauſe, hauing condemned all euill deſires and affections, annexeth,
that this is not yet ſuch a perfection as he requireth: but wee muſt
know that euerie affection which ſtirreth vs vp vnto euill, albeit we
conclude not any thing within our ſelues, neither reſt our ſelues on
it, that if onlie a concupiſcence forceablie breake forth in vs, and we
ſtriue therwith, that this is a ſinne committed: we are culpable before
God. And thus we ſee what integritie is required in this place
when our Lord hauing forbidden wicked deſires, adioineth that both
our ſenſes and mindes muſt be locked vp in ſuch ſort vnder his feare,
and inflamed with ſuch a loue and deſire, to walke in all holineſſe,
that we be not moued or driuen either on one ſide or other by any wicked
paſſion, to deſire either the good or the wife of an other. Now ſeing
we haue the intent and meaning of God, let vs diligently conſider
whervnto he bindeth vs. For the law ought to ſerue vs for a looking
glaſſe, to behold the pouertie and miſerie which is in vs: and after
that we ſhall haue vnderſtood what our dutie is, let vs know that
we are to be condemned, if we come not neere that perfection, to the
which God hath called vs. Ye ſee wherevpon we muſt ſlaie to make
our profite of this laſt commaundement of the lawe. And to the ende
that we may be ſo much the more attentiue, and that we may knowe
that this is a doctrine which requireth, that we applie our whole ſtudies
therein, let vs beare in minde that which S. Paule ſaith, That
being reputed a great and exceding wiſe Doctor,Phil. 3. 
                     •
                  . hauing bene nouriſhed
in the law of God from his infancie, yet was he ſo blind, that he
vnderſtoode not what the lawe of God ment, vntill he was conuerted,
and that our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt had enlightened him by his
Goſpell, to the end he might knowe whither the lawe of God ought
to lead vs.
            Beholde then Saint Paule, who was inſtructed in ſuch ſorte,
that hee was in great reputation among men, not among the
Painims, to ſay, that he was ſome great Philoſopher: but he
was taught and brought vp in the lawe of GOD. And touching
his life, hee proteſteth, that he liued irreprehenſible, as
without all faulte beefore men: Loe, I ſay, Sainte Paule

an holy and learned perſonage after the common eſtimation of men,
but yet a poore beaſt touching the law of God. And why? He ſaith he
eſteemed himſelfe liuing, & that he thought himſelfe iuſt before God,
and knew not that he had neede of the mercie which GOD offereth
vnto all ſinners. For he abſteined from theft, from fornication, & ſuch
like thinges: he had no wicked deſires in him which one might perceiue,
and which might be knowen vnto men, ſo that he iuſtified him
ſelfe in his owne fantaſie. Now in the end, when God had taken pitie
on him, he opened his eyes, & made him to vnderſtand that which
is conteined in this laſt commaundement, Thou ſhalt not couet. Behold
how S. Paul began now firſt to vnderſtand the lawe, in which
before he was a doctor, making profeſſion thereof, wherein hee had
bene taught and inſtructed from his firſt age. Vntill he had wel conſidered
and medicated of this, he tript ouer the quicke coles, he learned
his leſſon (as we ſay) by rot, he neuer taſted nor vnderſtoode the
force and power of the lawe, he neuer knewe that this was ſinne, to
condemne himſelfe before God, and to haue his refuge to his mercie,
in the which the hope of our ſaluation lieth, and wherevpon it ought
to be grounded. Seeing then S. Paul knew not the law, and had no
right vnderſtanding thereof, but by this worde: let vs labour herein
with ſo much the more diligence: and ſeeing that all the time of
his life, vntill his conuerſion, he was ſo blind, that he vnderſtood not
this worde: by ſo much the more ought we to bee attentiue in this
place, for we are of no greater abilitie than he: but God by his holy
ſpirit muſt reueale to vs what this concupiſcence is, which hee hath
in this place condemned. Now beyond all this, we muſt haue an other
admonition which is very needfull and neceſſarie for vs. For the
diuell hath ſought in ſuch ſort to couer and hide this precept, that a
man ſhould not knowe the intent and meaning of God, but that one
ſhould lightlie content himſelfe, to condemne onelie thoſe euill concupiſcences
for ſinne, which appeared manifeſtly, and whereof a man
were plainly conuicted. So that many haue reſtrained this word of
concupiſcence to thoſe euill affections and deſires, which importe a
reſolute will and full conſent. Now this is againſt the natural ſenſe
and meaning of Moſes: and yet is this a doctrine fullie concluded
on in papiſtrie. Although the Papiſts cannot denie, that to be pricked
and prouoked with an euil and wicked deſire, is a damnable vice,
and which procedeth from originall ſinne, and from this corruption

which we drawe from our father Adam: yet they imagine that after
baptiſme this is no more a ſinne. As if ſuch a fantaſie come into the
minde of man, to doubt of the promiſes of God, to murmur againſt
him, to be angrie with him: when a man ſhalbe afflicted, if it come
into his fantaſie to accuſe God of iniuſtice and crueltie, this is not
a ſinne ſay the Papiſts. Neither are theſe of the rudeſt & ignoranieſt
ſort among them which ſpeake thus, but this is a generall reſolution
& doctrine vniuerſally concluded on in all their diueliſh Synagogs.
There is not a Synagog among them, where this hath not bene receiued
as an article of faith: namelie, that a man being prouoked and
ſtirred vp with ſome wicked deſire ſinneth not, that if he be tempted
in himſelfe to commit murther, to empoyſon any, to commit fornication:
and briefly, to be guiltie of all the crimes and enormities in the
world: if ſo that he conſent and aſſent not thereto, (for loe the wordes
which they vſe) that is to ſay, if hee reſolue not himſelfe herein, to
ſay, I will put in practiſe my wicked conceite, and that hee ſtay not
himſelfe hereon to pleaſe himſelfe in this wicked affection, all this is
no ſinne. This is, ſay they, but to exerciſe vs in combate and fight againſt
ſinne, and we then declare that we are valiant champions, and
that ſinne beareth not rule ouer vs, or reigneth in vs. Now I graunt
it is true, that the faithfull ſhew well that the ſpirit of God reigneth
in them, when they repell and beate backe ſuch temptations, when
they bridle and captiue themſelues ſo, when they reſiſt and withſtand
ſuch thinges, knowing that they are contrarie vnto God, and that he
condemneth them. It is certeine that hereby it is ſhewed, that God
hath geuen vs victorie ouer ſinne, and that the vertue and power of
his ſpirit abideth in vs, and that we are ſtoute and valiaunt champions
to bid battell againſt Sathan. But this is not to ſay, that we are
exempted and freed from all fault, and that we may ſo plucke out of
vs all ſinne, and ranſome our ſelues ſo fullie, as if it might not ſtaine
and ſpot vs no longer. Alas, we are farre wide from this. For on the
one ſide it is true, that we haue great cauſe to praiſe God, that he beſtoweth
this grace on vs by his holy ſpirit, to ſurmount & ouercome
all wicked affections. But in the meane time, we ought to bewaile
our ſelues, knowing that we are on our part ouerweake, and that if
he take not pitie on vs, foraſmuch as we haue within vs an euill and
wicked conſcience, which is to prouoke his vengeaunce againſt vs,
we ſhould well deſerue to be throwen downe of him into the bottomleſſe

pit of hell. But let vs note how God would here open and diſcouer
the ſhame and reproche of the Papiſts, and how he would ſhew
that the greateſt Clerkes among them, are more rude and ignorant
than the poore vnbeleeuers which neuer heard one word of the holy
ſcripture. And why? For let vs conſider of that which is conteined
in the lawe. It is ſaid, that the ſumme of the lawe is, That wee loue
God with all our heart, with all our minde, with all our vnderſtanding,
with all the faculties and powers we haue. If it were ſaid,
Thou ſhalt loue God with all thine heart, a man might with ſome
colour conclude, that there is no ſinne, but when the will is certeine
and reſolute. For the heart in the Scripture, although it ſignifie
ſometime the vnderſtanding, yet is it taken for the will. Now then,
one might vſe this cauill:Deut, 6. 5. It is ſaid, That we muſt loue God with all
our heart,Mat. 22. 37. if ſo be then our will be not contrarie: well, it is inough,
we haue quited our ſelues before God. For one might happilie reſtraine
the will from conſenting to this wicked affection, and ſo it
ſhould ſeeme that the wicked deſires which firſt incite and ſtirre vs
vp, and yet hold vs not captiues, be not compriſed vnder ſinne. But
God addeth, With all thy heart, with all thy vnderſtanding and
thoughtes, and with all thy powers.
            Let vs now conſider, if I conceiue any thing againſt God, if I conceiue
any euill luſt or deſire of fornication or ſtealing, albeit I cleaue
not at all vnto it, whether one part of my ſoule & vnderſtanding bee
not alreadie corrupted, and whether I loue God with all my heart,
when one parte of my vnderſtanding is bent againſt him? There is
no queſtion of the heart, but of this apprehenſion and conceiuing of
the minde, which is in the ſoule of man. Nowe I ſhewe well that
there is vanitie in this, that the feare of God withholdeth me not as
it ought. It followeth then, that I am culpable and condemned,
becauſe I diſcharge not my ſelfe in louing GOD, as he hath commaunded
me. And againe, is there not ſome vertue and power of
my ſoule which applieth not it ſelfe to thinke on this or that, which
is contrarie vnto GOD and his iuſtice? So then, wee ſee that euill
and wicked thoughtes are condemned, and that wee cannot ſo
excuſe them, but that GOD ſhall worthilie puniſh vs for them.
And let vs knowe, that albeit men neuer conſent vnto euil, to haue
their will reſolutely bent therevnto: yet ceaſe they not to bee accurſed
before GOD, if hee would vſe his ſeueritie againſt them.

Now therefore wee haue the true ſenſe and meaning, and wee ſee
withall, that wee muſt take diligent heede to this place, that we bee
not ſeduced and abuſed herein. And the example of Saint Paule
ought to pricke vs forwarde ſo much the more, ſeeing that he confeſſeth
that hee was ignoraunt of the lawe of GOD, vntill our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt had enlightened him by his holy ſpirite, to the ende hee
might knowe what this worde of concupiſcence imported. It remaineth
that we now applie this which hath bene touched to our vſe
and profite.
            In the firſt place therefore let vs learne, that to ſerue God well,
and as we ought, we muſt not onelie deſire to doe well, neither is it
ſufficient that we profit herein, and proceede effectually: but we muſt
purge our ſelues of all euill and wicked affections, and of all corrupt
thoughts, in ſuch ſort, that all our ſenſes & vnderſtanding tend to this
end, to giue ouer our ſelues fullie and wholie vnto God, that we may
ſhew wee haue not bene ſo diſtracted, as to bend on one ſide or other:
but that wee bee held vp ſo ſtreight, as to runne without beeing
hindered or ſtaied: yea, to runne in that way, whiche God ſheweth
vs, ſo that there bee in vs nothing, but all puritie: and when wee
ſhall haue well and throughlie vnderſtood this, wee ſhalbe aduertiſed
to bee watchfull, and to ſtand on our garde. For wee ſee howe
men wander, and lead them ſelues aſtray. And what is the cauſe
hereof? Becauſe they reckon (as wee ſay) without their hoſt. For
they expounde the lawe of GOD after their owne fanſie, and they
thinke it ſufficient, if their will bee not wicked, and that they reſt
not them ſelues on their euill thoughtes. Well, God will not impute
this vnto vs, ſay they: and herevppon they walke on in their
wicked concupiſcences, and they haue an headband whiche they
put before their eyes, that they might not knowe howe cloſelie they
deceiue them ſelues. Now when men ſpeake thus, yet this will
not ſerue them to eſcape the hande of the heauenlie Iudge. Let vs
therefore take diligent heede, we reſtraine our ſelues in our concupiſcences.
For God hath not onelie condemned wicked intentes
and purpoſes, but all deſires alſo, which prouoke vs to euil, and driue
vs therevnto. Let vs therefore walke in ſo much the greater feare,
let euerie one hold him ſelf, as it were vnder lock, foraſmuch as there
is no part in vs, which is not infected with ſinne. For let vs examine
all the faults of our ſoule, and wee ſhall finde ſinne diſperſed ouer all:

as when a poiſon hath entred the bodie of a man, ſo that euerie part
thereof is infected. There is in vs ſuch an vniuerſall leproſie, as poſſeſſeth
both the bones and the marrowe, the thoughts and the affections,
and all which is in vs. Seeing then it is ſo, that our nature is
thus corrupted, ought wee not to be ſo much the more vigilant and
watchfull to hold our ſelues in bridle, ſeing God by the law hath condemned
all wicked thoughts, which tend to incite vs vnto euill, ſeeing
hee hath condemned the ſmalleſt motion which flattereth & tickleth
vs, and when we onelie feele our will a little pricked and ſtirred,
albeit it be not at all held captiue? When we ſee this (I ſaie)
haue we not great occaſion to awaken vs to walke vnder the hand of
God, in ſo much the greater heedefulneſſe? So then behold how this
precept ought to awaken vs, when wee are ſo ſleepie and ſouthfull,
and would ſo eaſilie acquite our ſelues of our duetie towardes God.
But let vs knowe, that no ſuch ſhiftes will ſerue vs to eſcape. And
why? God followeth on alwayes to condemne wicked deſires, hauing
condemned wicked counſels and purpoſes. Nowe this doctrine
ought to ſerue two wayes to our vſe and profite. Firſt, it may
teach vs more feruentlie to praie vnto God to gouerne vs by his holy
ſpirit, and to purge vs from all our corruptions and vices. And
againe, hauing made our requeſt and prayer vnto him, that euery one
force himſelfe, that we vſe violence with our nature, with all our ſenſes
and appetites, ſeeing there is in vs ſuch a rebellion againſt the
law of God. As S. Paul alſo ſpeaketh not onelie of the wils of men,
when he ſaith,Rom. 8. 7. That through their peruerſe and crooked nature, they
are enimies vnto God: but he mentioneth the affections & thoughts,
for he vſeth a word in that place which ſignifieth the thoughts which
we conceiue. Seeing it is ſo, let vs knowe, that when we ſhall haue
beſtowed our labour well, to hold our ſelues ſnaffled with the bridle
of God, that yet ſome euil deſires ſhal eſcape vs, for which we ought
to lament and bewaile our ſelues before God. Loe what the firſt vſe
of this doctrine is: namelie, that we haue this zele to call vpon God
to gouerne vs by his holy ſpirite, and that we employ all our paines
herein, and vſe ſuch force with our ſelues to be retained from all euil,
that Sathan haue not his entrance into our heartes, that he may not
make any breach into vs, to winne poſſeſſion of our bodies: but that
we keepe him aloofe and farre off. And as ſoone as we ſhal perceiue
any thought in vs, which ſhall tende vnto euill, let vs come forth to

oppoſe our ſelues againſt it, let vs make this barre, to ſay, What?
God muſt beare rule wholie in thee, he muſt poſſeſſe not onelie thy
mind, but all thy ſenſes and thoughts. For the ſecond, we muſt learne
to condemne our ſelues, & giue all glorie vnto God, in confeſſing that
we are all culpable & guiltie, and that if he call vs to account, & ſhall
vſe ſeueritie with vs, loe we all periſh and are caſt downe to the bottomleſſe
pitte of hell. We muſt come vnto this point, otherwiſe we
ſhall not profite in the lawe of God, as wee ought. But here a man
may demand, ſeeing that God knoweth the frailtie and weakneſſe
of men, Why he either ſtrengtheneth not them better, or why he maketh
a lawe ſo ſtraite and ſo auſtere? For it ſeemeth that God would
oppreſſe vs, when he forbiddeth wicked deſires, and that he is not
content that we render him obedience in our willes, enioyning vs no
further thing by adding this word. And loe why theſe ieaſters ſay,
That God would ſpite and anger men in his law, and as it were forbid
them to ſcratch themſelues when they itch. But we muſt come to
knowe this miſerie and wretchedneſſe which is in vs: namely, that
we haue neither thoughtes nor affections, which are not rebellious
vnto God. Let vs not therefore maruell, if there be ſuch a ſtrife and
combate betweene the lawe of God, and our luſtes and appetites.
And why? For when we haue diligently ſifted and examined what
ſoeuer is within vs, we ſhall finde there is nothing but all manner
of corruption and damnable wickedneſſe. For we cannot conceiue
one onelie thought which tendeth not vnto euill. Seeing it is ſo
with vs, and that God hath giuen vs a perfect rule of all goodneſſe
and vpright liuing, hath hee not as it were thundered againſt vs?
And is it not manifeſt, that the fire and the water are at leſſe ſtrife,
yea, agree better, than the nature of men, and the iuſtice of God?
Let vs not therefore thinke it ſtraunge, that God hath ſo reproued
our appetites and luſtes: and when we heare the blaſphemies which
theſe ieaſters ſpue foorth, let vs deteſt them as monſters. For in
ſteade of glorifying of GOD in his iuſtice, they fling themſelues
and ſpurne againſt him, as ſauage and furious beaſtes. Lo what
wee haue to note touching the frailtie and weakneſſe of men: that
albeit it bee ſo great: yet he condemneth it in his lawe. And why?
For when GOD ordereth our life, and ſheweth vs howe wee are
to walke, hee hath not reſpect what we can doe: but hee conſidereth
of that we owe him, he reſpecteth what vprightneſſe and innocencie

of liuing is, though it be not found in vs. We are the creatures
of GOD: ought wee not then to giue ouer our ſelues wholie
to his ſeruice? Without all doubt we ought: for this is a percemptorie
reaſon: and can not be gaineſaide. And men may well mutter
and murmur hereat, yet ſhall they alwayes bee conuicted with
ſo manifeſt a proofe, that hauing their beeing of GOD, and for
him, they ought to dedicate vnto him all their ſenſes and affections,
and whatſoeuer there is either in their bodie or their ſoule.
Nowe withall let vs note diligently, that we cannot acquire vs of
our duetie towardes him. But where is the cauſe hereof, but in our
owne nature? But this we drawe from Adam. It followeth not, for
that we are helde captiues vnder ſinne, and that this curſed ſeruitude
and bondage hindereth vs from doing well, and maketh vs giue
our ſelues altogether vnto that which is euill, what euer other cauſe
be hereof, the roote is in vs, and euerie one ſhall feele himſelfe culpable.Iam. 1. 13.
And we muſt not ſay, that we are driuen herevnto by anie externall
force, but euerie one is ledde and driuen vnto this by his owne
proper concupiſcence, and ſo there remaineth no excuſe for vs. And
hereby we ſee that we muſt not meaſure the lawe of God by our owne
faculties and powers. And why? God reſpecteth not what we can
doe, or what our power and abilitie is: but he reſpecteth howe farre
we are bound vnto him, he reſpecteth this integritie and perfection,
which is without vs. Behold what we haue to obſerue. And this is
that which abuſeth and deceiueth the Papiſts. For they haue this
principle among them, That the law of God is not impoſſible vnto
men. It is wonderfull how they haue bene ſo mad, how the diuell hath
inchanted and bewitched them in ſuch ſort. For this doctrine is moſt
cleare and manifeſt throughout all the holy ſcripture: namely, that
men ſhall bee alwayes condemned by the lawe, and muſt alwayes
haue recourſe to the meere grace and mercie of God. When Saint
Paule will proue that men are accurſed being ſinners,Gal. 3. 10. and that there
is not at all one iuſt man, what argument or reaſon is it which hee
vſeth? He alledgeth the place of Moſes: Curſed is euerie man that
continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the
law to do them. Now it might ſeeme at firſt ſight, that Saint Paule
hath euill argued, and that this reaſon is impertinent. For let it bee
graunted, that all they which haue tranſgreſſed the lawe of God, are
accurſed: yet it followeth not, that all mankinde be curſſed. For

if one man obſerue the lawe, and acquite himſelfe herein: loe hee is
exempted out of this condemnation. Some then ſhall bee founde
which ſhall haue obſerued the lawe of GOD, and therefore all are
not curſſed. But Saint Paule preſuppoſeth that the lawe is vnpoſſible,
and if he had not tooke this as graunted, hee might ſeeme to
haue proceeded in his argument without ſenſe or reaſon. Thus
we ſee that the Papiſtes haue taken and grounded themſelues vpon
a principle and ground, altogether contrarie to the ſpirite of God:
yea, they are ſo rude and ignoraunt, that they haue not yet learned
and vnderſtoode the ABC of faith, and of Chriſtian religion.
So then, let vs diligently note, that when queſtion is of the lawe of
GOD, we muſt not meaſure it by our ſtrength and power, to reſpect
what we are able to doe: but we muſt conſider what we owe vnto
God. Yea: but what then ſhall bee the meane to deliuer vs from
the curſe of the lawe? For it ſeemeth vnto them, that all the worlde
muſt needes be damned. I graunt it well, and it behoueth it bee ſo,
that is, that we be all damned, if we will haue ſaluation in Chriſt Ieſus.
For how ſhall we ſeeke vnto the grace and mercie of God, except
we knowe the want and need we haue thereof? Men would not ſeeme
beggers by their good will. But as long as we ſhall thinke anie
iuſtice to bee in vs, wee ſhall neuer haue any care to ſeeke it elſewhere,
than in our ſelues, & therfore we muſt be wholie rid of all opinion
of our owne vertues, we muſt perceiue the wrath of God which
is bent againſt vs, we muſt feele the weight and burthen of death
which lieth on and preſſeth vs. For without this, it cannot bee that
wee ſhall bee able to prepare our ſelues to obteine mercie at the
hande of GOD. But this thing requireth a more large and
ample declaration. Let vs therefore firſt of all beare in minde,
that when wee feele anie euill thought to ariſe in vs, and that
our appetites and luſtes, with anie pleaſant motion, ſhall tickle
and ſtirre vs vp vnto euill, that we bee culpable and alſo guiltie of
ſinne before GOD. But here one may demaunde this queſtion,
Whether, if when a man conceiueth a wicked thought, and hee
bee ſo farre from reſting on it, that hee deteſteth it before hee
feele anie pricke and prouocation thereof, whether this be ſinne?
As there are manie thoughtes, whiche touche not our heart,
which moue vs not at all, which ingender and breede no wicked
luſt in vs: yea, a man may haue ſome thought ariſe, beeing as

it were halfe a ſleepe: and well, this flitteth from him without mouing
the heart, or drawing anie luſt after it: and yet for this we muſt
lament and bewaile our ſelues before GOD, and knowe, that
except God ſtaied vs by his grace, wee haue opened the doore to
Satan, whereat entring in, hee might incontinently winne vs
vnto farther wickedneſſe. Wee muſt therefore bee ſorie for this
thing, albeit GOD imputeth it not vnto vs for ſinne. But there
is nowe a ſeconde degree, when not onelie wee conceiue ſome
wicked thing in our minde, moued herevnto by ſome preſent obiect:
but when wee ſhall be thereby ſomething moued, that wee
ſhall feele ſome pricke of Satan which ſtirreth vs, then is ſinne
conceiued, that is to ſay, although there bee no conſent giuen:
and albeit the will bee not reſolute herein, yet is ſinne formed before
GOD, and it is d
                  •
               mnable in his ſight. for to haue this
better vnderſtoode, wee muſt alledge examples hereof. It may
ſo happen, that a man beholding either the houſe or the lande of
an other, conceiueth ſome flying fantaſie, and yet his heart is nothing
moued herewith, hee hath no ſuch deſire bredde in him, as
to ſaye, I woulde this were mine: but hee paſſeth from this
thought, and ſeeth it is but a vanitie: he coulde not withſtand it
from ariſing in him.
            But albeit there be not here in anie wicked affection and deſire,
yet notwithſtanding, GOD doth hereby warne vs of our inſirmitie
and weakeneſſe. And wee muſt herevpon humble and bewaile
ourſelues, and acknowledge that this is alreadie a ſinne, for which
wee were to bee condemned. For let vs conſider whether this ſhall
bee founde in the Angels of heauen. It is moſt certaine it ſhall not
bee ſeene in them. And yet the iuſtice and righteouſneſſe of Angels,
ſhall hardly ſuffice to ſatiſfie and anſwere the lawe of GOD.
True it is, that there is in God an other iuſtice, as we haue ſeene
in the booke of Iob, which ſurpaſſeth and exceedeth this of the law:
but if the Angels of heauen applie them ſelues to fulfill the lawe
of GOD, without doubt it is all they are able to doe, to conforme
them ſelues to the rule which hee here preſcribeth vs. Wee
ſee then, that this is a vice, for which men ought to condemne
them ſelues: not when they ſhall haue hadde anie occaſion offered,
whereby ſome wicked affection might ariſe: but when
they ſhall haue bredde in them ſuch a deſire, as to ſay, I coulde

wiſh this or that. Although a man incontinentlie repelleth ſuch a deſire,
and ſtayeth nothing at all vpon it, yet is he culpable of this couetouſneſſe
which is here mentioned. Nowe, ſeeing this is ſo, let vs
learne altogether to condemne our ſelues: and againe, let vs beware
we fall not into a double condemnation, when we ſhall not only
haue coueted ſomething to prouoke vs vnto euill, but ſhall haue nouriſhed
this deſire: as when a woman hath couceiued, ſhee nouriſheth
her childe vntill ſhe bring him forth: for when we ſhall haue looſed
the bridle to our wicked luſtes and deſires, ſo farre, as that our will
be wonne, in ſo much that we reſt our ſelues on wickedneſſe, to giue
our full conſent therevnto, behold howe we incurre a double condemnation:
and then muſt we with more and greater teares bewaile our
miſerie: for we ſee we haue brought two condemnations vppon our
heads, except God of his infinite mercie and goodneſſe beare with
vs. Loe, what wee haue here to note touching euill and wicked
thoughtes. Nowe withall we muſt returne to conſider of the remedie
we haue herein: for we were in a deſperate caſe, as being vtterlie
confounded, if we had not this grace and mercie of God, whereby
we are ſuccoured and relieued. Therefore, when we ſhall haue vnderſtood
and confeſſed, that we are in all ſortes that may be culpable, beholde,
God calleth and ſheweth vs, that of theſe ſo manie wicked deſires
which are in vs, although in their owne nature they are ſinne:
yet will he not impute anie of them vnto vs for ſinne. Is then a wicked
deſire reputed ſinne in the faithfull? No. But here two diuers
things are to be conſidered. For if we reſpect the nature of the vice,
it is alwayes ſinne. But doeth God pardon it? Why then beholde,
he calleth none of theſe euill concupiſcences vnto account, foraſmuch
as by his free mercie and goodneſſe hee pardoneth them vnto the
faithfull. We knowe alſo, that by the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, all our
ſpottes are waſhed and wiped out: and baptiſme is hereof a ſure teſtimonie
and witneſſe vnto vs. For by it haue we bene waſhed from
all the filthes and pollutions which are in vs, that we might appeare
pure and cleane in the ſight of God: yea, which more is, thoſe mortall
and deadlie ſinnes which are acuiallis committed, ſhall not bee
imputed vnto vs, becauſe (as I haue ſaid) that God hath buried our
ſinne, and will not regard it: but we muſt notwithſtanding haue reſpect
vnto it, and beware diligentlie howe we offende. But if anie abuſe
and deceiue them ſelues, to be perſuaded, they conceiue no wicked

ked deſires, this ſhall occaſion GOD to call them to their account.
And why? For, when men flatter them ſelues they muſt
needes be condemned. And loe why the diuell hath ſo much ende-uoured
to blind the eyes of men, in making them beleeue that none
of all theſe thinges are ſinne: yea, we ſee how the Papiſts thinke
that the groſſeſt faultes that may be, are ſoone wiped out with one
ſigne of the croſſe, or with one Aſperges of holie water. They thinke
theſe thinges are nothing, and they ſport them ſelues with GOD,
as with ſome litle childe. But let vs contrariwiſe remember, that
when wee ſhall not onelie ſlugge in ſinne, but ſhalbe greatlie inclined
to flatter our ſelues in our vices: let vs (I ſay) remember to
take vnto vs this glaſſe of the lawe, and to behold our ſelues in, that
we abuſe not, nor deceiue our ſelues. A man may haue his face foule
and dirtie, euerie one ſhall mockee him, and yet hee ſhall ſee nothing
thereon: but when het looketh in a glaſſe, and ſeeth all his face
ſoyled, then hee withdraweth him ſelfe, and goeth and waſheth it:
ſo haue we need here to do. It is true, that the whole lawe of GOD
is as a glaſſe, to ſhewe vs our filthineſſe, that wee might bee confounded
and aſhamed of our wickedneſſe: but wee muſt haue to
conſider of our condition a moſt cleare and bright glaſſe. If wee
reade this onelie, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, Thou ſhalt not bee a murderer,
nor adulterer, euerie one will make him ſelfe beleeue, that hee
is guiltie in nothing: but when wee come to this commaundement,
Thou ſhalt not couet, loe GOD ſoundeth not onelie the depth
of our heart, but all our thoughtes and imaginations: there is nothing
which hee trieth not and examineth? and thoſe thinges which
we ſhall account for no faultes, ſhalbe condenmed before GOD,
and he ſhall be Iudge of them, if wee on our part will not iudge
them. Nowe, in the meane time we are to magnifie the mercie of
our God, that when we are ſo manie wayes culpable, hee yet receiueth
vs as iuſt and righteous. Let vs compare together the iuſtice
wee obteine by the meanes of faith, and the malediction which is
on vs, wherein wee are plunged. Are wee culpable before GOD
of one offence, of three, of anie number? Nay rather, are wee not
plunged into ſuch bottomleſſe gulfes, that when wee ſhall beginne
to make our account, we ſhalbe ouerwhelmed and confounded with
the multitude of our offences? An hundred millians of faultes are
the hundreth part of them which wee haue committed in the ſight

of GOD, wee are guiltie in ſo manie, that there is neither end
nor meaſure in our ſinnes. Yet for all this, GOD receiueth vs ſo
to mercie, that we are accounted iuſt before him, as if there were in
vs all integritie and perfection, and that wee wanted nothing of fulfilling
the whole lawe. Therefore, when God beſtoweth on vs this
gift of faith, whereby wee apprehend and take holde of the grace
and mercie, which hath bene purchaſed vs, by the death and paſſion
of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that wee will nowe doe him this honour,
to ſay: Lorde, it is in thy meere goodneſſe and free mercie, that our
ſaluation conſiſteth: when GOD (I ſay) pardoneth vs ſuch an
infinite number of ſinnes and offences, and clotheth vs with his owne
iuſtice: ſee we not howe farre wee are bounde vnto him for this ineſtimable
goodneſſe? So then, when the lawe of God ſhall haue vtterlie
confounded vs, ſeeing not onelie our concupiſcences exceede
all number, but that we are buried in them, as vnder great and huge
mountaines, if GOD would ſeuerelie deale with vs for them, let
vs knowe, that God will not leaue vs in deſpaire, but as ſoone as we
are beaten to the ground, he helpeth vs vp againe: when he ſeeth our
weakeneſſe, hee reacheth vs out his hande, and calleth vs vnto him,
and willeth vs to bee of good comfort, when he for his mercies ſake,
will impute none of our ſinnes vnto vs. Loe, in what ſort the faithfull
continue in glorifying of God, although they be in them ſelues
condemned. And at this end wee muſt alwayes beginne, to bee veterlie
confounded in our ſelues, that our Lorde may deliuer vs from
the deepeſt dongeon of death: ſeeing that our onelie ſaluation lieth
and conſiſteth in his meere mercie and grace. Nowe withall, let
vs walke in all heedefulneſſe, let vs diligentlie looke vnto our
ſelues, knowing that when wee ſhall haue employed great paines
to ſerue GOD, when wee ſhall haue ſhunned all occaſions which
might leade vs vnto euill, when wee ſhall haue ſubdued our luſtes
and affections, when wee ſhall haue further endeuoured to repreſſe
wicked thoughtes, wee are yet to condemne our ſelues, and to
ſtand in greate feare of the anger and diſpleaſure of GOD.
For, although, (through the vertue and power of his grace) ſinne
reigneth not in vs, yet doeth it alwayes dwell in vs, and ſtaineth vs
ſtill with ſome blot of filthineſſe and vncleanneſſe. Let vs therefore
bewayle our ſelues hereof, and lament in ſuche ſorte, that
wee bee hereby incited and pricked forwarde to doe our duetie.

We ſee in what ſort Saint Paule ſpeaketh, after that he had profited
ſo farre, and was come euen to an angelicall holineſſe: O wretched
man that I am,Rom. 7. 24. who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of death?
And why is it ſo, that he deſireth death in him ſelfe? For no other reaſon,
but becauſe he ſawe ſinne abiding in his bodie. Now, moreouer
wee muſt knowe, that wee ought not, although euerie day wee ſee a
millian of faultes in vs, to bee diſcouraged. Loe, why Saint Paule
exhorting the faithfull to flee from vices ſaieth not, Let not ſin dwell
in you: but he ſaith,Rom. 6. 12. Let not ſinne reigne in you. I grant it were to be
deſired, that ſinne dwelt not at all in vs: but although we be not altogether
rid thereof, yet muſt wee not bee to much diſmaide. But when
he ſaith that ſinne dwelleth in vs, let vs knowe that this 
                  •
               s firſt to
warne vs of our miſerable condition: and againe, to admoniſh vs,
that wee muſt bee exerciſed continuallie in combat and fight with
ſinne, to the end wee ſhould more feruenthe deſire the aide and help
of our God, praying him to fortifie and ſtrengthen vs by his power,
and by the grace of his holy ſpirite, whiche he hath giuen vs, in the
name of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good God,
with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him to make vs feele
them better than wee haue done, and that wee may learne to conforme
our liues to his obedience, who reſpecteth not onely the outwarde
woorkes, but regardeth what our willes, our affections, and
all our thoughtes are. And becauſe wee can not in one day come to
ſuch a perfection, pray we him that this may bee an occaſion to humble
vs, and to ſtirre vs vp more manfullie to fight with ſinne, that euerie
one awaken him ſelfe to correct the vices which are in his nature,
vntill God ridding vs of this fleſh and corruption, cloth vs with his
iuſtice, and reforme vs altogether to the image of his glorie.
That it will pleaſe him to graunt this grace, not
onely to vs, but to all people and
nations of the earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 13. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               22 Theſe are the wordes, which the Lorde ſpake vnto all your
multitude in the mount, out of the middeſt of the fire, the
cloude, and the darkeneſſe, with a great voice, & added nothing
thereto: and wrote them vpon two tables of ſtone,
and deliuered them vnto me.
            
            
               BEcauſe wee finde no better excuſe for
our looſe behauiour, or for our rebellion
againſt God, than to alledge ignorance,
we could bee verie well content to haue
alwayes this cloke and couerture, to
ſay, that we vnderſtand not thoſe things
which God ſpeaketh vnto vs, or that he
directeth not his talke, vnto vs, or that
his voice is ouer farre for vs to heare it.
But God perceiuing ſuch a malicious wickedneſſe in vs, hath ſought
to preue at all that which men might alledge for their defence, to the
end they might no longer haue any excuſe for them ſelues. And therefore
when he publiſhed his lawe, ſee why he would that the doctrine
therein conteined, ſhould bee pronounced with an high and cleare
voice: and that it ſhoulde bee ſpoken in the eares, not of three or
foure onely, but in the hearing of all the people, both of the ſmalleſt
and greateſt: briefly, of all without exception. Againe he would that
the lawe ſhould bee written, that it might continue, and ſerue for the
vſe, not only of one age: but that euen to the end of the world it might
haue his force and vigor, his rule & authoritie. Loe, why in this place
it is ſaid, That God ſpake with an high and mightie voice. Whereby
Moſes giueth vs to vnderſtand, that the lawe is no ſuch ſecrete
and hidden doctrine, that any one neede to alledge, that he is not ſo
great a ſcholer as to vnderſtande it. For God, not without great
cauſe, hath ſo exalted his voice, when he would preſcribe a rule for the
ordering of the life of men. And he adioyneth this of purpoſe, that the
Lord ſpake vnto all the multitude and aſſemblie, as if he ſhould ſay:
True it is that God hath choſen ſome among you to be your gouernours,

and hath giuen them of his ſpirite, yet will he that his lawe
bee knowen of the moſt rudeſt and ignoraunteſt, that it may bee a
common wiſedome vnto them all: that is one of the pointes we haue
here to note. The ſecond is, that God had added nothing after theſe
ten ſentences or ſayings. Whereby Moſes admoniſheth the people,
that ſuch breuitie and ſhortneſſe, as GOD vſeth, ought to
encourage them, to receiue what he ſhall ſpeake. For he propoſeth
to them no great volumes, which might occaſion vs to replie,
that all our life would bee to little to ſtudie them. God therefore
hath not bene ouer long, when he deliuered his woorde, he hath
inſtructed vs in ten woordes, and no more: count wee them on our
fingers, and wee ſhall haue inſtruction touching all that which is
required for the well ordering of our life. Withall, Moſes hereby
would haue vs vnderſtand, that ſeeing GOD hath giuen vs ſo certeine
a rule, and that himſelfe would adde nothing whatſoeuer, to
that which he had ſaide, that wee ought to holde our ſelues content
therewith, and that it is not lawfull for the creatures, to adioyne
any thing therevnto. And this is the ſecond pointe wee muſt note.
For the third point he addeth againe in this place, that whereof he
had before ſpoken: namelie, that God when he publiſhed his lawe,
ſpake out of the middeſt of the cloude, that the mount ſmoked,
that there were flames of fire, that the lightenings flew abroade.
And wherevnto tendeth all this? Euen to this end, that the doctrine
of God might haue the greater maieſtie, and that men might bee
induced to humble them ſelues in all reuerence before GOD, to
ſubiect them ſelues fullie and wholie vnto his word, and to yealde
all dutifull obedience vnto it. Loe then three notable pointes recited
here by Moſes, before he proceedeth to the reſt which folioweth.
Nowe touching the firſt, let vs beare in minde, that whiche
hath bene touched: namelie, that GOD hath ſpoken with an high
and cleare voice, and that not to one handfull and ſmall aſſemblie of
men, but in generall vnto all the people, and that this is for no other
end, but that wee might knowe, that the word of God ſhall ſounde
lowde and ſhrill enough in our eares, for vs to heare and vnderſtand
it, except wee will willfullie plaie the deafe men, and ſtop our eares
at it. I graunt all our ſenſes are ſo weake, that we ſhall neuer bee
able to comprehend one worde of that which God ſpeaketh vnto vs,
except he inligh
                  •
               en vs by his holy ſpirite.1. Cor. 2. 14. For the naturall man perceiueth

not the thinges which are of God: they are to high and profound
for vs. But where of commeth this default and blindneſſe, but
from our owne corruption and wickedneſſe? For it is moſt certeine
and true, that the veritie & trueth of God in it ſelfe, and in his owne
nature is eaſie enough, and plaine to bee vnderſtood. Let vs not then
alledge, that it is to darke and obſcure. But how muſt wee behaue
our ſelues to profite thereby? If wee will that God make vs to profite
in his woord, let vs bee humble, and obedient, and little in our owne
eyes. For it is not for naught that he promiſeth to teach and inſtruct
ſuch as are humble. Let vs not then truſt vnto our owne wit. Let vs
not come to the hearing of his word with ſuch an hautineſſe and preſumption
in vs, as to thinke we are of ſufficient capacitie to iudge of
that which ſhalbe ſaide: but rather let vs deſire of God, that he will
open our eyes, that he will reach vs out his hande to leade vs: and let
vs confeſſe, that wee are not of ſuch dexteritie of wit, to profite vnder
him in his ſchole, except he beſtowe it on vs. When this humilitie
ſhalbe in vs, doubt wee not but the woord of God ſhalbe eaſie vnto
vs, and that wee ſhall knowe, and vnderſtand, whatſoeuer is therein
deliuered vnto vs. Hereby wee ſee what miſerie and wretchedneſſe
hath bene heretofore in the world, that the common people, and in a
manner all, haue foreſlowed, and euen withdrawen them ſelues from
beeing taught by the holy ſcripture. For they thought this belonged
only to the Monkes and Prieſtes. And in the end ſuch a fooliſh and
beaſtlie opinion was conceiued, that men thought all diuinitie ought
to be cloiſtered in their dennes and cabins. Now for all this, this teſtimonie
hath alwayes remained, and muſt endure to the end of the
world, that God hath ſpoken with a lowde voice, that he hath not
hid, or drawen him ſelfe backe into ſome little angle and corner of the
earth. So this hath bene a moſt wicked vnthankfulneſſe in men, that
they haue left the word of God as clene caſt off & forſaken of all. And
ſo much the more heedfullie ought we to note this place, wherein it
is ſaid, that God directed not his ſpeech only to ſome great Doctors,
but hath communicated his voice to the whele people, euen to the
moſt ſimple & leaſt among them. And withall let vs, to whom God
hath reſtored his world, praiſe & magnifie him for ſo ineſtimable a benefite,
whereof the greateſt part of the worlde haue depriued them
ſelues by their owne malice and retchleſſe negligence. Let vs, I
ſay, praiſe and extoll his goodneſſe, that his woorde at this daye

ſoundeth in our eares, that wee may reade it, that all both priuatelie
and publikelie may bee partakers thereof, that this heauenlie treaſure
is laid open vnto vs to vſe and to enioy it. Beholde an ineſtimable
benefite, & aboue all, he beſtoweth on vs, for which wee
ought to magnifie our God, as priceing this benefite aboue all the
reſt. Moreouer, let vs bee attentiue to heare our GOD ſpeake.
Let none alledge here any excuſe to exempt him ſelf from this dutie.
For ſeeing that GOD ſpeaketh to the whole companie of the faithfull,
to all them which are baptiſed in the name of our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt, let euerie one in his degree and calling applie his ſtudie to
profite in the woord of GOD: and let vs all in generall take God
for our Maiſter, and let vs be readie to heare him alwayes, and as
often as it ſhall pleaſe him to ſpeake vnto vs, as he ceaſeth not
dailie to doe. And thus much bee noted touching the firſt point:
wherein it is ſaid, that GOD hath ſpoken to the whole multitude
and aſſemblie. Nowe let vs come vnto the ſecond point wee
noted: namelie, that he added nothing. And this is ſaid, that
wee might with better courage heare that which is conteined in
the lawe. It is true, that all that which Moſes hath written, apperteineth
to the lawe, all that likewiſe which the Prophetes haue
left in writting: finallie, whatſoeuer hath bene adioyned in the Goſpell,
all this (I ſay) conteineth one ſubſtaunce of doctrine, and the
Bible is bigge enough: but yet, becauſe wee ſhould not neede to
wander farre, or make any greate inquirie after that, wherevnto
wee ought to tend, GOD hath propoſed vs one certeine ſcope
and marke, at which in ordering our whole life wee might ayme,
and ſhoote at. For all is referred to theſe ten ſentences, as I haue
ſaid. Let vs then but count ouer our fingers, and wee ſhall haue
the tenne commaundementes of GOD, all is concluded in a
ſhort ſumme, which we ought to beare in minde, to bee good
ſcholers vnder GOD. Therefore, when God vſeth ſuch breuitie,
are not men to to wicked and vntoward, if they refuſe ſuch a doctrine,
if they will not for all this bee at ſo much leaſure, as to
profite in the woord of GOD? Howe therefore let vs lay aſide
all ſuch vaine and friuolous replies, to ſay: O, the holy ſcripture is
a deepe ſea, it is a bottomleſſe pit, if a man enter into it, which way
ſhall hee bee able to get forth? Let vs alledge no ſuch thinges. It is
true,1. Pet. 1. 12. that God ſheweth in the holie ſcripture, that which the Angels

deſire to behold. It is true, that wee can haue but ſome ſmall taſt
thereof, while wee dwell in the world. It is ſufficient, that wee
knowe in part,1. Cor. 13. 12. as Saint Paule ſpeaketh, and in darkeneſſe, beholding
as it were in a glaſſe, that which wee can not ſee as yet face
to face. All this is verie true: yet ſo is it notwithſtanding, that God
hath ſo conformed and abaſed him ſelfe vnto our rudeneſſe and ſ
                  •
               enderneſſe,
that theſe things are eaſie vnto vs, or at the leaſt wee ſhalbe
able to vnderſtand ſo much, as is profitable for our ſaluation. If with
all there be thinges doubtfull and obſcure, let this ſobrietie bee in
vs, that wee aduaunce not our owne iudgements, but that wee firſt
aſke counſell at the mouth of GOD, knowing that wee are yet
farre from our perfection. And yet, according to the meaſure, which
he hath giuen vs, wee may alwayes glorie in this, that our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt will not leaue vs in doubtfulneſſe and ignoraunce, but
that he will giue vs ſo ſure and certeine a way, as wherein wee
ſhalbe able to walke with great aſſuraunce: knowing that he hath
not called vs in vaine vnto him ſelfe, when wee ſhall not haue any vncerteine,
and wandering courſe to runne, but ſo certeine a marke propoſed,
as wherevnto if wee ſhall directe our race, wee ſhall not neede
to feare any erring, as deſtitute of ſome good guiding and direction.
Let vs therefore beare in minde, that our Lorde hath not ſpoken
according vnto his owne nature. For if he would ſpeake in his
owne language, ſhould he bee vnderſtood of mortall creatures? Alas
no. But how ſpeaketh he vnto vs in the holy ſcripture? Verilie
he liſpeth and ſtutteth for our better vnderſtanding. Saint Paule
ſaith, that he became as a nource of little children, when he preached
the Goſpell. Nowe when he ſpake it of himſelfe,1. Theſſ. 2. 
                     •
                  . there is no doubt,
but that he would ſhewe thereby the goodneſſe of God, which ſo gouerned
him by his holy ſpirite. And this which is in S. Paule, we
ſhall finde likewiſe in Moſes, & in all the Prophets. Let vs then diligentlie
note, that God is made as it were a nource, whiche will not
ſpeake vnto her infant, as ſhe would vnto a man, but will haue reſpect
vnto the capacitie of it. So God abaſeth him ſelfe, foraſmuch
as wee could not vnderſtand what he ſaid, except he ſubmitted him
ſelfe to our vnderſtanding. Loe, for what cauſe he is like a nource in
the holy ſcripture, that men might not perceiue his great and infinite
maieſtie, to the whiche wee can not come, nor approche
any thing neere vnto it. Seeing GOD hath bene ſo gentle vnto

vs, as to open himſelfe vnto vs in moſt familiar manner, ſo much
more grieuous a condemnation ſhall fall vpon our heades, if we beſtowe
not paine to profite in that doctrine which hee hath, as I may
ſo ſay, ſhewed vnto vs, that there reſteth nothing for vs to doe, but
to ſwallowe it, and digeſt it.
            Let vs therefore note, that when Moſes ſaith, That God added
nothing to theſe tenne ſentences, it is to this end, that wee ſhould
ſhew our ſelues more eaſie to bee taught, and bee the more encouraged,
knowing that God will not make vs to wander, and take endleſſe
labour, as in a thing which hath neither banke nor bottome: but
he propoſeth vnto vs onelie ten ſentences. True it is, that hee hath
expounded theſe tenne commaundementes by Moſes. And againe,
conſequentlie by the Prophetes. Laſtlie, we haue had the finall declaration
of them by our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, as it is at this day deliuered
vs in the Goſpell. But what? Wee haue yet this marke,
wherevnto we muſt alwayes order our ſelues. Wee haue but tenne
wordes for our leſſon, and ſeeing it is ſo, ought wee not to iudge our
ſelues verie frowarde and peruerſe, if wee deſpiſe ſo great grace of
God, and if we come not vnto him, when hee handleth vs after ſo
gentle a manner? This wee haue then briefly to beare in mind of
this eaſineſſe and plaineneſſe which Moſes ſheweth vs to bee in the
worde of GOD. And withall let vs alſo note, that he would hereby
warne vs, that we learne to content our ſelues with the ſimplicitie
of the lawe, that wee aduiſe our ſelues how wee come to controll
GOD, to cloute our patches and pieces to his worde. For when
he ſpake, hee ſpake once for all, and will that men hold themſelues
to that he hath ſaid. As we ſhall ſee hereafter, how he hath ſtreightlie
forbidden vs to bende either to the right hande, or to the left, or
to adde any thing to his doctrine. And in verie deed, ſeeing GOD
hath adioyned nothing thereto, who are wee, to enterpriſe and take
in hande any thing aboue him? Thinke wee, that when GOD deliuered
his lawe, hee had loſt his memorie, and knew not what was
profitable for vs? Can a man bethinke himſelfe of that which hath
bene vnknowen vnto GOD? And againe, beſide all this, when
our Lorde hath ſo applied himſelfe vnto vs, thinke wee hee would
inſtruct vs by halfes, and leaue vs in the middeſt of the way? Let
vs therefore beare in minde, that ſeeing GOD hauing pronounced

theſe tenne ſentences, added nothing vnto them: wee muſt ſo
wholie applie and reſt our ſelues ſimplie on that d
                  •
               ctrine which is
conteined in his lawe, that wee ventur not to enterlace any thing of
our owne whatſoeuer? but let vs knowe, that this is our perfect
wiſedome, to bee obedient vnto our GOD. It this had bene in all
times well obſerued, we ſhould not haue bene at this daie ſo incumbered,
to amend the corruptions whiche reigne throughout the
worlde. For, from whence commeth it, that men haue corrupted
all religion, and the ſeruice of GOD, as wee ſee it is come to paſſe
in Poperie? The Papiſtes will vaunt and boaſte themſelues of ſeruing
GOD, when they ſhall haue their ſolemnities, their ceremonies,
and other like traſh. And whence is this? Euen from this,
that they haue preſumed to adde ſome thing to the worde of GOD,
when they thought it not ſufficient, that GOD ſhould be ſerued after
his owne manner and faſhion: but men muſt reare vp ſome new
deuiſes in their braines, and fanſie whatſoeuer they ſhould thinke
good. So then, all this which they call the ſeruice of God in Poperie,
is nothing els but a fardell of trumperies, which men haue made
vp together, and not onelie this, but that which hath bene ſpoken
by the Prophet,Eſaie, 29. 18. hath bene accompliſhed in them: namelie, That they
haue deſpiſed and ſet at naught the commaundements of GOD,
while they haue bene geuen to their own inuentions. And men ſee the
wickedneſſe and miſchiefe which is happened by this diueliſh boldneſſe
and preſumption, when men haue gone about to diſguiſe the
worde of GOD by their lies, and dreames, and dotages. So
much the more diligentlie therefore ought wee to note this place,
when it is ſaid, That GOD hauing once ſpoken, added nothing
to that which he had ſaid. And in verie deede, as I haue alredie ſaid,
this is an horrible blaſphemie, when men will attempt to finde out,
I knowe not what, ſome thing better than that which is conteined
in the lawe of GOD. This were to reproue him of a lie, or to
thinke that hee was not well aduiſed, or happillie that hee forgat to
geue in commaundement that which he ought. And ſhall men finde
out ſome thing better than hee? Nay verilie. Then let vs learne to
order our ſelues in ſuch forte vnto God, that we haue this alwayes
imprinted in memorie, that God hauing ſpoken, he made a full end
and concluſion, to ſay, Theſe are my limits & borders, whoſoeuer wil

preſume to goe beyond, ſhall but ventur further to breake his necke.
And in deede it can not otherwiſe be, but a ruine and deſtruction ſhall
followe vpon vs, when wee will not keepe vs in that high way,
which God hath made, and hedged in for vs. Now, albeit GOD
ſpeake not at this time in ſo viſible manner, as he did then to the
people of Iſrael: yet ought wee often to call to minde this leſſon,
which is conteined in the lawe. True it is, that God hath not ſpoken
twice, but he hath ſpoken once for all, as wee ſay: but wee on
our part muſt againe and againe call it to minde, as it is alſo ſaid
in the Pſalme, The Lord hath ſpoken once, I haue heard him twice.
For hereby wee are admoniſhed,Pſal. 62. 10. that it ſhall not ſuffice to haue vnderſtood
for one day that which our Lord will haue pronounced and
publiſhed in his name: but wee muſt often and ſundrie times meditate
therevpon. Let euerie one therefore exerciſe himſelfe herein all
the time of his life, and let vs not ceaſe euening & morning, to call
this to minde, and to conſider well that which our Lord ſheweth vs.
For when wee haue employed all the time of our life herein, we ſhall
hardly come ſo farre as the midde way. True it is (as wee haue alreadie
ſaid) that euen at the firſt entrie God teacheth vs ſo much as
is expedient to be knowen for our ſaluation. But yet for all this, we
ſhall alwayes finde wherein to make our further profite in the worde
of GOD. Let vs therefore be diligent, and let vs not thinke it
is labour loſt, which we beſtowe herein: no, not when we applie our
ſtudie day by day herein, and ſhall not geue ouer to ſearche and inquire
after that which God teacheth vs. Behold in what ſort wee
muſt applie this to our vſe, and practiſe it: wherein it is ſaid that our
Lorde hath added nothing.
            Now let vs come to the third point, which is, that God ſpake
out of the middeſt of the fire of the cloud, and of the whirlewind.
It is true that this hath bene before expounded alreadie: but ſeeing
it is repeated againe vnto vs by Moſes, let vs note that it is not any
thing ſuperfluous. And in verie deede, wee cannot be to often
put in minde hereof, that the worde of God ought to beare a great
maieſtie with vs, to humble vs vnder it, that wee may yeelde all
ſubiection and obedience therevnto. And why? Firſt we ſee what
pride and arrogancie is in men, that they can hardlie ſtoope
and bend their neckes to bee pliable in ſuch ſorte as they ought. I
graunt, a man ſhall not heare them ſay plainelie & in expreſſe words,

they will reſiſt God, and make open warre with him. But what euer
they proteſt herein, are they ſo tractable to be taught, ſo humble and
modeſt as were requiſite they ſhould be? Nay, they are farre wide
from this. Againe, there is in vs ſuch a dulneſſe and vnſenſibleneſſe,
that being ſo nouſ
                  •
               ed, as we are, in theſe earthlie things, and
ſo charmed in them, wee can not raiſe vp our vnderſtanding to hearken
vnto GOD, we can not come neere this ſpirituall wiſedome,
for aſmuch as our mindes are ſore poſſeſſed with the cares of this
worlde, wee neede not anie thing to make vs reſt our mindes here
belowe on the earth. It is therfore verie needfull and neceſſarie, that
our Lorde touche vs to the quicke, to the ende we may beare ſuch a
reuerence vnto his woorde, as that it die not altogether in vs:
partlie by our rebellion, partlie by our ſtupiditie and dulneſſe, that
is to ſay: becauſe wee are ſo lumpiſh, ſo earthlie, ſo groſſe and worldlie
minded: and partlie, for that we are alreadie fraughted with ſo
manie vanities, that wee neuer minde ſuch things as are on high,
but lying ſtill groueling on the grounde, wee are helde occupied in
theſe tranſitorie and corruptible things. Therefore, GOD (not
without cauſe) ſpake out of the middeſt of the fire, and of the cloud,
and whirle winde, when he would publiſhe his fame. For it behoued,
that the people ſhould be touched with ſome great feare, to ſay:
There is no talke of ſporting our ſelues with God, when he appeareth
vnto vs ſo terrible, and in ſuch maieſtie: what reſteth then, but
that wee tremble vnder him, and ſhewe, vnto him ſuch ſubiection,
that he gouerne vs as his ſheepe, that we all bende our necke, that
we ſloope with our head, ſuffering him to order vs to his will, that euerie
one giue himſelfe wholie thereto, and that we be all confounded,
when hee ſpeaketh, and haue no other affection and deſire in
vs, but to ſerue and honour him, and to ſubiect our ſelues altogether
to his guiding and direction. Loe, why God hath ſo magnified
his lawe, when it was firſt publiſhed. Hee might well haue ſpoken
without caſting out flames of fire, without making the mountaine
to ſmoke, without hauing ſo darke and obſcure a cloude: but hee
would vſe theſe miracles, that the people ſhoulde tremble, being
ſtroken with an exceeding great feare. And therefore let vs note,
that hee would hereby leade vs vnto that,Eſaie. 66. 5. which the Prophete Eſaie
ſpeaketh, That his ſpirite ſhall not reſt, but vppon them which
tremble at his woorde. For this is the thing wherein hee will proue

our obedience towardes him: namelie, that when he ſpeaketh, wee
receiue without anie contradiction or gainſaying, what ſoeuer hee
ſhall ſay, that we account it good for vs, and agree therevnto, and
ſay, Amen: not onelie with the mouth, but alſo with the heart, that
in our whole life we ſerue & obeie him. For this is the ſeruice which
GOD requireth, and wherewith hee will be honoured: namelie,
that we declare what obedience we beare vnto his woorde. But becauſe
we are herein ſo hard and ſo heauie, that rather wee drawe
cleane backwarde, than bende the necke to carrie his yoke, it is
needfull that we be ayded and ſet forwarde by ſuch meanes as are
here mentioned. And therefore, let vs note, that this flame of 
                  •
               ire
appeared not then to ſerue and inſtruct them onelie, which ſawe it:
but that at this day the lawe of God muſt by this teſtimonie & witneſſe
be authorized, and made authentike: and that the remembrance
hereof ſhould remaine ſo freſh in our memorie, that when we ſhal call
to minde this which happened for one time, we be humbled vnder the
maieſtie of our God, and that when we would proudly and preſumptuouſlie
lift vp our ſelues againſt him, this fire which then burned to
feare the people, the thicke & darke cloude likewiſe come before our
eyes, that we remember alſo, howe the mount was ſeene to ſmoke, &
that all this may be to holde vs in ſuch a fright and feare, that all loftineſſe
and hautineſſe of ours be beaten downe, that we may bethink
vs to come and preſent our ſelues to our God, to bee led by him whither
he will, and that we may followe, moſt willinglie, whither ſoeuer
we ſhalbe called of him. Ye ſee then wherevnto we muſt referre
this which is here touched, of the ſmoke, of the flame of fire, and of the
thicke cloud. And withall, let vs note, that when God appeared in a
whirlewind, and in an obſcure and darke cloud, this was to repreſſe
and keepe downe the curioſitie of men. It is true (as we haue alreadie
touched) that GOD ſpeaketh to be vnderſtoode, that he vſeth no
doubtfull and ambiguous wordes, that he fetcheth no long circumſtances
(as we ſay) but manifeſteth and openeth his will ſo clerelie
and plainlie, that the fault ſhalbe no where but in vs, if we bee not
perfectlie inſtructed therein, if wee will but lende our eares to
heare him. But in the meane time, wee muſt not bring with vs ſuch
a fooliſhe curioſitie, as to inquire, beyonde meaſure, of what wee
liſt: as wee ſee men inclined to ſuch a fooliſhe ambition, that
their eares are alwayes itching, and they will ſay: I would

knowe this and that. Nowe, beholde howe our Lorde God oppoſeth
him ſelfe contrarilie, and ſaieth: Will you knowe this and
that? Loe, a thicke cloude which hindereth you: conſider of this obſcuritie
and darkeneſſe which you ſee. So let vs learne, that if wee
will bee good ſcholers vnder God, we muſt not looſe the bridle to
our owne fantaſies, to be inquiſitiue after that which ought to be hidden
from vs: but let vs content our ſelues with that, which ſhalbe ſpoken
vnto vs in the name of God, and let vs waite for that day, wherein
we ſhall haue a full manifeſtation of the reſt which is nowe incomprehenſible:
brieflie, let vs be ignorant of that which God will not
declare vs. For this ignorance ſurmounteth all the knowledge and
wiſedome of the world: namelie, when we deſire to knowe no more,
than our Lord permitted and graunted vnto vs. Now let vs come vnto
that which Moſes addeth: he ſaith, That the lawe was written in
two tables of ſtone, & that it was deliuered to him. When mention
is made of two tables, we muſt call to minde that which hath bene
ſaid & handled heretofore: that is, that God could well haue written
the whole law in one ſtone, but he would write it in two, that this diſtinction
being made, we might ſo much the better comprehend that
which is conteined in the lawe. For we ſee, our Lorde hath ſo chewed
thoſe things for vs, which are there conteined, that we might not
alledge that he ſpeaketh in to high a language for vs to vnderſtand.
For as much as there are two principall points in our life, our Lord
hath diuided his law into two tables: namelie, that we might know,
how we ought to gouerne our ſelues towards him: and then, how we
are to liue & to be conuerſant wt our neighbours. Will a man order
his life in all perfection? It behoueth firſt that he giue him ſelfe to the
ſeruice of God, that he knowe what God requireth and approueth:
and after this, we muſt liue in ſuch vprightneſſe and equitie with
our neighbours, that we ſheire hereby, that we are the true children
of God. Firſt therefore we muſt know how God wilbe honoured and
worſhipped of vs. Secondlie, we muſt render to our neighbours, that
which apperteineth to them: obſeruing this indifferencie of nature,
not to do to another, which we would not haue done to vs. So God
hath declared in two tables, in what ſorte hee will bee ſerued of vs:
as wee haue aboue declared, that hee propoſeth him ſelfe onelie to
be worſhipped, that men ſhould forge no newe Gods. Againe, hee
hath declared, that he wil not be repreſented by images normoppets

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
that he is a ſpirit, and will be ſpirituallie worſhipped of vs, and not
as men ſhall fanſie, to reare vp this or that kinde of worſhip: but
hee will be ſerued in ſpirit. Againe, he will haue his name ſanctified,
hee will that men exerciſe them ſelues in his woorde: and aboue all,
that euerie one withdrawe him ſelfe from his owne thoughtes and
affections, that wee reſt vs to bee ruled and gouerned onelie by
GOD. And this is conteined in the firſt table of the lawe. Touching
the ſecond, we haue ſeene howe hee commaundeth vs to obey
father and mother, howe hee forbiddeth vs murders, adulteries,
theftes, euill ſpeakings, all wicked luſtes and concupiſcences. Yee
ſee then, why GOD hath diuided his lawe into two tables. Will
we therefore order our life well, and as wee ought? Let vs firſt
learne to honour GOD, and after that, to liue with our neighbours
in all integritie and vprightneſſe. For there are ſome, which will
abſteine from iniuring of others: but in the meane while, they haue
litle regard of GOD: and they thinke they are quited & abſolued,
if ſo be none indite them, nor complaine of them in this worlde. But
(I pray you) what ſhall this be, not to be theeues, if wee commit ſacrilege?
Is it not a greater and more enormious crime, to rob
GOD of his honour, than to ſpoile a man of his goods, to cutte
his purſe, or to picke his cheſt? So let vs not thinke wee haue fullie
diſcharged our duetie, when men ſhall ſue no proceſſe, nor make anie
complaint againſt vs: for God muſt alſo haue that hee requireth, and
is due vnto him: for wee are bounde to doe him homage all our life
time. We muſt therefore beſtowe ſo much the more ſtudie to obſerue
the firſt table of the lawe, that wee leade not a Philoſophicall
life, as did ſome of the Painims, to liue honeſtlie and vprightlie with
men: but let vs haue in greateſt price and eſtimation, the honour of
GOD, and let vs beginne firſt of all at this point. Nowe againe,
there are ſome which would ſeeme verie deuoute towardes GOD,
as hauing ſome great zeale to ſerue and honour him: but when they
bee conuerſant with men, they fall to pilling and ſpoiling, and beating
of them, they are full of crueltie, of enuie, & malice. But let vs
note, that GOD hath not ſeparated the two tables of the
lawe: hee hath made a diſtinction of them: but hee hath not
giuen to ſome the firſt table of the lawe, and to others the ſeconde
table. He hath ſaid: Behold my lawe, and that which I haue ioyned
together, muſt not bee ſeuered, but muſt remaine vnſeparable.
            
               
It is true, that you ought to bee warned to followe that charitie
which you owe to your neighbours: but yet, when you haue diſcharged
your dutie in one point, you muſt conforme your ſelues vnto the
other: and you muſt not retchleſly neglect to walke in all equitie and
vprightneſſe, when you ſhall haue ſhewed ſome great deuotion of honouring
and ſeruing of me. There are alſo manie, which will ſerue
God: but how? As there owne blinde deuotion ſhall teach them: as
doe the Papiſts. But God meant to bridle vs herein, when he gaue
vnto vs the firſt table of his lawe, that we might learne to ſerue him
as he commandeth, and that we accept of nothing as good, which he
approueth and liketh not. See then wherevnto this apperteineth,
which is ſaid, That God wrote his law in two tables of ſtone, to the
end it might remaine and continue. For it hath not bene giuen to remaine
for a certeine time, it is not tranſitorie. I graunt that the ceremonies
haue an end, as this is a reaſon, why the law is called temporall,
for as much as this order which had bene eſtabliſhed among the
auncient people, to endure vntill the comming of our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt, was then taken away and aboliſhed, and the things were perfect:
ſo that we are no longer vnder theſe figures and ſhadowes of
the law, which ſerued for that time. But the truth and ſubſtance of the
law was not to remain for one age, but it is a thing which endureth,
and ſhall neuer ceaſſe or haue end. Let vs therefore learne, that God
in ſuch ſort publiſhed his will, when the people came out of the lande
of Egypt, that he ſo ſpake in the mount of Sinai, that withall he deliuered
vnto vs there an order which we ſhould obſerue, and ſo prouidedſt,
that his doctrine ſhould alwayes haue his full force and vigor.
And for this cauſe he hath written his lawe in two tables of ſtone. He
hath not written it in barke, as at that time the maner was, or as we
might now ſay in paper, or in parchment: but he would that it ſhould
be engrauen in ſtone: that there might be a memoriall thereof to endure,
to the end we ſhould be confirmed in this which he hath ſpoken.
For he was not contented to haue ſpoken for one time, but hauing engrauen
his lawe in ſtone, he would we ſhould haue attentiue eares to
receiue it all the time of our life. Now withall let vs note, that it is
true that it ſerued to no great purpoſe, that the law of God ſhould be
ingrauen in ſtones. If this were all, what is then further required?
We muſt know that the doctrine of God propoſed vnto vs, is indeed
neceſſarie and profitable for vs, but yet that it ſhould ſerue vs to ſmall

purpoſe, except God ſhould adde therevnto a ſecond grace: namely,
that this which hee hath pronounced, ſhould be imprinted in our
hearts and inwarde partes. Therefore, as God with his finger, that
is by his diuine power, hath written his law in two ſtones, ſo muſt he
now by his holie ſpirite write it in our heartes, which are of ſtone,
& full of hardneſſe:Eze. 11. 19. as the Prophet declareth, when hee ſaith, That
God ſhall giue vs heartes of fleſh, which ſhall bee loft, pliable, and
apt to be taught, and to receiue whatſoeuer he ſhall commaund vs.
So then, ſeeing God hath viſiblie declared, that it is he which muſt
write the lawe, to haue it well knowne and vnderſtoode, let vs make
our requeſt, that it will pleaſe him, by the vertue and power of his
holie ſpirite, to write it at this day in vs, that wee may holde it
within vs, and that howe ſoeuer the diuell labour herein, hee may
neuer wipe it out of our remembraunce. Nowe withall Moſes
concludeth, that the lawe was deliuered vnto him, to conſerue,
and to keepe it, and to bee alſo the miniſter and diſpenſer of it to
the people, that he might bee acknowledged of them for a Prophet,
for otherwiſe he could not haue executed his office, he could
not haue edified the Church of GOD, except men had knowne
that this charge was committed vnto him. As at this time, if wee
were not perſuaded that GOD would that his Goſpell ſhould be
preached by the mouth of men, that there ſhould be paſtours in the
Church to carrie abrode his word, which of vs would daine or vouchſafe
to heare a miniſter? I am not, nor ante creature beſide, of ſuch
dignitie, as that I might perſuade the worlde to receiue what I ſay.
But when I ſpeake here in the name of God, that men hearken to
his doctrine, to rule and order them ſelues thereto, and to doe him
homage: beholde, this is of more force than all the lawes, than all
the ſtatutes, than all the edictes of Kings and Emperours. Hath
a mortall man done this? No. But when we knowe that God would
that this policie and rule of order ſhould be in his Church, and that
men ſhould inuiolablie obſerue it, that is: that there be Paſtours
which may beare his word abrode, which may be expounders of it,
which may be as his meſſengers to announce and declare the remiſſion
of ſinnes in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which may reprehend,
which may reproue, which may comfort and exhort, when (I
ſay) we vnderſtand that God would ſuch a regiment ſhould be in his
Church, then are we aſhamed to reſiſt and withſtand him, which hath

formed and created vs. Loe why Moſes in this place ſaith, that God
deliuered him the lawe. It is true, that God deliuered it to all the people
in generall, as we haue ſaid. Why then is Moſes now the onelie
poſſeſſor of it? It ſeemeth that God would depriue the whole world
of it, and that Moſes onely were priuileged therein, as if the lawe
were written for him, and all other (as it were) excluded and ſhut out
from it. But this is nothing ſo. And yet, albeit the lawe was giuen
for the whole people, Moſes is appointed the garder and protectour
of it. And this which God hath pronounced of him, we muſt extend
further, as we ſee the Prophetes were appointed in the ſelfe ſame
charge: namely, that they were as ſtewardes and diſpenſers of the
treaſure of ſaluation, of this couenaunt of God, and that this office
was giuen vnto them, alwayes to declare the will of GOD, and
to preach it vnto vs in his name. And this is the generall rule which
Saint Paule hath deliuered,1. Cor. 4. 1. That men ought to eſteeme vs as the
miniſters of God, and diſpenſers of the ſecretes which hee hath ſent
the world. Now, when Saint Paule ſaith, That we are diſpoſers of
the ſecretes of GOD, he ſheweth hereby, that it is not ynough that
we haue the holie Scripture, that euerie one reade it in his houſe:
but it is further required, that it be preached vnto vs, that we reteine
among vs this order, to be taught by the mouth of men, that there be
paſtours and teachers, whoſe miniſterie God vſeth, to the end that
when we ſhall heare them, we may profite more and more in the doctrine
of ſaluation. And this is the cauſe why Saint Paule in an other
place ſaith,1. Tim. 3, 1
                     •
                  . That the Church is the piller of truth, and as it were the
ſafegard and towre thereof. The Papiſts alledge this verie fooliſhly,
to yeeld vnto themſelues a licentious libertie of making new articles
of faith, and of eſtabliſhing lawes after their owne fanſie: for
Saint Paule hath vnderſtood the cleane contrarie. He ſaith therfore,
That the Church is the piller and ſure prop of the truth of God: becauſe
that when GOD publiſhed his trueth vnto men by the
lawe, by the Prophetes, and the Apoſtles, hee would, that this
miniſterie ſhoulde indure and bee perpetuall: that is, that there
ſhoulde bee ſome deputed and appointed to this office and charge,
to expounde his worde, to edifie the Churche in this ſort. Let
vs therefore knowe, that it is by meanes of the Churche, that the
trueth remaineth in his perfect and entire eſtate. For when
GOD raiſeth vp men, which are indued with his ſpirite, to confirme

vs in the faith, to enlighten vs, and to ſhewe vs the right way.
Loe how the truth of God remaineth vnto the worlde, how it is not
extinguiſhed, howe it periſheth not. Let vs then note, that Moſes
meant not here to make himſelfe the onelie poſſeſſour of the lawe, to
exclude the people from it, and to ſhut them out of doores: but hee
ſpeaketh as thus vnto them: Welbeloued, it is verie true, that the
lawe is common vnto vs all, wee are all the children of God, I challenge
nothing vnto my ſelfe aboue you: yet for all this, if I will diſcharge
my dutie in the office wherein God hath appointed mee, I
muſt be a faithfull expoſitor of the lawe to you, I muſt be the keeper
of it, that you tread it not vnder foote, I muſt put you in mind of it euerie
day, that you neuer forget it. Seeing then it is ſo, let all them
which are here appointed miniſters of the worde of God, take heede
they be preſt and readie to ſerue and miniſter vnto the ignorant: and
let all conſider, that it is not ynough to read the holie Scripture, but
we muſt be diligent to profite therein, and to come with all humilitie
to heare them, which are ordeined miniſters of the worde, to deliuer
vnto vs the meaning and vnderſtanding thereof. Thus ye ſee whereto
this text is to be referred.
            Nowe let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good
God, with acknowledgement of our faultes, praying him to make vs
feele them better than we haue done, and to lead vs to ſuch a repentance,
that we deſire onely to ſerue and pleaſe him, without ſeeking after
anie thing of our owne. And becauſe we are ſo giuen to the things
of this world, pray we him the ſooner to drawe vs hence, and in the
meane while, to giue vs his grace to order our life to his will, and to
conforme it to his iuſtice. And for the doing hereof, pray we him, that
his word may beare ſuch rule ouer vs, that we be gouerned by it, and
conforme our whole life thereto, vntill that being deſpoiled of all our
carnall affections, wee be clothed with his heauenlie glorie,
when we ſhall haue neede, neither of ſcripture, nor of preaching.
That it will pleaſe him to graunt this
grace, not onelie to vs, but vnto all
people and nations of
the earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 14. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               
                  23 And when ye heard the voyce out of the middeſt of the
darkneſſe, becauſe the mountaine did burne, ye came to
me all the chiefe of your tribes and your elders.
                  24 And ye ſaid, Behold the Lorde our God hath ſhewed vs
his glorie and his greatneſſe, and wee haue heard his voyce
out of the middeſt of the fire, we haue ſeene this day that
God hath talked with man, and he remaineth liuing.
                  25 And now why ſhould we die? &c.
               
            
            
               WE thinke if God in ſtead of preaching
his worde by the meane and miniſterie
of men, ſhould in his owne maieſtie
ſpeake, or that ſome Angel ſent
from him ſhould appeare vnto vs, that
wee ſhould bee more liuelie touched
than we are, and that the whole world
incontinently would be conuerted, that
euerie one would yeld obedience without
any either contradiction or rebellion.
But alas, we knowe not what is conuenient and profitable for
vs. For if wee conſidered of our owne frailtie and weakeneſſe, wee
would ſoone vnderſtand that it is not poſſible for God, to touche vs
with his maieſtie and power, but hee muſt needes altogether ouerwhelme
and confounde vs. Therefore, when men deſire that GOD
would manifeſtlie ſhew himſelfe with ſome viſible ſigne, or that hee
would deſcend from the heauens to teache them, they knowe not
what ones themſelues are, neither conſider they howe weake and
fraile their condition is. For if they would well conſider and bethinke
themſelues hereof, the infinite glorie of GOD would ſtrike
them with a wonderfull feare and trembling, knowing full well, that
they are not able to beare it. Therefore let vs knowe that GOD
procureth our profite and ſaluation, when hee declareth vnto vs his
will by the mouth of men, when hee ordeineth and appointeth miniſters

of his worde, to bee meſſengers vnto vs of ſuch thinges as he
knoweth to be meete and conuenient for vs. And yet ſo is it, that for
once he would by euident proofe holde men conuicted, that it were
not good and profitable for them to heare his voice thunder from
heauen. And that is the cauſe why he would publiſh his lawe, not
ſimplie by Moſes, but deſcending in his owne perſon, as we haue
alreadie handled. And yeſterday wee ſaid, that the lighteninges,
the whirlewinde, and the flaming fire, and all that we reade of in
the 19. and 20. of Exodus, that all this (I ſay) was done, to the
end the people of Iſrael ſhould learne to beare greater reuerence
vnto the worde of God.
            Now this inſtruction apperteineth alſo vnto vs. For God would
that the memorie of theſe thinges ſhould laſt for euer, and that the
vſe of them ſhould bee perpetuall. So then, beholde GOD hath
once diſplaied and laid open his glorious maieſtie, to the ende wee
might learne to receiue his worde in all feare and humilitie. But
withall he would alſo that the people of themſelues ſhould bee conſtrained
to ſay, It is not good that God ſpeake vnto vs againe, onelie
let vs haue a man to bring vs ſuch doctrine as it ſhall pleaſe
him to ſende vs. And this rule is for to condemne vs, if we followe
not the example of this people, which haſtilie put forth themſelues
to ſpeake in this ſorte. Now if any one alledge, that this which
was then ſpoken cannot binde vs, he is eaſilie thus anſwered: That
if at this day God would doe the like he did then, that is, would pronounce
with his owne mouth that which we now heare by the mouth
of mortall men, it ſhould bee impoſſible for vs to abide his glorie:
and not to be altogether ouerwhelmed therewith, and vtterlie confounded.
And ſo let vs learne, that this is here recited vnto vs, to
the ende that, in the perſon of the people of Iſrael, wee knowe that
God applieth himſelfe to our ſlenderneſſe and infirmitie, when it
pleaſeth him to ſende vs his worde to bee preached by men like vnto
our ſelues, which might bee his meſſengers, reſpecting herein what
is behoouefull and profitable for vs. And knowe we, that this is an
inordinate and fooliſh deſire, to wiſhe that God would appeare vnto
vs from heauen, or ſhew vs ſome apparant and viſible miracle. For
we cannot comprehend his maieſtie and glorie. And although it bee
the proper nature of the lawe to fraie vs, yet apperteineth this as
well vnto the Goſpell. For wee muſt take this as a generall rule,

that as ſoone as we feele the preſence of God, wee muſt needes bee
confounded. We ſee how the Angels hide their eyes, becauſe the
glorie of God is greater than they can beare, and they are conſtrained
to confeſſe, that they are ouerweake to beholde it as beeing creatures.
What ſhall then be ſaid of vs? For wee are farre inferiour
vnto the Angels. And there is beſide in vs an other thing, which
maketh our infirmitie the greater: namelie, that wee reteine not
that integritie and innocencie of our firſt nature, wee are not ſuch
as God created vs, that is to ſay, earthlie men onelie as was our
father Adam: but we are altogether corrupted, and there is nothing
in vs but ſinne and wickedneſſe. And therefore it muſt needes bee,
that God be made our enimie, and that we flie from his throne, as
malefactours will keepe themſelues as farre as they can from the
iudgement ſeate of their Iudge: brieflie, wee are poore miſerable
wormes and ſtinking carions. So then, as ſoone as GOD ſhall
approch and come neere vnto vs, we muſt needes be frighted with ſo
great a feare, as to be beaten therewith downe to the ground. Therfore
it is profitable for vs, that God declare himſelfe vnto vs in ſuch
ſort as hath bene alreadie touched: namelie, by the meane and miniſterie
of men: that he ordeine and appoint men to expounde vs his
will, as if he himſelfe ſpake, and that his worde be receiued of vs in
ſuch reuerence, as if we heard him to thunder from the heauens.
But it ſhall be profitable for vs more fullie to vnderſtand that which
in a worde we haue here touched, and els where more largelie handled:
namelie, that the lawe in compariſon of the Goſpell frighteth
and fraieth vs with a wonderfull feare. And why is this? Becauſe
that in the lawe, God requireth of men that which is his due.
            Now conſider we, whether wee are able to diſcharge our ſelues
herein. Nay contrariwiſe, whether we bee not as poore and miſerable
debters, which haue not one farthing to pay. Ye ſee then in what
a deſperate caſe we are. For howeuer the caſe ſtandeth with vs, God
diſchargeth vs not, but declareth that we are worthie to beaccurſed
and condemned of him. And for this cauſe hauing ſhewed how the
life of men ought to be ordered, he addeth this curſe and malediction
as thundring on vs,Deut. 27. 26 Curſed are they which obſerue & accompliſh not
all thoſe thinges which are here conteined. As if hee ſaid, All men
muſt paſſe here vnder condemnation, from the greateſt to the leaſt,

all muſt knowe they are indebted vnto me, and that by right I may
caſt them downe to the bottomleſſe pitte of hell. If I pronounce this
ſentence, there is not one may bee able to replie againſt mee, for all
are vtterly loſt and condemned. Beholde the language and ſpeache
of the lawe, beholde the ſtyle which God vſeth, and now muſt not
all needes tremble hereat? It is not then without great cauſe ſaid,
That the law fraieth vs: and if withall it ſhould pleaſe God ſeuerelie
to require of vs that which wee owe him, we muſt all needes periſh
and be confounded. Now in the Goſpell there is no ſuch thing:
for there GOD beareth with vs, and not onelie pardoneth vs our
faultes, but he writeth alſo his will in our heartes. Moreouer, albeit
wee ſerue him but by halfes, yet hee pardoneth vs our default,
and (as I may ſaie) winketh and cloſeth his eyes when wee are halting
in our duetie. And as a father dealeth not ouer ſtreightlie and
preciſelie with his childe to oppreſſe him, ſo God in his Goſpell vleth
a fatherlie gentleneſſe towards vs, that we ſhould not feare to
come vnto him.
            And this is the cauſe why the Apoſtle in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes
ſaith,Heb. 12. 18. That we are not come to this mount which ſmoketh,
that wee are not come to Sinai, to ſee the bruning fire which might
aſtonniſh vs, to ſee the lightenings, and all thoſe other thinges which
were to amaze and confound the people: but that we heare a ſweete
and pleaſaunt melodie, by the which we are accompanied of the angels
of heauen, with the ſoules of the holy Patriarches, and of the fathers,
which liued in the hope of eternall life, (although they had
yet nothing but obſcure ſhadowes) that God now coupleth & ioyneth
vs with them which in olde time haue waited for the comming of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Seeing it is ſo, we muſt not drawe backe, but
euerie one muſt ſet himſelfe forwarde, to come with a bolde courage
to heare our GOD, foraſmuch as hee ſpeaketh ſo gentlie
and louinglie vnto vs, and vſeth ſo fatherlie a ſpeache, as which
ſerueth not to feare and amaze his children, but ſweetelie to entiſe
them, and to winne their heartes vnto him. This difference
therefore is worthie to bee noted, that in compariſon of the lawe,
the Goſpell may ſeeme ſweete and amiable vnto vs. But for all
this, wee muſt returne to this generall principle: namelie, that
it is much better that the worde of GOD bee preached vnto vs

by the mouth of men, than if GOD him ſelfe ſhould thunder from
heauen. And why? For heare wee onely this naturall thunder, and
behold wee are taken with a great aſtoniſhment, and yet here is nothing
expreſſed. God only maketh a noiſe with a confuſed and vnperfect
ſounde. What ſhould bee then, when he ſhould ſpeake vnto
vs, and when he ſhould ſhewe vs his glorie? Wee can not
looke on the Sunne, which his a corruptible creature: and how
then ſhall wee bee able to behold the maieſtie of GOD, if it
were fullie ſhewed vs, and in his perfection? And therefore it is
ſaid, that a mortall creature can not ſee GOD and liue, can
not behold his glorie, and not bee vtterlie confounded. I graunt
that GOD appeared vnto Moſes, and that not in ſuch ſort only,
as to other of the Prophetes, as it is ſaid in the booke of Numbers,
That he gaue him this ſpeciall priuiledge,Numb. 12. 7. 8. to be ſeene of him
face to face, euen plainelie as of his friend, that he appeared not
vnto him, either by dreame, or by viſion onelie, but after ſuch an
eſpeciall manner, that Moſes ſeemed to bee exempted from the
companie of men, to bee made more familiar vnto GOD. But
what euer bee ſaid hereof, yet God manifeſted him ſelfe vnto him
in portion and meaſure. For if he had ſhewed him his infinite being,
Moſes muſt haue needes (what grace ſoeuer he had receiued of
the holie ſpirite) bene ouerwhelmed therewith, and vtterlie confounded.
Yea, when at one time beeing yet among the liuing,
GOD ſhewed him his glorie in more ample and plaine manner
than euer hee had done: yet ſawe he him not, but as it were
by the backe and hinder partes. In this ſimilitude it is declared
vnto vs,Exod. 33. 2
                     •
                  . that as in beholding a man in the backe, wee haue not
the plaineſt ſight of him (for the plaineſt ſight of a man, and the
principall view is in the face:) ſo, albeit Moſes had an eſpeciall
familiaritie with GOD, yet this notwithſtanding, in this ſouereigne
and principall viſion which was giuen him in the mount
then when he was ſeparated from the condition of this mortall
and tranſitorie life, when he was as an angel of heauen, yet he
ſawe GOD but in part: as when wee ſee a man by the backe.
So let vs learne to content our ſelues when GOD vſeth this order
towardes vs: namelie, that his woord bee preached vnto vs by
men: and let vs ſo receiue it at their mouth, as if wee ſawe his
maieſtie face to face. For it is profitable for vs to haue paſtours,

which be appointed for miniſters of the word, foraſmuch as we could
but periſh and be brought to nothing by the appearaunce of the glorie
of God, if it ſhould bee manifeſted vnto vs. And to the end that
none might take any occaſion to complaine, as if the woorde of
GOD were not ſufficientlie approued, and that men might not
doubt whether they ought to hold them ſelues vnto it or no, in
publiſhing his lawe he ſhewed himſelfe. And we haue here the teſtimonie
of the people, which ſay: It is the Lorde, he hath made
vs this day to feele his glorie and greatneſſe, wee haue ſeene that
it is he which ſpeaketh, he hath interpoſed none to be his ſpokeſman
vnto vs: but wee haue hearde his voice with our eares. This
then hath bene done for once. Withall let vs take this which is
here recited for a teſtimonie and witneſſe, that Moſes ſpake not of
him ſelfe, that he hath not forged and deuiſed of his owne braine, the
doctrine wee hold of him: but that he hath bene a faithfull ſteward
of GOD, who aduowed and approued him, and not onely ratified
and confirmed by miracles this whiche Moſes taught, but in his
owne perſon declared, that it was he who was the authour of all
this doctrine. Nowe, foraſmuch as by great reaſon the Goſpell
ſhould bee as authentike, and aſwell authorized as the lawe, wee
haue had alſo a witneſſe from heauen, that this is no humane doctrine,
but that it proceedeth from GOD. And this is that which
S. Peter toucheth in his ſecond canonicall Epiſtle,
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 18. ſaying: That
he and his companions heard the voice from heauen, by the which
the father declared his ſonne to be the ſouereigne maiſter, and doctour
of his whole Church: Behold my welbeloued ſonne, heare him.
Therefore, when this voice thundered from heauen, GOD declared
that wee ought not to take the Goſpell for a doctrine bredde
and borne here beeneath: but that wee ſhould alwayes haue this
maieſtie before our eyes.
            As at this time, if wee will bee true diſciples of GOD, when
wee come vnto the ſermon, wee muſt call to minde this whiche
Moſes reciteth, That the Lawe was publiſhed in ſuch ſort, that it
was God himſelfe which ſpake and pronounced it. And againe, we
muſt adioyne in the ſeconde place, the witneſſe wee haue alledged,
that this ſentence of God reſound and ring again in our eares, when
he hath pronounced: That our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is he, whom he will

haue men to heare. Loe an authentike and ſure ſeale wee haue, that
the woorde of God, albeit it bee brought vnto vs by mortall men,
ſhould be of full and perfect authoritie with vs, as it deſerueth.
And to the end that men ſhould not thinke, that Ieſus Chriſt onely
ought to bee hearde in his owne perſon,Luc. 10. 16. he ſaith: He that heareth
you, heareth me: and he which refuſeth or deſpiſeth you, he refuſeth
both me, and him which hath ſent mee. Indeede the Pope and
his ſacrilegious adherentes, vſurpe this ſentence for to eſtabliſhe
their tyrannie: but it appereteineth aſmuch to them, as to the diuell
of hell. And why? For they ſhould firſt of all bring vs the pure doctrine
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: ſeeing the ſonne of GOD hath not
ſo reſigned his office vnto men, as to deſpoile himſelfe thereof: he
will not haue vs gouerned after the appetite and luſt of men, but he
will alwayes haue that preeminence ouer vs, and that rule and empire,
which hath bene committed into his handes. So then, when
it is ſaid, That in hearing of them whom he hath ſent, wee heare
him, it is meant, that if wee obey the doctrine of his Goſpell, not
deſpiſing it when it is publiſhed vnto vs by men, it is aſmuch as
if he ſpake vnto vs: admoniſhing vs hereby, that wee ſtay not our
ſelues on the outward appearaunce wee behold with our eyes. And
this is that which Saint Paule ſaith,1. Cor. 4, 7. That albeit wee bee brittle
beſſels: yea, broken pottes of no value, yet this ineſtimable treaſure,
which is committed vnto vs, is not therefore of leſſe price and eſtimation,
neither ought the dignitie & worthineſſe of it for this cauſe
bee diminiſhed. True it is, that we are not able to procure vnto the
word of God ſuch a reuerence as gladlie wee would and deſire. And
why? For there is in vs nothing, nothing I ſay of our owne, whiche
may make for the aduancing of the glorie of GOD: and yet for
all this, wee muſt make proofe of our obedience in this behalfe, that
is, that wee beare abroade the worde of GOD, with ſuch great
confidence and boldneſſe, as knowing that he hath made vs
his Embaſſadours, to declare his will: and withall let vs beware
wee correct all hautineſſe and preſumption herein. As for thoſe vnto
whom wee come, let them receiue in all ſimplicitie the doctrine of the
Goſpell, and let them not diſpute, why and wherefore they are
bound to ſubiect them ſelues vnto mortall men. For ſeeing that
men ſhoulde deſpiſe, and ſet at naught the ſonne of GOD:

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
yea: the heauenlie father which hath ordeined him ſouereigne doctor,
except they heare him whom he hath ſent for his meſſengers, it
behoueth vs with all diligence to bee ruled and ordered herevnto.
So then let vs learne to ſtoope our necke, to beare the yoke of the
ſonne of GOD, receuing the doctrine of the Goſpell in all humilitie,
although it bee preached vnto vs by men. And as I haue alreadie
ſaid, let vs diligentlie conſider the ratification it hath, which
ought to ſuffice vs to knowe, that the Goſpell hath bene brought
from GOD himſelfe, ſeeing it hath bene warranted and ratified
from heauen, when GOD with his owne mouth pronounced, that
he would that men ſhould heare his ſonne. Yee ſee in effect what we
haue to beare in minde vppon this place. And therefore let vs followe
them of whom mention is here made: namelie, that wee deſire
not, that GOD for our pleaſure deſcend from heauen: but when
it ſhall pleaſe him otherwiſe to communicate his woord vnto vs, let
vs be therewith ſufficientlie contented. Now it might ſeeme at the
firſt ſight, that there were in this place ſome contrarietie. For the
people ſay: Wee haue ſeene this day how God ſpeaketh vnto men,
and yet they liue. And afterward: Wee ſhall die if God ſpeake vnto
vs. For it ſeemeth, that if wee haue once had experience, that God
confoundeth vs not when he ſpeaketh, that this ought to make vs
more bold and hardie. And why? For ſeeing wee are remaining
aliue, albeit wee haue heard the voice of God: when hee hath done
this for once, why ſhall he not doe it twice or thrice? And here the
people ſay, Wee haue hearde the voice of God, but if he ſpeake againe
vnto vs, behold wee die, wee are vndone, wee periſhe. It
ſeemeth that they truſted not to the bountie and goodneſſe of GOD,
and that they were alſo verie vnthankefull, for not acknowledging
and remembring the benefite, which GOD beſtowed on them,
when he left vnto them their full vigor and ſtrength. But wee muſt
note that the people hereby declareth, that they will not tempte
GOD any further, that it ſufficeth them once to haue knowen
that the lawe was not a thing forged and feigned by men, but
that GOD was the onely authour thereof. This ſentence therefore
ought thus to bee taken, as if they had ſaid: Wee haue this
day ſeene that GOD ſpeaketh vnto men, and they yet continue
aliue: this is ſufficient for vs, wee muſt take heede, wee abuſe not
the patience of God. He hath ſpared vs this day, but wee muſt not

herevpon conclude, that he will alwayes doe ſo: he hath tried vs in
this ſorte for one time; euen becauſe of our malice, our ſtubbornneſſe,
and hardneſſe of heart. For were wee worthie vnto whom he ſhould
in this wiſe appeare in his glorie? But he knewe that wee would
not bee ſufficientlie daunted and tamed to bee ordered to his obedience,
except he ſhould come vnto vs in his viſible glorie, and
ſhould amaze vs with ſuch feare as to confound vs. So then, if he
ſhould not haue wonne vs by ſuch force, he knewe well wee would
haue ſtill continued as wilde and ſauage beaſtes. But ſeeing it
hath pleaſed him of his goodneſſe to pardon vs the fault and offence
wee haue committed, and that at this day he beareth mercifully
with vs, let vs not returne to tempt his patience any more. For this
ſhould bee too great an outrage, this ſhould bee to mocke his gentleneſſe,
and to make a ſcorne of his patience. So then this teſtimonie
ſufficeth vs, both for our life, and for the life of our children: &
for euer vnto all poſterities, euen to the end of the world. Wherefore
let them which ſhall come after vs knowe, that they muſt not enter
into this fond and fooliſh deſire, to wiſh to drawe God vnto them
out of the heauens, as if it were conuenient he ſhould bee our fellowe
mate and companion Ye ſee then how the 
                  •
                two places agree
verie well together. Now here wee haue to note, that albeit the
worde of God bee of that force and power, as to deſtroy and bring
vs to nothing, that he yet vſeth ſuch mercie towardes vs, that it is
vnto vs to life, in ſteede of conſuming and deſtroying vs. And when
I ſay that the worde of God is of ſuch force as to conſume vs to nothing,
I vnderſtand not onelie the worde as it is here deſcribed by
Moſes, but if the Lord would make vs feele the vertue and power of
his worde, albeit it ſhould be preached vnto vs by men, yet ſhoulde
it ſerue vtterly to confound vs. But now wee ſee that the Lorde
quickeneth vs, when he ſpeaketh vnto vs, and eſpecially at this
day,Iohn. 5. 
                     ••
                  . when the Goſpell is preached vnto vs: for this which is ſpoken
by Saint Iohn, is euerie day accompliſhed: namelie, That all
thoſe which heare the worde of the ſonne of man, are reſtored to
life. For by nature wee are aliantes from GOD, wee are exiled
and baniſhed his kingdome, wee are dead, and as it were en
                  •
               umbed
in ſome graue or ſepulchre: and loe, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt
profeteth vnto vs the remiſſion and forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes:
God his father adopteth vs for his children. Beholde then the

manifeſtation of ſaluation which is opened vnto vs, and wee are
thereby quickened and reſtored vnto life by the meanes of the
Goſpell. And for this wee haue wonderfull great cauſe to praiſe
and glorifie our GOD, for that he maketh his worde to ſerue
for to reſtore vs vnto life, and to deliuer vs from death, whereas
his worde is of ſuch force and vertue, as vtterlie to conſume
vs, if he of his mercie did not turne it to worke a cleane contrarie effect
in vs.
            Now withall let vs diligentlie note, that if our Lord hath once
beſtowed on vs more than we any way deſerue, wee muſt not therefore
take leaue and licence hereby to tempt him, and to deſire alwayes
to rule him after our owne luſtes and appetites. As wee ſee
at this day the Papiſts will excuſe themſelues for not receiuing the
Goſpell, becauſe they ſee no miracles done in our time. Yea, but let
them anſwere me wherevnto the miracles which our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt hath done, and which hee committed to his Apoſtles, ſerued?
Ought theſe to ſerue nothing to our profite and commoditie? Behold
then what admirable vertue and power GOD hath declared at
the beginning of the Goſpell. The heauen and the earth were then
moued, there was no parte in the worlde wherein GOD imprinted
not ſome worke or ſigne of his maieſtie, that the Goſpell might
be authorized. Beholde the Angels, which deſcended at the birth of
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, to beare witneſſe vnto him: beholde the
Sunne which was darkened at his death: behold the vaile of the temple
which was rent in two pieces, to ſhew that the holy Sanctuarie
was opened, and that freer and bolder acceſſe was graunted vnto
GOD than euer before. The raging and tempeſtuous Sea is appeaſed,
the diuels themſelues do homage to the glorie of GOD
being preſent.
            Brieflie, both by ſignes and wonders aboue and beneath, God hath
declared that the Goſpell proceeded from him, as wee haue alreadie
ſhewed. So many maladies & ſickneſſes healed, ſo great warres appeaſed,
ſo many other ſignes and wonders which were ſhewed,
were not to ſerue for one time onelie, but at this daie the memorie of
them ought to remaine: and wee muſt receiue this witneſſe for a
ſeale of our faith, that wee doubt not, but that the dignitie of the
Goſpell ought to bee as great at this day, and that the authoritie

thereof is as well nowe ratified and confirmed, as it was then,
when Chriſt wrought his miracles. And yet for all this, we ſee manie
of the vncredulous and vnbeleeuing ſorte, which alledge, that
if they did ſee any miracles, they ſhould be conuerted.
            But it is certeine, if they were now preſently ſhewed, they
would ſtill remaine in their obſtinacie and ſtubborneſſe, & take thereby
an occaſion of further enuenoming and impoiſoning themſelues
againſt GOD. What remaineth then for vs to doe? We muſt
learne (as I haue ſaid) to content our ſelues with that which GOD
hath once done. If GOD hath giuen vs more than hee owed
vs, let vs receiue it, and with geuing of thankes let vs learne not
to prouoke his wrath and anger againſt vs by an ouer preſumptuous
tempting of his patience. Beholde then what wee haue to
beare in minde in this place, when the people ſaith, Let the Lorde
ſpeake vnto vs no more, for it ſufficeth vs that were haue hearde his
voice, and yet haue bene permitted of him to liue. And that this
wee haue aboue declared may bee more certeinlie confirmed vnto
vs, let vs beare in minde that which is here ſaid, What fleſhe
hath hearde the voice of the liuing GOD and liueth? For by
theſe wordes in this place, it is plainelie ſhewed, that the people
of Iſrael ſpake not in their owne name, but euen in the behalfe of
all mankinde. They ſaie not onelie, What are all we to heare
GOD ſpeake? but, What is all fleſh? And in verie deede (as I
haue touched in the beginning) it cannot bee, but men are either
ſtaring madde, or ſtarke dronken, when they cannot humble themſelues:
for there needed no other thing for them to doe, but to reſpect
their owne eſtate and condition, to ſaie, What are wee?
There is nothing, neither in our bodies, nor in our ſoules, but
frailtie. We are not now remaining in our nature wherein wee
were firſt created: but beeing fallen therefrom into that eſtate
wee nowe are in, what are wee but as a water which glideth away,
as a ſmoke which paſſeth and vaniſheth on a ſoudeine? And
which worſe is, wee are enimies of GOD, and hee muſt needes
bee our aduerſarie partie, foraſmuch as there is nothing in vs to be
found, but ſinne and wickedneſſe.
            Therefore, when we be entiſed and tickled with ſuch fooliſh
and vaine luſtes and deſires, as to wiſhe that GOD would do

miracles, that we might heare the angels of heauen: let vs returne
to thinke on this which is here ſaid, and what is all fleſh? Let vs, I
ſay, enter into this conſideration, to bethinke our ſelues what wee
are, and our owne ſmall abilitie ſhall ſufficiently aduiſe and aduertiſe
vs, to geue praiſe and thankes vnto God, that he maketh vs not
feele his preſence to conſume & vtterlie to confound vs, but with an amiable
mildeneſſe and gentleneſſe, allureth vs to himſelfe, when we
heare men like our ſelues, and our brethren, which ſpeake vnto vs in
his perſon.
            And let vs further note, that when the people of Iſrael ſay, What
people hath heard the voice of the liuing God, and remained aliue
as wee? It is to ſhewe vnto vs, that God would not that this ſhould
bee drawen into conſequence, for vs to conclude any thing thereon.
And therefore let vs not alledge this, to ſay: And why ſpeaketh not
God at this day vnto vs after a viſible manner, as he hath done to
his people in the mount? It pleaſed him then ſo to doe, but wee
muſt not impoſe him a lawe, or thinke to binde him to continue to
doe that which he hath done for one time onelie. So as I haue
ſaide, let vs not abuſe the graces of God, as deſpitefully to queſtion
againſt him in this ſorte, And ſeeing God hath done this at other
times, why will he not doe the like at this day? When men
lift themſelues vp in this manner againſt God, beholde, what a diueliſh
preſumption and ouerweening is in them. Let vs then honour
our God ſo farre as to graunt him this libertie, to manifeſt and
declare himſelfe vnto vs in ſuch ſorte as it ſhall pleaſe him, and as
he ſhal know it expedient & neceſſarie for vs. Let vs not binde him
by conſtraint to any neceſſitie, for that it ſhall haue pleaſed him for
one time to vſe ſome eſpeciall grace, let vs not deſire him to doe the
ſame againe, but content we our ſelues ſimplie with his wil, whervnto
we muſt alwayes be ſubiect. In the end, it is ſaid, Go thou neere
vnto God, and heare all which he ſhall ſay vnto thee, and declare thou
it vnto vs, and we will heare it, and do it. We ſee here in the firſt
place how the people deſire that Moſes ſhould bee the meſſenger, to
bring them whatſoeuer he ſhall haue receiued from God. And this
is written for our inſtruction, that euerie one ſubmit himſelfe to the
policie and rule of order which God hath eſtabliſhed in his church.
For (as I haue alreadie ſaid) hee will ſpeake vnto vs by the mouth
of men, that is the onelie purpoſe why hee would there ſhould bee

miniſters. This order is not inuented by men, but our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt hath declared, that hee would haue ſuch a regiment in his
church. Ye ſee then an inuiolable order, and which proceedeth from
GOD, who will haue Paſtours in his church to announce and declare
his doctrine which wee muſt receiue to our ſaluation. Seeing
it is ſo, let none oppoſe himſelfe againſt it, but let vs patiently beare
it, that God raiſe vp them amongſt vs, by whom he will be ſerued to
bring vnto vs the embaſſage of ſaluation. And let vs not murmur
at this, that euerie one of vs hath not ſuch a priuiledge: for hee will
that his bodie, that is, his church, bee ſo gouerned. Ye ſee then
what wee haue to gather vppon this place: namelie, that ſithence
GOD hath appointed miniſters of his worde, wee heare them
quietlie and contentiuelie, that there bee no enuying or malicing for
this, if all be not Doctors and teachers, and that GOD appoint
not euerie one vnto this office. For wee muſt bee ordered according
to his good pleaſure, as we haue alreadie ſaid.
            Behold one note to bee obſerued. But withall, let vs alſo note,
vnder what condition wee muſt haue and receiue Paſtours. For this
place is to diſcerne betweene ſ
                  •
               ductors and deceiuers, which falſlie
abuſe the name of GOD, and attribute vnto themſelues the title
of Prelates without time or reaſon, and betwene the true Prophets
and good ſeruitours of God, and miniſters of the Goſpell. The Pope
and all his peſtilent vermine will ſay, that men muſt heare them, and
receiue their doctrine, without any contradiction. And why? For
God would there ſhould bee Prelates in the church, and will that
men heare and obey them. All this is true. But in the meane while,
is this title geuen indifferentlie vnto all, and without diſcretion? No.
But God hath withall adioined that he will be chiefe, that we be ſubiect
vnto him, and not in the ſeruitude of men. Seeing then it is ſo,
wee muſt knowe what Prelates and what Doctors God ſendeth vs,
as we are directed by this place: namelie, ſuch as heare what God
ſhall ſay vnto them, and then deliuer it faithfullie to the people. So
they which would be heard in the name of GOD, and that men receiue
their doctrine in all reuerence, let them bee t
                  •
               e firſt to heare
God, let them not attempt to adde any thing vnto the word of God:
but let then be tractable, and eaſie to be taught of God: and when
they ſhall haue bene inſtructed by God, let them diſpenſe vnto others
that which they haue receiued from God. For none are to be accounted

good miniſters of the woord of God, but ſuch as haue firſt beene
his ſcholers, and which vſurpe not a maiſterſhippe ouer others, to
bring vnto them whatſoeuer ſhall ſeeme good to them ſelues. And
wee muſt not here be to wiſe: for God reſerueth vnto himſelfe this
office, to declare that vnto vs, which he will haue vs to knowe. It is
not here ſimplie ſaid, Heare that which God ſhall ſay vnto thee, and
then come and tell it vs: but it is ſaid, All that which God ſhall ſay
to thee: ſo that there is no point nor article which may be omitted, in
ſuch ſort, that Moſes is here put beſide all libertie of preſuming to
declare any thing, but that which God appointeth, and commaundeth
him to declare. And now, what are theſe filthes of the world, whiche
will dare aduaunce themſelues aboue Moſes? Wee ſhall in the ende
ſee, that there neuer was any Prophet raiſed with ſo ſingular a grace
as was Moſes. And in verie deede, albeit wee ſee an admirable ſpirite
in Eſaie, and in all the reſt of the Prophetes: yet is Moſes notwithſtanding
preferred before them all, when it is ſaid: Remember
the lawe of Moſes my ſeruant, which was giuen him in Horeb.
And behold Malachie, which ſpeaketh after all the reſt of the Prophetes,
and referreth all vnto Moſes, as if hee were the principall
Doctor and Teacher, as if the lawe were the fountaine wherehence
all muſt drawe.
            Now ſithence it is ſo, that Moſes, who hath in this ſort bene preferred,
to whom God gaue ſo excellent a dignitie: if he (all this notwithſtanding)
muſt not enterpriſe to declare any thing of his owne,
but what he hath heard of God, that muſt he faithfullie diſpenſe vnto
the people: is it not now a diueliſh arrogancie of lewde villaines to
preſume to ſay, that it is in them to impoſe and make lawes for the
conſciences of men, and to binde them vnder the paine of mortall and
deadlie ſinne? Is not this too barbarous a tyrannie? So then, let vs
hold this meane, that we fal not into two vicious & wicked extremes:
namelie, that ſeing God would gouerne his church by the exteriour
preaching of his worde, let euerie one rule and order himſelfe thereto,
let vs be diligent to heare ſermons, and let this policie and rule
of order be inuiolablie kept as a thing ſacred and hallowed: namelie,
to be taught by the mouth of mortal men. And in the meane time notwithſtanding,
let not men haue this authoritie, to bring vnto vs what
them liſteth, but let them be faithfull ſtewards and diſpenſers of the
worde of God. And that we may alwayes proteſt, that our faith is

grounded on the will of God, let vs not depende on the wiſedome of
men, but let our Lord ſo hold vs vnder his obedience, that wee may
ſay, It is he whom we heare from heauen, albeit he vſe the miniſterie
and labour of men, as a meane to do this.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good
God, with acknowledgement of our faults, praying him that he will
make vs to feele them more and more, in ſuch ſort, that we may learne
to diſpleaſe our ſelues. And becauſe the ſouereigne & beſt remedie to
deliuer vs from all our maladies and corruptions is this, that wee
heare his holy doctrine, pray wee that it will pleaſe him to open vs
our eares, that we may learne to receiue it in all feare and humilitie,
and that it may be ſo imprinted in our hearts, that we make
it auaile to the vſe wherevnto hee hath ordeined it, that is,
that we be thereby quickened and brought to ſaluation,
to the end we may with all our heart deſire it, and
applie our ſtudie thereto more and more. And
ſo let vs ſay humblie from our heart, Almightie
God and heauenlie
father, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 15. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 5.
               
                  28 Then the Lorde heard the voyce of your woordes, when ye
ſpake vnto me: And the Lorde ſaid vnto mee, I haue heard
the voyce of the woordes of this people which they haue
ſpoken vnto thee, they haue well ſaid all that they haue
ſpoken.
                  29 Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them to feare mee,
and to keepe all my commaundementes alway, that it
might goe well with them, and with their children for
euer!
                  30 Goe lay vnto them, Returne you into your tentes.
                  31 But ſtand thou heere with me, and I will tell thee all the
commaundementes, and the ordinaunces, and the lawes
which thou ſhalt teach them, that they may do them in the
land, which I geue them to poſſeſſe it.
                  32 Take heede therefore, that ye do as the Lorde your GOD
commaundeth you, you ſhall not decline neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.
                  33 But you ſhall walke in all the wayes which the Lorde your
God hath commaunded you, that ye may liue, and that it
may goe well with you, and that your dayes may bee prolonged
in the earth which you ſhall poſſeſſe.
               
            
            
               FOllowing on that which was yeſterday
declared, God in this place ſheweth,
that he agreeth vnto the requeſt
and deſire of the people, and giueth
them choice of that, which ſhall ſerue
beſt to their profite and commoditie.
And herein we ſee, that he would breed
a ſenſe and feeling of his goodneſſe in
this people, to the end that hee might

the better winne them vnto himſelfe. It is true, that for the right
of his rule and authoritie he hath ouer vs, we ought to be vnder his
ſubiection, and to yeelde him obedience, and he might force vs herevnto:
but hee chooſeth rather to handle vs in all fatherlie loue and
gentleneſſe. Loe then why hee ſheweth, that he is agreed with the
requeſt of the people. And ſo let vs diligently note, that GOD
conſidereth of that, which is ſo good and profitable for vs, that if wee
were to make our choice, we could not wiſh anie thing better, than
that which he hath appointed. It ſhall not alwayes ſeeme ſo vnto
vs, but the thing notwithſtanding euidently declareth it. Moreouer,
hee addeth that hee hath not done according to the deſire of the people,
but becauſe he did approue and allowe their requeſt. For well it
may be that God ſometimes will giue vnto men that which they require:
but this is becauſe of their importunitie, and in the meane
time it turnes them to their cōdemnation. As when the people would
needes eate fleſh, it is verie true, they were ſatiſfied therewith, but
they payed their ſhot full deare: for God was angrie, that they deſired
to enioy a thing,Num. 11. 33. which was taken from them. And albeit God
thenſatiſfied them which had murmured, ſo that they had wherwith
to fill their bellie, yet had it bin much better they had all died for hunger.
Now in this requeſt whereof Moſes in this place ſpeaketh, there
is no ſuch thing: for God expreſſely ſaith, That they haue rightly iudged.
As if he did ſay: Follow this order, for ye ſhall ſee what a pleſure
and good turn I do you. Ye haue requeſted of me a man which ſhould
ſpeake vnto you in my name, & I am contented you haue him. This
therfor ought the rather to perſuade you to receiue the doctrin, which
ſhalbe preached vnto you in my name: for aſmuch as I haue graunted
this at your owne choice & deſire. And yet think you not that I would
haue pleaſed you herein, without great reaſon, and for good purpoſe.
For I aſſure you, you ſhall do well to follow this order of profiting in
my word. And always, & as often as Moſes ſhall come to you, when
I ſhall haue ſent him, heare ye with all reuerence that which he ſhall
tell you for your profite & cōmoditie. And ſo let vs note, that when the
word of God ſhalbe preached vnto vs by men, that this is not don according
to their pleaſure & fantaſie, but becauſe that God hath here
deliuered a doctrine, which is profitable for vs. And this ought the
rather to ſtay vs from being moued with any fooliſh affection & deſire
to change, as ſeemeth vs, what we vnaduiſedly ſhall miſlike: as alwayes

wayes nouelties delite & pleaſe vs. Know we then wheron we are to
ſtay & reſt our ſelues: namely, that all the time of our life we heare the
worde of God, which ſhalbe preached vnto vs by men. And why? Becauſe
not onely the will of God is ſuch, but he hath alſo declared that
the thing is good & behouefull for vs. Moreouer, God in this place awakeneth
the people, better to conſider of obſeruing the commandements
of the lawe than they had done. For the people had ſaid, We
will do them. And God ſaith on his ſide, that he will giue them the
will to do them, that he will breede in their heart ſuch a deſire. Now
by theſe wordes he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that it was a ſmall thing
for them, and it coſt them little to make a promiſe, as men will with
full mouth make great proteſtacions, but when the time commeth to
fulfill the things they haue ſpoken, they ſhewe full well howe at randon
and vnaduiſedly their promiſes haue beene made. God therefore
to make the people feele howe hard a matter it was to obſerue
the lawe, ſaieth in this place, I woulde feigne it might be ſo. For
the worde he vſeth, when he ſaieth, hee will giue them the will and
power, importeth in Hebrewe, this, which we ſay. And ſo be it: and,
I coulde wiſhe it well. It is true, that GOD here ſpeaketh
much after the manner of men, vſing a verie humane ſpeache. For
he needeth not to wiſhe anie thing: all things are in his hand. And
therefore one might replie vnto him: And this is in thee, O Lord,
to doe: aſkeſt thou who will giue them an heart and will? Who
hath power to doe this? For man of himſelfe will neuer be inclined
vnto that which is good: but he muſt be from elſewhere driuen therevnto,
and this can not be by anie creature, but by the holie ſpirite.
So then ſeeke to further who ſhall giue them the power to obſerue
thy commaundements, but ſhewe thou foorth in them the vertue and
power of thy ſpirite, and then they ſhall keepe them: as wee ſhall
hereafter ſee that God ſaith,Deut. 30. 6. I will giue you the will and power to
feare me. If this were in vs, what ſhould hee neede to ſay thus?
But he pronounceth that it is in him to doe this. As he addeth by his
Prophete,Iere. 32. 39. I will giue them an heart to obey mee. We ſhall ſee as
much ſaide to this purpoſe hereafter,Eze. 11. 19. and 36. 27. I will cauſe that they ſhall
keepe my commaundements. God therefore challengeth this office
vnto him ſelfe of inſtructing men, and of gouerning them by his
holie ſpirite, to the end they may be ſubiect vnto him, and that they
order themſelues to his iuſtice. And wherefore then in this place

ſeemeth he to wiſhe this? It is for that (as in manie other places)
hee ſpeaketh after the manner and faſhion of men. And this is to
the end, that wee may better vnderſtande, as I haue alreadie touched,
that when men ſpeake vnto vs of walking in the obedience of
God, that this is not done without great difficultie, and that all our
ſeuſes may bee more throughly awakened, to applie our ſelues willingly
and painefully vnto ſuch a ſtudie. Therefore in ſteade of
this, that men lightly promiſe without anie long deliberation, that
they will worke, I knowe not what miracles, that they will obey
GOD, that they will obſerue the lawe, let vs knowe, that wee
muſt examine what power and ſtrength is in vs, and then ſhall we
perceiue howe weake wee are, wee ſhall ſee that we are ſo farre
from beeing able to performe all that which is commaunded vs,
that wee knowe not where to beginne: nay, we knowe not howe to
conceiue one good thought, vntill GOD hath reformed vs, and
drawen vs vnto himſelfe, that hee giueth vs the will, and beſtoweth
withall on vs the power to put in execution and practiſe, that which
we ſhall haue willed. Ye ſee then what this worde importeth, And
who ſhall giue them the will? Or, I woulde it might bee ſo. By
this let vs bee admoniſhed, not to preſume on our owne power
and ſtrength, to bee ouer hardie and venturous in matters concerning
God.
            For this is the cauſe of our ruine and deſtruction, when we thinke
our ſelues able to doe all thinges whatſoeuer: and GOD by good
right laugheth to ſcorne in the meane time ſuche arrogancie and
ouerweening of men. But learne wee to feele our owne weakeneſſe,
howe wee are able to doe nothing. And albeit that wee are
bounde to accompliſhe whatſoeuer GOD commaundeth vs,
that this is not to ſay, that we therefore haue the meane to doe
it: yea rather, wee want all power and abilitie to perfourme
it. For it is not ſo ſmall and eaſie a matter to loue GOD with
all our hearts, to loue GOD with all our mindes, with all our
power, and ſtrength, and might, that wee neede but to ſay: Yea,
we will go roundlie away herein: but let vs knowe that this ſurmounteth
and exceedeth all the abilitie which is in men.
            Nowe, when wee knowe that the lawe conteineth a iuſtice
ouer highe for vs to reache vnto, and that on our part wee
are ſo weake and feeble, that it is pitie to beholde, then ſhall wee

learne to lament and bewaile our ſelues before God, and vnderſtanding
full well, that we are bound to do whatſoeuer he commaundeth,
we ſhall deſire that he will giue vs the power, that he will aide vs by
his holie ſpirite, and that not onelie hee will ſupport vs in our frailie
and weakneſſe, but that he will beginne and perfect that which is
in vs, that he will giue vs a will and deſire, and confirme and continue
the ſame in vs, and that afterward, when hee ſhall haue giuen
vs a conſtancie to perſiſt in our deſire, he will giue vs alſo the power
to accompliſh all that which we ſhall haue well deſired. Now withall
GOD in this place ſheweth, that when hee ſendeth vs his
worde, it is for this ende, to ioyne and knitte him ſelfe with vs,
that we alſo may be vnited vnto him: ſo that hee demaundeth nothing
but obedience, that when wee ſhall become children vnto
him, hee may ſhewe himſelfe our louing father. Beholde then
for what intent God will that his worde bee preached vnto vs:
namely, that we may bee gathered vnder his winges, that he may
protect and defende vs, that he may ſaue vs: yea, vnder this condition,
that we come vnto him quietly, and that we ſuffer our ſelues to
be gouerned by his worde, and to be ſubiect therevnto. True it is (as
we haue alreadie touched) that this is not in our power, that God
muſt beſtow on vs the grace hereto, and that he giueth not this grace
vnto all. But we are not here to inquire after the ſecrete counſell of
God, what the cauſe is, that hee reformeth and reneweth ſome by his
holie ſpirite, and that he leaueth others to wander according to the
corruption and wickedneſſe of their owne nature, and neuer draweth
them backe into the right way. Wee muſt not entangle our
ſelues in this Labyrinth: but let it ſuffice vs to knowe, that God
would ſhewe that men are inexcuſable, when hee ſaieth: O, I could
wiſhe it might bee ſo: as if hee ſaide, That after that wee haue
beene taught in his woorde, wee haue no excuſe, GOD ſhall not
bee in fault, if we bee not ſaued. And why? For if wee walke as
hee commaundeth vs, wee ſhall perceiue that this is the way to
come to all bleſſedneſſe. And ſo let vs impute vnto our ſelues the
cauſe of all thoſe euils which ſhall happen vnto vs. And when wee
ſhall bee afflicted, when GOD ſhall chaſtiſe and puniſh vs by
aduerſitie and ſundrie other afflictions, let vs knowe wee haue no
cauſe to murmur or to complaine againſt him. For our ſelues
are in great fault, becauſe wee haue not followed his woorde.

Ye ſee in effect, what we haue to beare in minde vppon this place.
True it is, that we muſt in the meane time haue recourſe vnto his
ayde and helpe, knowing that we are ouer weake on our part to accompliſh
the lawe, and that we can not fulfill our dutie therein: nay,
not come neare vnto it in what ſort ſocuer. But yet, if we walke not
as it behoueth vs, we muſt alwayes paſſe vnder condemnation, knowing
that all the fault lieth in our ſelues, and that when we are beaten
and chaſtiſed with the roddes of God, that we can not ſay that
this is beſide all merite and deſert of ours. And why? When we haue
the worde of God, we haue a teſtimonie and witneſſe, that he deſireth
to be vnited and ioyned vnto vs, and to execute the office of a father
towardes vs, and to preſerue vs in all proſperitie: were it not that
we on our part did burie his grace, and hinder the courſe and proceeding
thereof. Loe then howe men are by good right conuicted, to
haue repelled, and deſpitefullie refuſed the gratious goodneſſe of
God, and to haue debarred him of all acceſſe and entrance, by ſhutting
vp the doore, when they haue bene taught and inſtructed by his
word, and yet they haue not profited therein. And ſo this is a verie
profitable admonition for vs, when we ſee that God wiſheth in this
place, that we would do that which he commaundeth vs, to the end it
might be wel with vs. And hereby we ſee, that if we receiue his doctrine
in all reuerence and humilitie, if we ſeeke to yeelde all obedience
therevnto, it can not be, but the ende and iſſue thereof ſhalbe
proſperous and bleſſed, and that we ſhalbe certeine of our ſaluation.
Nowe, it is true, that we muſt alwayes returne backe to this point,
to pray God to giue vs the minde and will to ſerue him: but if thorough
infirmitie we faile in our duetie, let vs learne to condemne our
ſelues, that we may be abſolued before him. And moreouer, let vs
reioyce when we ſee that he procureth by all meanes our ſaluation,
and ſeeketh to ſet vs forward therein alwayes, and as often as his holie
word is preached vnto vs: and let vs call to minde that which is
ſaid in the Prouerbes of Solomon, That the ſolace and delight of
the wiſedome of God,Pro. 8. 31. i
                  •
                to dwell with men. Beholde, howe God
here proteſteth, that when he ſendeth his word, it is to inſtruct vs in
all perfection of wiſedome, as if he ſent his wiſedome from the heauens.
Yea, and to what end? For wiſedome is brought in here to
ſpeake, and to ſay: Behold my dainties and delites to dwell with the
children of men. And this is as much as if God did diſplaie and laid

open his heart vnto vs, and that he ſaide: Beholde, I will binde my
ſelfe with an holie and ſacred bond vnto men, when I inſtruct them
by my word, and if they on their part be not wilde and vnrulie, they
ſhall perceiue, that I will alwayes be in the middeſt of them, and neuer
withdrawe my ſelfe from them. This ought well to inflame vs
with ſuch a reuerence of the woorde of GOD, that wee endeuour
with all our might, to profit therein, and not to ſuffer our ſelues to
be at anie time turned from it, ſeeing the benefit thereof is ineſtimable:
namelie, that by it our Lorde vniteth him ſelfe with vs.
Now, it followeth in the text of Moſes, how God commaundeth
the people, That euerie one goe his way into his tent, and that Moſes
abide there: and he addeth, I will tell thee all the commaundementes,
and the ſtatutes, and the lawes, which thou muſt teach the
whole people. God againe in this place ſheweth, that he ceaſeth not
to continue in teaching and inſtructing the people, albeit he vſe the
meane whiche hath bene declared: namelie, that Moſes bee as an
expoſitour of the will of God, and the meſſenger thereof vnto the
people. This is well worthie the noting. For it ſerueth vnto this
end, that wee may vnderſtand, that God will alwayes hold vs vnto
himſelfe, and that he will not that our faith bee grounded vpon men,
or depend on them. And it is verie needefull and requiſite, that wee
bee warned hereof. It is true, that thoſe whiche followe their good
meaninges, or which ſay, that they hold and ſticke vnto thoſe things,
which haue bene determined by the Church, and by the auncient
Fathers, may bee for a time ſo beſotted, that if one tell them, they
hold as it were by the aire, that they haue no certeine ſtay and aſſurance
to leane vnto, when they ſo reſt themſelues wholie one men,
they will bee ſtill headie and obſtinate: as we ſee the Papiſts, whom
the diuell hath ſo bewitched, that they are content to ſtande vnto the
reſolutions, which men at their owne luſt and pleaſure haue made,
and venturouſie deſpiſed the woord of GOD: yea, albeit men
bring manifeſt witneſſes and teſtimonies from it, to reproue their
ſuperſtitions, all is one with them, they are ſo dull and obſtinate,
that it ſkilleth not with them, whether GOD bee contrarie vnto
them or no. Men I ſay ſhall haue this preſumptuous boldneſſe for
a time, to ventur to goe on whither their fond imagination carrieth
them, they ſhall indurate and harden them ſelues againſt GOD:
but when they come to the triall, that GOD thorouglie toucheth

them with the vertue and power of his woorde, behold they are ſo aſtoniſhed
and amazed, that they know not what may become of them.
So then let vs note, that wee ſhall haue no certeine and aſſured ſtay
to reſt vpon, except our faith bee grounded on the woord of GOD,
and that wee may proteſt, that whatſoeuer wee haue, wee hold from
him, and account that this is the onely truth, that wee wander not
in our owne weenings and thinkings, or propoſe vnto our ſelues
the doctrine of men to leane vnto, and to ſtay and to reſt vpon. When
wee heare that GOD in this place ſaith, I will tell thee the things
wherein thou ſhalt inſtruct them: let vs note, that wee muſt alſo in
like manner leane wholie vppon him, that our faith muſt not bee
wauering and in doubt, being vnderpropped by the infallible veritie
of his woord. And this is that wee are to ſeeke after when
wee come vnto a ſermon, that wee may haue this article fullie ratified,
and ſealed vp in our conſciences, that wee haue the woorde of
GOD, wherein our life conſiſteth.
            Withall let vs alſo note, that GOD would bridle them in this
place, which haue the charge of preaching his woord, from all preſumption
of commending vnto the people any thing of their owne:
but that they content them ſelues to bee faithfull diſpenſers of that
which he commaundeth, that they alwayes proteſt they haue ſerued
God, foraſmuch as they haue executed that whiche he gaue
them in commaundement, and haue deliuered the doctrine they
preach, from the mouth of God, into the handes of men. Beholde
what wee haue to note, we (I ſay) whom God hath ordeined miniſters
to declare his woorde, and vnto whom he hath committed this
office of teaching his people, that wee adde vnto his woorde nothing
of our owne, which wee ſhall haue imagined: but wee declare
ſimplie, and bring that onely whiche wee knowe to proceede
from God. How, to the end that the people ſhould not thinke, that
God inſtructed them by halfes, but in moſt abſolute and perfect manner,
he repeateth in this place that whereof we haue heretofore entreated,
The ordinaunces, the ſtatutes, the commaundements, & ceremonies:
as if he ſaid, that nothing ſhalbe wanting in his doctrine,
and that the people ought not to deſire any thing beſides whatſoeuer.
This hath bene beefore largelie expounded: but alwayes,
when GOD vſeth ſo many and diuerſe wordes, where hee might
ſimplie and in a woorde haue ſaide the lawe: let vs note, that
this is the better to withholde men, from attempting vppon

anie fooliſh curioſitie to adde anie thing vnto his lawe, as we ſee how
by nature we are ouermuch giuen thereto, and our fleſhlie mindes alwayes
ſtirre vs vp, to inuent I knowe not what nouelties and newfangled
things. And loe howe in Poperie euerie one hath enterpriſed
to clout vnto the word of God his patch and piece, and howe manie
lawes they haue made one on the backe of another. And why?
For it ſeemeth vnto them, that it ſufficeth not to walke vprightlie according
vnto the word of God, but that it were further good and conuenient
that their medlie ſhould be made therein. Howe, God contrariewiſe
ſaith, That if we haue his lawe, we ſhal haue his ſtatutes,
commaundementes, ordinances, and rites: as if he ſaid, That mortall
men muſt not be ſo preſumptuous and ouerweening, as to deſire
to ſeeme wiſer than he. For when they ſhall haue made their longeſt
diſcourſes, they ſhall not finde any thing which they can amend, or
wherevnto they may make addition: yea, let them know, that all that
they ſhall ſeeke to put vnto of their owne, ſhall not bee ſuperfluous
onelie and vnprofitable, but ſhall marre all: as if one would mingle
vinegre with wine. And now God, hauing ſpoken in this ſort, warneth
them further, that they beware they obſerue that which hee ſhall
commaunde them, without anie turning, either vnto the right hande
or vnto the left. In theſe words our Lord declareth, that hee will not
that his law be honoured of men, in approuing it onelie with the
mouth, as if we would ſeeme to be acquited of all the dutie we beare
thereto, when we doe no more than this: but he ſheweth, that for to
retaine vs vnder his ſubiection, and in his ſeruice, he hath publiſhed
his lawe, and at this day will haue it preached. For herein it is his
pleaſure to proue, whether he ſhall diſpatch and come to anie agreement
with vs, as with a quiet and tractable people, whom hee hath
nowe lured to his traine. Let vs therefore diligentlie note, that when
we come vnto a ſermon, this is not to ſay, that the doctrine we heare,
is holie and good: God ſhalbe much beholding vnto vs, when wee
haue pronounced that his word is worthie to be receiued. Hee will
not that we be his iudges. I graunt that we owe vnto him this confeſſion,
that when we ſhall haue heard his worde, euerie one acknowledge,
that it is the pure and ſincere veritie, that there is no other vprightneſſe,
nor iuſtice, nor wiſedome, beſide that which is there conteined:
but in the meane time we muſt proceede further: namelie, to
order our ſelues vnto the ſeruice and honour of God, Behold, one profitable

point which we haue to gather vpon this place. Againe, wee
are diligentlie to obſerue that which he ſaith, Take heede ye do that
I command. For hereby God ſheweth that we muſt ſeriouſlie applie
all our might and power herein: for men ſhall not followe God by
ſleeping, ſeeing that when they vſe the greateſt force they may with
themſelues, they ſhall with much a doe drawe their legges after
them, their infirmitie and weakeneſſe of nature is ſo great. Let vs
not thinke then to acquite our dutie towardes God, without beſtowing
much paine and labour therein: for the thing is of great difficultie,
conſidering what ones we are: namelie, ſlowe and euer lazie to
beſtirre our ſelues about that which is good. Nay, I ſay yet further,
that albeit God hath affectioned & moued vs with ſome deſire thereto,
albeit he gouerneth vs with his holie ſpirit, the thing will not be
ouer eaſie. For if he leaueth vs to remaine ſuch as we are, wee ſhall
not onelie be ſlow herein, but we ſhall drawe cleane backward from
that which he willeth vs: if he call vs vnto him ſelfe, we ſhall recule
and flee backe from him: yea, we ſhalbe forced to followe that which
is euill, ſo farre ſhall we be from being able to deſire any manner of
way, that which is good. But note we that which wee haue alreadie
touched, that although God hath giuen vs ſome good affection, albeit
he hath ſet vs in ſome good way, yet are we ſtill ſlouthfull, and loth to
remoue one foote: whereas a minute of time ought to ſerue, we had
need of an houre, we winch & fling in ſuch ſort when we are put forward:
and if happilie we moue one ſteppe, either we ſtumble, or elſe
we ſtart backe two paces for one, or we take ſo greuous falles as it
is pitie to behold. So, it is not without good cauſe, that God ſaieth
here, Take heede ye do that I commaund you: as if he ſaide, True
it is, that my lawe is giuen you that you ſhould put it in practiſe, and
to yeelde obedience therevnto, but thinke ye not, that this is ſo eaſie
to be done. Therefore, let euerie one prepare him ſelfe with ſuch diligence
to walke after my commaundementes, that ye thinke and meditate
on them, that ye be diligent to beſtowe all paine in them, that
ye take a full taſt and ſauour of them, that yee bee vigilent to ſtand
on your watch, for feare that you bee not turned aſide: be ye therefore
attentiue and heedefull herein. This wee ſee brieflie, that our
Lorde exhorteth vs in this place ſeriouſlie to trauell and beſtirre
our ſelues, when queſtion is of walking vnder his obedience. And
why? For the things he requireth of vs, are not ſo eaſily performed.

And moreouer, wee are ſo euill diſpoſed, as is lamentable to beholde,
that except wee bee pricked on, and driuen thereto, as by force, wee
can not ſet one foote forward as wee ought in our dutie. If is needefull
therefore, that wee awaken our ſelues better, to bee more diligent
and attentiue, and to ſtand alwayes more warilie on our garde,
to accompliſh that which our Lorde commaundeth vs. Nowe he afterwarde
addeth, That this muſt be done without turning either to
the right hand or to the left, but that altogether they walke in that
way, which he hath ſhewed them. True it is, that this place ſhalbe
expounded more at large in the twelfth Chap. of this booke: but yet
wee muſt not ſo paſſe it ouer in this place, but that wee vnderſtande
what God meant to ſay in forbidding vs, That wee bee not turned,
neither vnto the right hand nor to the left. For he ſheweth vs, that his
pleaſure and will is in all things to bee hearkened vnto of vs, nothing
whatſoeuer excepted. Now this importeth two thinges: that is, wee
neither adde vnto, nor diminiſh any thing from his lawe. To adde
any thing is, as if wee woulde turne on the right hand. For they
which adde vnto the lawe of God, doe it as thinking that it is not enough
to obſerue all that which is therein conteined, but that it
were good to put ſomewhat more therevnto. Loe how men woulde
haue ſome place for their fantaſies, that if they can bethinke them
ſelues of any thing, it ſeemeth them that God hath forgotten it, and
that it were good to bee obſerued. And beholde what hath bene the
cauſe of making ſo many ordinances, ſo many lawes, & ceremonies,
in Poperie. The Iewes had the like vice reigning among them as
it is vpbraided them, that by their traditions they had ſet at naught
the ſtatutes and commandements of God. So then let vs beware
howe wee walke rightlie,Mat. 15. 3. I meane on the right hande, to turne our
ſelues from the way which God hath ſhewed vs. And why? Wee
turne then on the right hand, when wee will bee to wiſe, and to iuſt,
and when wee thinke it is good to doe more than wee are commanded.
But herein wee are the ſeruantes and miniſters of the diuel, for
GOD diſalloweth whatſoeuer wee ſhall adde vnto his woorde, he
will no ſuch medlie. Now wee decline vnto the left hand, when we
diminiſh and take away any thing from the woorde of God, namelie,
when wee thinke wee haue done enough, if wee haue diſcharged
halfe our dutie, and that for the reſt he giueth vs leaue to followe

our owne luſtes and deſires: A man that ſhall not bee ſubiect to ſome
number of vices, will happilie deſire to acquite him ſelfe towardes
God ſo far forth: but becauſe he can not reſtraine him ſelf from ſome
one, he would that God ſhould notwithſtanding be contented, & giue
him leaue to cōdition with him, to ſay: Well, if I miſſe in this thing,
I will make a recompenſe in another. But take we heed of walking
on the left hand, that is to ſay, of diminiſhing anie thing from the
word of God: for when he hath forbidden men murder, he hath forbidden
them alſo to ſteale, & to commit adulterie. We muſt therefore
without any replie yeelde our obedience vnto him in all things. For
as we ought not to adde any thing vnto the lawe of God, ſo is it not
lawfull to take anie thing from it: but we muſt walke in all the way
he ſheweth vs. And nowe, when he ſaith, The way, it is to exhort
vs to hold our ſelues therein, as we ſhall ſee in the end of the booke.
Behold the way, walke ye therein,Deut. 28. 9. will Moſes ſay: as if he ſaid, Who
ſoeuer turneth him ſelfe aſide from the doctrine which I ſet before
you, he wandereth, he runneth but acroſſe the fields, & the further hee
runneth on, the further he is from the end of his iournie. So in this
place, Walke ye in the way, that is to ſay: Wander ye not wilfullie
ye wretched ones, ſtraie not from the way wherein your God leadeth
you, ye can not miſſe of your way by folowing of him: but if you giue
your ſelues ouer to go whither your owne head leadeth you, God muſt
in the end declare vnto you, that you ſhalbe but as ſtraying & wandering
beaſtes, for that you haue not kept forward your courſe in the
right way. And ſo know ye, that the word of God is your way wherein
you muſt walke. If this word were well imprinted in our minds,
we ſhould be held ſhorter, than to runne wandring at rouers, and ranging
whither ſoeuer our flitting fanſies & deſires ſhall carrie vs, as
we accuſtomablie vſe to do: we ſhould (I ſay) beheld backe in this
way which is preſcribed vs: for our God ſheweth vs continuallie
which is the way. And yet for all this men enter into their diſputes,
and make long queſtions: what is to bee done? and what is not
to bee done? As if it had not bene ſaide, That GOD neuer
openeth his mouth, but to ſhewe vs the right and perfect way:
and when hee ſheweth it vs, doe not wee him great wrong and
iniurie if we followe him not? And doe we not accuſe him, as if hee
had loſt all his time and paine he beſtoweth to inſtruct vs? Wee

ſee nowe what this worde (way) importeth: namelie, that without
the woorde of GOD, there is nothing but errour and deceite, and
that men farre abuſe them ſelues, when they ſhall thinke to do well,
except they leaue themſelues to be gouerned by the worde of God,
which ſheweth vs the beſt and the ſtreighteſt way. And purpoſelie he
ſaith, All the way. For hee will not part ſtakes with men in this
place, as they deſire hee ſhould that, is, they would alwayes reſerue
ſome thing, I knowe not what, vnto them ſelues: they would ſerue
GOD by peece meale (as wee ſay:) but beholde, GOD on the
contrarie ſide ſaith, I muſt be obeyed of all, throughout all pointes,
or elſe I renounce you, I will none of you. So then, will wee approue
our life vnto GOD? We muſt not thinke to yeelde him obedience
in part onelie, but wee muſt take heede we order our whole
life vnto that which hee commaundeth vs, in ſuch ſort, that wee
may truelie proteſt and ſay, That wee haue helde our ſelues in all
the way of the Lorde.
            But here one might make a queſtion, whether it be poſſible, that
we may walke altogether in the way of God? For contrariwiſe, ſeeing
it is ſo, that men doe not the good they deſire to doe, it ſhalbe
much when we ſhall haue endeuoured to come to the right way, and
to goe as far forward towardes the end as we may, though we come
not thereto. Saint Paule him ſelfe complaineth, that he could not do
that,Rom. 9. 17. which he had deſired for to diſcharge his duetie towardes God.
But here is no ſpeaking of ſuch perfection as is required in the law:
but we muſt onlie vnderſtande, that God will haue men employ them
ſelues with all diligence in his ſeruice, and that they inforce them
ſelues thereto, that they make their race therein, albeit they can not
atteine the end thereof. Therefore, although for all our life time wee
go as drailing our legges after vs, and that wee come not fullie and
perfectlie vnto God, yet muſt we proceede herevnto, and goe on forward,
not in part onlie, but in all that which is conteined in the lawe.
It is true, that we can not acquite our ſelues herein, in ſuch ſort, that
there be a full and correſpondent agreement betweene the woorde of
God, and our life: but when we ſhall haue this deſire to order our
ſelues vnto God, and to conforme our ſelues vnto his will, not in one
point or article onelie, but in all without exception: and when wee
ſhall haue beſtowed our whole trauell and induſtrie herein, beholde,
howe we ſhall holde vs in all the waye of GOD.

For he beareth with vs in ſuch ſort, that hee accepteth in good part
ſuch a deſire, when he ſeeth vs to go roundly to worke in his ſeruice,
and that we double not with him, and that we reſerue not to our ſelues
our owne luſtes and deſires, nor yeeld vs the libertie and leaue to fulfil
them, but that we labour to pleaſe and to ſerue him as much as we
may, and according vnto the grace which is giuen vs. Now withall
he alſo adioyneth, That they may proſper, and that it may be well
both with them, and with their children. Wherein hee giueth vs to
vnderſtand, that (as we haue alreadie touched) all the miſeries and
afflictions which wee endure in this worlde, are ſo manie chaſtiſements
and corrections for our ſinnes. And we cannot ſay that we are
anie other way miſerable and vnhappie, but by our owne fault. True
it is, euerie one deſireth to bee at his eaſe, and in proſperitie, wee
neede not to bee taught to wiſhe this vnto our ſelues, for our nature
leadeth vs herevnto? but for all this, it ſeemeth that wee haue
conſpired our owne miſerie and wretchednes. For the meane to proſper
is this, that we be obedient vnto God, and then he ſhall bleſſe vs,
in ſuch for, that we ſhall feele the fruites thereof in all things. But
what? We will not yeeld him the obedience which is due vnto him,
and therefore we muſt needes bee depriued of his bleſſing, hee muſt
needes reiect and refuſe vs, as if we were not worthie to bee in the
number of his creatures. And ſo let vs note, that God would in this
place reproue men, and ſhew them that they are themſelues the cauſe
of all the miſerie and wretchedneſſe they ſuffer in this worlde, and
that they muſt attribute it to their ſinne and wickedneſſe. But hee
would moreouer withall allure his vnto himſelfe, when he ſetteth before
them a reward: as if he ſaid: Go to, there is great cauſe why I
ſhould be ſerued of you, I deſerue it full well at your hands, though
you haue ſmall regard of me: for ſeeing that you are my creatures,
is it not good reaſon that you be my ſubiectes, and render all obedience
vnto me? Ought you not for the whole time of your life to bee
giuen ouer vnto me? But yet I will not requeſt you to ſerue me for
gramercie? I will for beare mine owne right in this behalfe: ſo that
whereas ye are bound to doe all that I commande you, without looking
or hoping for anie thing: loe, I yet tell you, that I am at hand
to bleſſe you, & to make you proſper when you ſhall ſerue me. When
our Lord ſpeaketh thus, he ſheweth that he will in moſt louing and
amiable wiſe, winne his vnto himſelfe, that he will (as it were) break

their heart, that they might be the better affectionated, & more willingly
diſpoſed to ſerue and pleaſe him: ſeeing that hee commeth not
vnto them, with ſuch rigour and ſeueritie as he might: but yeelding
of the right which apperteineth vnto him, chooſeth rather to execute
the office of a Father, ſaying, That if we will be his children,
hee will be a liberall and bountifull Father towardes vs: and albeit
he oweth vs nothing of duetie, yet will he beſtowe a rewarde
on vs for the ſeruice which wee ſhall haue done him. Nowe hereby
we are admoniſhed, that it pleaſeth GOD, by ſo great gentleneſſe
and liberalitie, to allure and winne vs vnto himſelfe. But we muſt
not herevpon inferre, that men may merite and deſerue any thing
by ſeruing of God. As the Papiſts, when they heare ſuch places,
they runne to their merites: and it ſeemeth vnto them that GOD
is further bounde and beholding vnto them than hee hath promiſed.
But God contrariwiſe meaneth to ſhewe vs that he is readie to applie
himſelfe to vs, and to the faſhion of men, that he deſireth nothing
elſe but to winne vs by all gentleneſſe vnto his obedience. And this is
not for anie profite that he receiueth thereby: as in verie deede, what
profite ſhall he receiue when wee ſhall haue accompliſhed his whole
lawe? Is this anie way to his gaine and aduantage? No. But it
maketh for our ſaluation. Ye ſee then what the intent and purpoſe of
God is, & what we haue to note vpon this ſentence. So let vs learne
that when we ſhall haue obeyed our God, if he make vs to proſper,
that this is not for that he oweth vs anie thing, and that wee haue
deſerued it, and that wee may vaunt that he giueth vs no more than
we deſerue: but it pleaſeth him to diſplay and lay open his bountifull
goodneſſe towardes vs, euen to call that a rewarde and recompenſe,
which he of his mere and free liberalitie giueth vs, without being
therefore bounde and indebted vnto vs. Moreouer, when hee
chaſtiſeth vs, and that we are ſubiect to ſo manie miſeries, let
vs knowe, that wee doe but gather in the fruites of our owne ſeede.
Becauſe wee haue ledde an euill life, our Lorde muſt needes ſhew
ſome ſigne and taken of his anger, that it may bee knowne hee is
Iudge of the worlde. But hee hath alſo as well a regarde vnto
our profite: that is, that we might be ſorie for our faultes, and bee
in diſpleaſure with our ſelues for them, and that we ſhould haue
our recourſe vnto him, in true and vnfeigned repentaunce. Loe
howe GOD, when hee ſheweth his anger towardes vs, ceaſeth

not to declare his loue: for hee ſeeketh to winne vs vnto himſelfe.
Hee ſeeth that we are brought aſleepe in our ſinnes, and hee awaketh
vs, knowing that it is expedient and neceſſarie that he ſhoulde
ſo doe. Thus we ſee what we haue to note vpon this place. Now
in the end, Moſes ſpeaketh of the lande they were to poſſeſſe, and
ſaieth, That thou maieſt proſper in the lande whiche I ſhall giue
thee. And againe for the ſecond time, he placeth this ſentence, That
it may be well with you in the land which you ſhall poſſeſſe. Nowe it
ſeemeth at the firſt ſight, that God promiſeth no other reward than
in this earthlie and tranſitorie life. If it were ſo, the hope of the
people of Iſrael had bene cleane beaten downe. But let vs note,
that our Lorde hath vſed towards this people an other meane than
with vs: albeit it tendeth to the ſame end. for the ſacrifices
which were ordeined in the lawe, were not to withdrawe the people
from the ſaluation which wee haue in Ieſus Chriſt:Heb. 9. 8. 13. 14. 22. but they
ſerued rather that GOD might ſignifie that men are condemned,
that they haue no other meane to be reconciled vnto him, than this
which they haue by our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. Nowe for all this,
men ceaſſed not to kill brute beaſtes for their offerings, and GOD
ſaid: Your ſinnes ſhall be pardoned,Leuit. 16. 1
                     •
                  . 16. when you ſhall haue killed for
mee a calfe, a lambe, or a ſheepe. It ſeemed them that God would
appoint the remiſſion of ſinnes by theſe ſacrifices of brute beaſtes:
but he did not. This was to conduct the people, after ſuch a groſſe
manner, to the redemption which in the end was obteined vs in the
perſon of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. As much was ſignified by the
land of Chanaan: God therein would from the beginning propoſe
the eternall inheritance of ſaluation vnto the children of Abraham, in
ſaying to Abraham,Gen. 15. 1. I am thy exceeding great reward. He promiſeth
not the land to Abraham, therein to reſt himſelfe: but he will that
Abraham putte his whole truſt and affiaunce in him, that hee
raiſe and lift vp his hope aboue all the world, & that he waite for euerlaſting
life for himſelfe, and for his whole race. But it was expedient,
becauſe our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt was not yet appeared, becauſe
the vaile of the Temple was not yet broken: it was (I ſay) expedient
and needefull, that this lande of Chanaan ſhoulde bee
as it were a pledge thereof, becauſe this was fullie promiſed
him for his inheritaunce. Let vs therefore diligentlie
note, when it it is ſaide, That thou maieſt proſper in the

land, that God ment not to buſie his people in this preſent life, but by
this meane it pleſeth him to conduct them higher: namely, to the hope
of immortalitie which he had promiſed them. Neuertheles our Lord
promiſeth his bleſſing in ſuch ſort vnto this people, that euen in this
life they ſhall perceiue it, and haue thereof ſome taſt, waiting to haue
the full enioying thereof, when they ſhall be withdrawne out of this
world. And at this day we ought alſo to call to minde the teſtimonie
of S. Paule,1. Tim. 4. 8. That when we ſhal feare God, we haue the promiſes
of the preſent life, and of the life to come. For God wil in this life giue
vs ſome feeling of his goodnes, to the end we might therby be led vnto
an higher hope, and that we alſo learne to receue the benefites of
God in ſuch ſort in this world, as that we be perſuaded we ſhal be ſatiſ
                  •
               ied
with them, when we ſhalbe come into his kingdome, where we
ſhall enioy them in all fulneſſe and plentie.
            Now let vs caſt our ſelues downe before the face of our good God,
with acknowledgement of our faults, praying him to make vs feele
them better than we haue done, vntill we be ſed to a true repentance,
and that more and more feeling our owne wretchedneſſe, wee may
learne to reſiſt all the affections of our fleſh, and all our wicked and
peruerſe deſires, and not this only, but that curſed preſumption which
is in vs, of attempting to do that which we thinke good: that nothing
may hinder vs to followe the pure and ſimple worde of our GOD,
knowing that this is the true and perfect rule to order vs by, that
wee attempt to adde nothing thereto, but ſimply reſt in that which
is therein conteined, to profite more and more therein, vntill that hauing
atchieued and ended our courſe here on earth, wee come vnto
that heauenlie reſt, wherevnto he calleth vs: and in the meane time
pray we him to reach vs out his hand to ſtay vs, when we ſhall
ſeeke vnto him, and call on him, in all our needes and
neceſſities. That it will pleaſe him to
graunt this grace, not onely to vs,
but vnto all people and
nations of the
earth, &c.
         
         
            
            The. 16. Sermon.
            
               Deut. Chap. 6.
               
                  1 Theſe are the commaundementes, ordinaunces, and lawes,
which the Lord your God hath commaunded me to teach
you, that ye might do them in the lande whither ye goe to
poſſeſſe it.
                  2 That thou mighteſt feare the Lorde thy God, by keeping all
the dayes of thy life, thou, thy ſonne, and thy ſonnes ſonne,
all his ordinaunces and commaundementes, which I commaund
thee, that thy dayes may be prolonged.
               
            
            
               WE haue often heretofore ſene, how Moſes
did put the people in minde of the
things conteined in the law: & euen yeſterday
we ſawe how to the ſame purpoſe
he made mention of them, & yet
againe in this place he doth the like.
Howbeit, this is no needleſſe or vnprofitable
repetition, ſeing that men haue
ſo ſoone forgot the things they learne
in the ſchoole of God, except the memorie
of them, for their better remembrance, be often refreſhed. And
we ſee there needeth nothing to turne vs aſide from our duetie herein:
for we are ſo much inclined vnto vanitie, that there is nothing
more harder than to reteine vs vnder the obedience of God. As ſoone
as we haue conceiued a fantaſie, it carieth vs away headlong, and we
remember no more what God had ſaid vnto vs. Moreouer, becauſe
he ſeeketh no other thing than to winne vs vnto himſelf, he muſt roote
out of vs thoſe falſe opinions wherewith wee are alreadie forepoſſeſſed.
For it is with vs as with a ground which hath lien fallowe a
long time, whereon a man muſt beſtowe exceeding great labour, before
he can applie it to ſome profitable vſe. And that is the cauſe
why Moſes ſaith againe, That theſe are the commaundements, and
ordinaunces, and lawes, which the Lord hath committed vnto him,
that hee deliuer them vnto the people, and that they bee obſerued.

Now by theſe woordes he ſignifieth, that God will reteine the people
in his obedience: when hee ſemeth to ſay, What meane ye, ye
wretched ones to wander? Loe, I deliuer vnto you my lawe: when
you ſhall holde your ſelues in this doctrine you can not erre: this is
the way of ſaluation, therefore keepe your ſelues in it. Nowe for all
this men are ſtill wandering, they are borne away headlong hither &
thither, and God continueth to raine them with the bridle: as when
an headſtrong horſe is hardlie ruled, the rider reſtraineth him backe
with bitte and bridle, not for one time onely, but ſo long as he continueth
wild and vntamed. Yee ſee then how God vſeth the ſame order
with his people. And hereby he ſheweth, that the minde of man is
full of rebellion, or full of lightneſſe and raſhneſſe, and that he can not
wholie reſt him ſelfe on the woord of God, wherein notwithſtanding
our whole ſaluation and happineſſe conſiſteth. Seeing then it is ſo,
let vs note, that vnder the perſon of the people of Iſrael, we are here
warned, that when God hath ſet before vs his worde, wee muſt not
thinke on it for one day onely, but that we ought to exerciſe our ſelues
therein all the time of our life. And when wee heare this, Beholde
the ſtatutes, Beholde the ordinaunces, Beholde the commaundementes,
which I propoſe vnto you, we muſt remember, that it is
not for vs to eſtabliſh lawes and rules to gouerne our life by, but
that this authoritie apperteineth onely vnto God. Moreouer he hath
alſo admoniſhed vs, that he hath ſhewed vs the right way. Let vs
therefore followe it, and walke therein, let vs not make further inquirie
what wee ought to doe: for there remaineth no doubting when
our Lord hath once ſpoken: wee muſt no longer alledge, I know not
whether this bee good, I knowe not whether ſomewhat elſe bee to
bee added. Content wee our ſelues with that which God hath ſhewed
vs: for he ſhall alwayes bee a good maiſter to teach vs, if ſo bee
wee bee not peruerſe, and euill ſcholers to learne vnder him. And for
this cauſe here is againe mention made of commaundementes, ſtatutes,
and ordinaunces, that we might not thinke that God woulde
inſtruct vs by halfes. There is then in his lawe compriſed a full perfection
of all wiſedome: ſo that there reſteth nothing, but that wee
yeald obedience therevnto, that wee bee not ſo curious, as to deſire
more than God ſheweth vs, that we haue no fooliſh deuotions, which
leade vs wandering hither and thither: knowing that God hath not
enuied them which were vnder his charge the knowledge of any
thing behouefull for them, but hath taught them all that which was

profitable and neceſſarie for them. Let vs therfore gouerne our
ſelues according vnto his will, let vs applie all our ſenſes thereto,
let his lawe ſuffice and content vs, albeit the whole world ſcorne and
reiect vs, the matter ſhall not much ſkill, wee haue our Iudge. And
ſo, although the world wander after vaine fantaſies, although euerie
one forge vnto him ſelfe, that which ſeemeth him beſt, let vs alwayes
conſider of appearing before the tribunall ſeate of our God, and that
vnto him we muſt render our account. Now he hath deliuered vs his
lawe, and by that he will iudge vs. And therefore let vs leaue all that
the world imagineth, & know that all is but vanitie and lying. Withall
Moſes addeth that concerning his office he hath deliuered nothing
of his owne. And this proteſtation is well worthie to bee noted.
For wee muſt remember what hath bene before ſaid, that Moſes
was the moſt excellent prophet that euer God raiſed, & yet notwithſtanding
he taketh to him ſelfe in this place no ſuch libertie, as to
teach any thing according to his owne iudgement. For he knew well
that he himſelfe was a mortall man, ſubiect to the lawe, as were others.
Behold why he proteſteth that that which he bringeth, is that
which he hath receued from God, and that he diſpenſeth and deliuereth
it as it were from hand to hande. Sithence Moſes doth this,
who will dare to ſay, that it is lawfull for him to paſſe further? And
yet we ſee what is happened herein. For among the whole rable of
Papiſts, is there any ſo giuen to heare what God ſhall ſay, as to preferre
his word before the doctrine of men? Nay: But they haue their
holy mother the Church, as they terme it, they haue their determinations,
their decrees, their ſtatutes: and they thinke it ſufficient to
haue this couerture of the Church, and in the meane time, they robbe
God of his authoritie, to cloth men which are but rotteneſſe therewith.
Behold an intollerable ſacrilege, when God ſhall no longer
be a Lawegeuer to conduct his people, and to holde them vnder
his yoke, but that men will vſurpe and challenge to them ſelues ſuch
an authoritie. So much the more heedfullie ought wee to obſerue
that which is here conteined: namelie, that Moſes albeit he was as
an Angel of heauen, although God had exalted him aboue all men,
though he had bene in the mount fortie dayes without eating or drinking
any thing, to ſhewe that he was no longer of the number of others:
yet nothwitſtanding, when he came from this heauenlie
glorie, and as it were from the companie of Angels, he humbleth

himſelfe, and declareth that he commendeth vnto the people nothing
of his owne, that he will not feede them with fanſies and dreames of
his owne head: but that hee is contented to haue heard what GOD
hath pronounced, and that he reciteth it as a faithfull ſeruaunt, which
addeth nothing thereto, which falſifieth not the commiſſion which is
geuen vnto him. Ye ſee then what we haue againe to beare in mind
upon this place. There followeth now the exhortation which he addeth,
that is, That the people diſcharge themſelues in keeping of the
lawe. As if he ſaid, That it is not geuen for men only to confeſſe, that
all that it conteineth is good, & iuſt, and of great equitie: but to this
ende alſo, that men ſhewe whether they be obedient vnto God, or no.
And that is the cauſe why he ſaith, That thou feare the Lorde thy
God, and that thou keepe his commaundementes and ſtatutes. Vnder
this worde of feare, he ſignifieth that God, by declaring his lawe,
meant to make a proofe whether we will ſerue him, or no. For albeit
we obſerue all the commaundementes, in ſuch ſort that men can find
no fault with vs: yet if this feare of God bee not rooted in our heart,
if we beare him not this reuerence, to deſire to bee his, all the time of
our life, this outward obſeruing of his commaundementes, ſhall be
but a friuoſous ſhewe, and a pompe of great vanitie. For wee muſt
not thinke that God is contented with that which outwardlie appeareth:
although it be highlie priced and eſteemed of men, yet is it but
as a vapour of ſmoke before him.
            We ought therefore to beginne at this point, if wee will obſerue
the lawe of God duelie, and in ſuch ſort, as our life may be agreable
vnto God: namelie, that we beare him all reuerence, that wee
ſeeke to be vnder his hande, vnder his guide and direction, that we
ſeeke to doe him homage as our ſouereigne King, we ſeeke to dedicate
our ſelues vnto him, as to our Creator, we ſeeke to honour him
as our Father. When this affection and deſire ſhall bee in vs, then
haue we the beginning of the whole lawe, and of all righteouſneſſe:
& that is the cauſe why it is ſaid,Prou. 1. 7. That the true wiſdome is the feare
of GOD. And when wee will knowe whether wee haue profited
in the lawe of GOD, we muſt ſounde our heartes to make the triall
hereof, to feele if wee haue ſuch a zeale and deſire, that GOD
bee honoured and glorified of vs. For if there bee ſuch a feare in the
heart, the fruites thereof will appeare, both in our handes, and
in our feete, and in all the partes and members of our bodie:

as God hath alſo ordeined this rule when he publiſhed his lawe. So
that they which boaſt themſelues of the feare of God, when their
life is loſed to all wickedneſſe, their owne tongues tell them they
lie, and they ſhew full well, howe impudent and paſt ſhame they are,
when they vaunt ſo much of the feare of God. Wee ſee then a place,
which is well worthie to bee obſerued: wherin Moſes firſt declareth,
that to ſerue God aright, it behoueth that our heartes bee wholie giuen
ouer vnto him, that it ſufficeth not, that in outwarde appearance
wee haue all the vertues that a man might imagine, except ſuch an
affection, and inward deſire of the hearte goe before. Againe, that
the feare of God is no hidden and idle thing, although it bee in the
heart of men, yet muſt it appeare and ſhew it ſelfe in their life. For it
is the heart, whiche gouerneth both the handes, and the feete,
and all the other partes, and members of the bodie. We muſt therefore
learne to ſhew by effect and experience, that wee feare God, by
ordering our whole life according vnto his will. Now hereby wee
may well gather, that God diſalloweth althings which men attempt
beſide his woord: as the Papiſtes are continuall men and religious
(as they ſay) in the ſeruice of God: but in the meane time, what doe
they? They trauell much, and are neuer the neere: for they profite
nothing, becauſe in the whole woorſhippe of God, which they pretend,
there is nothing, but the inuentions and deuiſes of men. To
ſerue God, is to mumble a fewe ſmall prayers, and to crouch before
their moppets and idols, to trudge from altar to altar, to chaunt
their Maſſes, to gad on pilgrimage, to faſt ſuch a day in the honor of
ſuch and ſuch a Saint, to eate no fleſh on Fridayes nor Saturdayes:
brieflie, it is nothing elſe, but a dongeon of ſuch like trumperies,
whatſoeuer they haue vnder this ſhadowe and title of the ſeruice of
God. But ſhall one finde that God euer ſounded one woord or ſyllable
hereof? No, all this hath bene deuiſed by men. Let vs now conſider
by this place, whether God accepteth ſuch a ſeruice as good and lawfull:
nay contrariwiſe, he ſaith, That thou feare the Lord thy God, &
that thou obſerue all his commaundements. But when men turne
themſelues aſide from ſuch a way, and followe their owne fantaſies,
and whatſoeuer ſhall haue bene forged by men, they ſufficientlie declare,
that there is no feare of GOD in them: for otherwiſe they
would offer vnto him the ſacrifice which he aboue all other preferreth:
namelie,1. Sa. 1
                     •
                  . 23. obedience, as hereof it is entreated in the firſt booke of Samuel

the fifteenth Chapter, That if men hearken not vnto the voyce
of God, to ſubiect them ſelues thereto, but contrariwiſe followe that
which ſhall haue bene inuented in their owne braine, or forged and
deuiſed by men, it is as idolatrie: yea, as the ſinne of witchcraft,
which is deteſtable in the ſight of God. Behold, how theholie Ghoſt
ſpeaketh hereof, although mortall men are of a cleane contrarie iudgement.
Now therefore we ſee how Moſes hath here declared, that
when we ſhall vnfeignedlie and in deede feare God, we will doe him
this honour, to be gouerned according vnto his will, wee will not
graunt men this leaue to leade and conduct vs whither it ſeemeth
them good: but when GOD ſhall ſpeake, we will knowe that euerie
mouth muſt be ſtopped, & that our eares muſt be opened to heare
and to receiue whatſoeuer he ſhall ſay vnto vs. But yet it ſufficeth
not that euerie one for his owne part onelie employ him ſelfe to ſerue
and honour God, but we muſt procure and endeuour as much as in
vs lieth, that he be adored and worſhipped of the whole world: yea,
we muſt labour that his ſeruice may endure and continue after our
death, that the name of GOD liue not and die with vs, when wee
ſhall be taken out of the world: but that it remaine and abide vnto
all poſteritie. And loe what is the cauſe why Moſes ſaith, Their children
and thoſe which ſhall iſſue from their race, ſhall continue to ſerue
God, and too bſerue his lawe.
            Let vs therefore diligentlie note, that Moſes in this place
not onelie exhorteth euerie one for his owne time to ſerue and obey
GOD, by conforming his life vnto the lawe whiche hee hath
deliuered, but he will that fathers beſtowe all their paines to inſtruct
their children, that we may leaue ſuch a ſeede after vs, if it be poſſible,
as that God be worſhipped of our poſteritie, that his name be alwayes
purelie and ſincerelie called vpon, & that by this meane, they
which ſhalbe deſcended from our loynes, may be bleſſed, and that the
couenant of God wherein our ſaluation is conteined, endure for euer,
and neuer periſh, albeit we are mertall and of ſmall continuance.
But we are ſo farre from diſcharging our dutie in this doctrine, that
we may ſee fathers giue ſuch examples vnto their children, that it
ſeemeth they haue conſpired to aboliſh and to take cleane away the
feare of God, and the whole obſeruation of his lawe. We ought not
therefore to maruell, if GOD alſo withdrawe him ſelfe from vs,
and that it ſeemeth that hee will cut off quite all the benefites and

bleſſinges which hee had beſtowed on vs. For are we worthie vnto
whom he ſhould continue them, ſeeing we are ſo retchleſſe and negligent
to procure that his ſeruice and worſhip may continue in his entire
and perfect eſtate? And yet this ſhould ſerue vs to ſo good a purpoſe
(as I haue ſaid) that it be not ſpoken in vaine. Let vs therefore
labour with all our might, to teach thoſe which ſhall come after
vs, in ſuch ſorte, that the worſhip of GOD, and his ſeruice, may
continue for euer, and that men alwayes knowe and acknowledge
him for the Father and Sauiour of all the worlde, and giue themſelues
ouer fullie and wholie vnto him. Withall Moſes hath adioyned
that whereof he had before ſpoken, that this is, To the end that
their dayes may bee prolonged, and that GOD may make the
people to proſper, according to the promiſe which hee made vnto
their fathers, that he would geue them a land flowing with milke &
honie. We haue alreadie expounded what Moſes hath vnderſtood by
this worde: namelie, that God, albeit by one word he may conſtraine
vs to ſerue him, notwithſtanding vſeth towardes vs a moſt milde
and amiable manner to winne vs to himſelfe, when he promiſeth vs
a reward, when wee ſhall haue ſerued him: not that our woorkes
deſerue any thing, or that he is any thing at all bound vnto vs. But
when he gratifieth vs ſo, and is in ſuch wiſe beneficiall towards vs,
it is to this end, that wee may bee ſo much the more liuelie touched,
& that we may ſerue him with a more ardent zeale & deſire. For ſhall
wee not bee ouer wicked and vnthankfull, when wee heare that God
of his owne good will bindeth him ſelfe vnto vs, and that he will propoſe
vnto vs a reward and recompenſe: ſhall wee not I ſay bee ouer
wicked and vnthankfull, if wee applie not our ſelues wholie vnto
his ſeruice? We are his, and whatſoeuer we are able to doe, we
owe vnto him: as our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſpeaketh plainlie hereof:
Who are you? ſaith he. I demande of you, when a man ſhall
haue a ſeruant: yea, a ſlaue, whom he ſhall burden and preſſe as
an oxe, or an horſe, whether if this ſlaue haue done him any ſeruice,
he will riſe from the table to ſerue him, when he returneth from
his worke? No: for all that which the bondſlaue doth, he oweth
of dutie to his maiſter and ſuperiour. So you owe all vnto God (ſaith
Ieſus Chriſt) & he oweth you nothing. But yet God of his owne free
good will bindeth him ſelfe to promiſe vs, if we ſerue him,Luc. 17. 7. we ſhalbe
well recompenſed, and perceiue our labour & paine ſhall not bee loſt.

And for what end and purpoſe doth he this? This is euen by gentleneſſe
to breake our heart. For (as I haue alreadie ſaid) wee are to to
wicked, if wee bee not altogether inflamed to ſerue GOD, when
wee ſee that it pleaſeth him, of his meere goodneſſe, to propoſe vnto
vs a reward, and to promiſe vs a recompenſe, when wee are in no
reſpect worthie thereof. And withall let vs alſo note, that when
God ſhall haue paſſed a thouſand contractes with vs, to reward and
recompenſe our woorkes, it wanteth ſo much that wee may ſay, he
oweth vs any thing, that he might rather accurſe and deteſt vs. For
who is he among vs, which obſerueth the lawe as were requiſite? If
wee obſerue one article thereof, wee faile in an hundred, and when we
thinke to fulfill that which God hath cōmanded vs in his lawe, we falter
therein, wee traile our legges after vs, there is alwayes ſuch
great imperfection and weakeneſſe in vs: that wee can neuer runne
in ſuch wiſe as wee ought, and as it were requiſite. Wee ſhall then
bee accurſed and condemned, when God ſhall iudge vs in any rigor
and ſeueritie. So then, men muſt not here vaunt them ſelues of obteining
any reward which they haue merited, nor boaſt of their workes:
but rather let them knowe, that all the promiſes which God hath giuen
in his lawe, import with them a condition, and therefore ſhoulde
bee vnprofitable vnto vs, by reaſon that none diſcharge them ſelues
of their dutie, except God would accept of vs, and beare with vs for
his meere bountie and goodneſſe. And hereby wee ſee what rage and
madneſſe this is in the Papiſtes, when they boaſt themſelues of
their merites, that it ſeemeth them, they haue to contracte and couenaunt
with God, and they ſo venturouſtie vpon a diueliſh ouerweening
and boldneſſe, make their account, that they thinke God is verie
much bound and beholding vnto them. But what proofes haue they
of their ſatiſfactions, their woorkes, their me
                  •••
               es? And where ſhall
a man finde thoſe merites? O, we haue done (ſay they this) and that:
no remedie, but wee muſt make vp our accountes with God. And
behold on the contrarie ſide God, who requireth that wee ſerue him
in all, and through all, which wee are neuer able to doe, as wee haue
ſeene heretofore, and as it is ſufficientlie handled and declared in
many other places. Nowe let all the worlde examine them ſelues, to
ſee, whether there may herein be found one which hath accompliſhed
the lawe. But ſo farre we ſhalbe from finding any ſuch, that there is
not one which may proteſt, that he hath done the hundred part of that

which is in the lawe required. Therefore all muſt confeſſe that they
are accurſed. Yea, in this ſo ſmall portion, and ſo little as may be,
wherein men acquite them ſelues, ſhall bee alwayes founde
ſome wickedneſſe, and ſome blottes or other. So then, GOD
ſhall iuſtly reiect and haue in deteſtation all that we bring, and are
able to doe. Let men therefore bee ouerwhelmed and confounded
with ſhame, and let them confeſſe that they are all culpable & guiltie
before God. Wherefore let vs note, that this promiſe cannot be accompliſhed,
but that God beareth with vs, and reſpecteth not ſo manie
vices and infirmities as are in vs, but by his mercie hideth and
burieth them. Therefore our workes are then receiued and approued
by God, when he reſpecteth not what they are, but accepteth
them, through the vertue of the death and paſſion of our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt, as good and holie. And albeit there be alwayes many blots
and ſtaines in vs: yea, much ſtinking corruption, except it ſhould be
waſhed away by the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt: yet hee alwayes accepteth
vs by the meanes thereof, and no otherwiſe. So, let vs learne
to boaſt our ſelues, and glorifie in the meere and only mercie of God,
and not vaunt vs of anie merites. And in the meane time let vs not
ceaſe to be incited and ſtirred vp with ſo much greater zeale to ſerue
him, when we ſee that hee will allure and winne vs vnto him ſelfe by
ſuch mildneſſe and gentleneſſe. Yea Moſes ſheweth, that whatſoeuer
God promiſeth vnto his people, when they ſhall obſerue his law,
procedeth from this fountaine, rather than from anie obligation. And
this is that which he ſaith, As God hath promiſed to thy fathers: as
if he ſaid, Beloued, ſerue God, and he ſhall be a good maiſter vnto
you. And thinke not that you haue loſt your time & labour when you
ſhall haue obſerued his law: for you ſhall haue a large reward, which
is made readie for you. But withall conſider ye whence it proceedeth:
Behold the fountaine (ſaith hee:) that is, that before ye were
borne and brought into this worlde, God hath promiſed your fathers
to bring them into a land which floweth with milke and honie.
Moſes thus leading the people vnto this promiſe which had beene
made vnto the Patriarches, ſheweth ſufficiently that God maketh
no new promiſe, but that he ratifieth and confirmeth that which hee
had ſaid. And why? Is it that he was bound to them which were not
yet born? No: but becauſe he had loued their fathers, as he hath aboue
ſaid. It is true, that Moſes now ſheweth, that the people was partaker
of ſuch a promiſe, if ſo be they ſhould obſerue the lawe of God.

But what? We muſt yet alwayes come to this point, that men are
vtterly confounded, if they will oppoſe themſelues againſt GOD,
alledging anie dignitie or worthineſſe of their owne, and that they
ſhall alwayes remaine in their condemnation, they ſhall finde
that they are all accurſed. It behoueth therefore that they haue their
onely refuge vnto the mercie of GOD: and that they knowe, that
when they ſhall haue forced them ſelues to walke according vnto
his lawe, that God ſhall owe them nothing, albeit he will not leaue
to accompliſh that which he hath promiſed them, euen by his meere
goodneſſe and free mercie. Loe then howe this place ought to bee
vnderſtoode. Nowe ſeeing he in this place ſpeaketh of the land promiſed
vnto the Iewes, let vs note, that at this day we ought to be by
manie degrees more incited and prouoked to ſerue GOD, ſeeing
hee hath dedicated the whole earth vnto himſelfe, and will that his
name be called on throughout all the worlde. For the bloud which
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhedde, hath ſanctified all the world,
which was then as it were in all filth and pollution. For we knowe
there was no lande but this which GOD had reſerued vnto himſelfe,
and wherein hee woulde beare rule vntill the comming of his
Sonne. But when our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt appeared, he then obteined
poſſeſſion of the whole worlde, and his kingdome was extended
from one end vnto an other, and eſpecially nowe, when the
Goſpell hath beene publiſhed. Sithence then it is ſo, let vs diligently
note, that we are at this day much more ſtreightly bounde
vnto the ſeruice and worſhip of GOD, for as much as by the
precious bloud of his Sonne, he hath conſecrated and made holie
the whole earth, to the end wee may dwell and be lodged therein,
and that we may liue vnder his kingdome. And therefore, as we will
that he haue vs vnder his ſafegard and protection, ſo let vs beware
that wee yeeld vp our ſelues wholie vnto him. But becauſe men
are alwayes ſo fickle and wauering, that (as I haue alreadie ſaide)
no bridles are ſufficient to raine them to obedience, Moſes
confirmeth all the doctrine hee hath in this place pronounced, by
ſaying: Heare therefore, O Iſrael, the Lorde thy GOD is one
GOD. He had ſaide before, Hearken: he had ſaid, Take yee
heede: he had ſaid, That they muſt obſerue the lawe. But here he
confirmeth his whole matter much more better, when hee ſaith ſo
expreſſely, That the GOD of Iſrael is one GOD, For by

this, his meaning is to exclude all the gods which the worlde forgeth,
and he will ſhewe that it is not lawfull for them to conceiue anie
thing after their owne fanſie, but that only which we holde by the
worde of God. Therfore when the God of Iſrael is called One God,
it is as much as if Moſes did make compariſon betweene the God
which publiſhed his lawe, as before he was manifeſted vnto his ſeruant
Abraham, and to the other Patriarchs, & would oppoſe him againſt
all the gods which the world imagined. As God in all times
hath bene called vpon, this name hath bene common among the Painims.
But what? The Painims haue ſo wandered, that albeit euery
one hath ſaide, I adore and worſhip God: yet what was this but
their owne dreames and fantaſies? For when men take vpon them
to worſhippe God, when they haue no knowledge of him, there is
no doubt, but they worſhippe idols. The Turkes at this day will
ſay that they worſhip God, Creator of the heauens and of the earth:
but this is but an idol which they worſhippe. And how ſo? They
name him Creator of the heauens and of the earth, they haue no images.
It is true. But yet haue they but an idol in ſtead of God,
becauſe they will not receiue our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt who is the liuelie
image of God his Father. And we knowe what Saint Iohn ſaieth,Heb. 1. 3. 1, Iohn. 2. 23.
that he which denieth the Sonne, he denieth the Father. Therefore
they haue not God, but an idol. As much is to be ſaide of the
Iewes. The Iewes will brag much that they haue the law, and that
they worſhip the God of Abraham, of Iſaac, and of Iacob: but what?
They are Apoſtataes, they haue renounced the lawe of God, when
they haue reiceted and refuſed Ieſus Chriſt, who is the ſoule of the
lawe. It is he by whom God the father will manifeſt and open himſelfe
vnto vs: it is he in whom hee will be worſhipped.Pſal. 2. 12. And againe
he ſaieth,Iohn. 5. 23. Riſſe the Sonne whom I haue ſent you. And againe:
Who ſo honoureth not the Sonne, the ſame honoureth not the Father
which hath ſent him. Let vs therefore diligently note, that
Moſes would in this place make compariſon betweene the GOD
which hath declared himſelfe in his worde, and all the gods which
are renowned throughout the whole worlde, ſhewing that all that
is beſide him, is nothing but apiſhneſſe, and meere vanitie, and lying.
And why? For we cannot worſhip God aright, except we haue
firſt knowne him. And wee muſt alwayes to this purpoſe remember
that which Ieſus Chriſt ſaid vnto the woman of Samaria:

ye knowe not what ye worſhip.Iohn. 4. 22. When Ieſus Chriſt vſeth this word,
he doth as it were ſpit at all thoſe ſeruices and worſhippings which
were then eſtabliſhed. There was no nation which vaunted not of
ſeruing God: and Ieſus Chriſt reiecteth all that which men thought
to be good and holie. Ye knowe not (ſaith he) what ye worſhip. Hee
ſheweth hereby, that it is req
                  •
               iſite and needefull there be made ſome
manifeſt declaration of God: we muſt not walke here at all aduentures,
but we muſt be aſſured what the God is whom wee ſerue and
worſhip. Now ſeeing God muſt be knowne of vs to be rightly ſerued
and worſhipped, let vs conſider whence this knowledge ſhall
come and ariſe. Shall it grow in our owne garden, as we ſay? Shall
we obteine it by our owne labour and induſtrie? Shall it bee lawfull
for euerie one to thinke what ſhall ſeeme good vnto him, to ſay:
I haue knowne God? No, no: but GOD muſt declare and ſhew
himſelfe, hee muſt approche and come neere vnto vs. And ſo the
onely meane to knowe GOD aright is this, that wee bee taught
and inſtructed in his woorde. And loe why he ſaith, The Lord thy
GOD. For this people had receiued the lawe: and againe, the
couenaunt had bene made with their fathers, GOD had ſeparated
this flocke from the reſt of the whole worlde. It is not then without
cauſe, that Moſes here leadeth the people to the knowledge of God,
to the end they eſtraunge and keepe themſelues from all the ſuperſtitions
of the Painims, that they haue nothing common with the vnfaithfull
ones: but that they know, that wheras God hath manifeſted
himſelfe ſo familiarly vnto them, they haue a moſt certeine and infallible
truth. Now if this hath bene ſaide of the time of the lawe, it agreeth
much better vnto vs. For albeit God hath giuen a ſufficient
admonition vnto the Iewes, that they bee not mingled among
the polluſions of the Painims in their idolatries: yet haue wee at
this day a much more brighter cleareneſſe, ſince the appearing of
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, who is the liuelie image of GOD his
Father, as wee haue ſaide. And wee may well agree vnto that
which is written in the firſt of Saint Iohn, None hath ſeene GOD
at anie time:Iohn. 1. 18. but the Sonne, which hath alwayes bene in the boſome
of the Father, hath reuealed him vnto vs. The auncient Fathers
haue had a knowledge (as we haue ſaid:) but this knowledge is accounted
as none, in reſpect of that which we haue at this day by the
Goſpel. Since the Sunne of righteouſnes ſhineth on vs, behold God

ſheweth him ſelfe moſt familiar vnto vs. And loe why the Prophet
Eſaie,Eſaie. 25. 9. when he entreateth of the redemption which was to be made
in the perſon of the ſonne of God: Behold him, beholde him, this is
our GOD, this is our Lord, ſaieth he. The Prophete crieth out,
This is, this is our God. He is not contented to ſay in one worde,
Beholde our GOD, but hee ſpeaketh as if the thing had bene preſent,
and that GOD ſhould then appeare. And howe is this ſaid?
Was not God in the middeſt of his people?Exod. 29. 4
                     •
                  . For hee ſaide, I will
dwell in the middeſt of you.Pſal. 132. 14. And againe, Beholde my reſt: Sion is
the place of my habitation. And againe, he proteſteth, that hee will
neuer depart thence, that the people is his temple, that they are his
royall prieſthoode. Why then is it that the Prophet Eſaie ſaieth,
Behold him, behold him, ſaith our God: This is he, this is he, when
our Lorde Ieſus ſhould come into the world? This is, becauſe God
reuealeth him ſelfe vnto vs in greater perfection. There remaineth
therefore leſſe excuſe for vs, if wee at this day wander, and holde
not our ſelues to the pure trueth, but that enerie one turne after his
dreames, to ſay, It ſeemeth me ſo, beholde what I finde to bee good.
Knowe we, that all this is nothing, & that wee muſt returne to that
certeintie of trueth which hath bene brought vnto vs by our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt. But the worlde is ſo farre from knowing of this,
that it ſeemeth all haue deſired to deſpite and anger GOD, that
they haue deuiſed howe to turne their backe vnto him, that they
haue laboured to reiect and lay aſide all ſubiection, that they might
haue leaue to remaine in their enormities and vurulie demeanours,
and that their wickedneſſe in the meane time might not bee perceiued.
The Iewes are vnexcuſable, as wee ſee howe the Prophetes
reproche them, that they haue wittinglie abandoned and put away
GOD, and that they can not excuſe them ſelues, as the wretched
Painims, ſaying, That they haue heard nothing: for GOD proteſteth,
that he hath not ſpoken in vaine. But nowe at this day,
when GOD ſpeaketh vnto vs with full mouth, and that we haue ſo
perfect a reuelation in his Goſpell, is not this an ouer great wickedneſſe,
that men yet wander and goe ſo aſtraie? Were there euer more
fooliſh and fond ſuperſtitions, or more outragious and enormous
than thoſe which are at this day to bee ſeene in Poperie? I graunt,
the Iewes mingled them ſelues among the ſuperſtitions of the
Painims, that they defiled them ſelues ouer much with their ſilthes

and pollutions: but when all ſhalbe well ſifted and examined, wee
ſhall finde that the Papiſtes haue ſurmounted and exceeded them
herein by manie degrees: for the word of God at this day is as it
were buried among them. When mention ſhalbe made of faith, the
articles ſhalbe drawen from out of the forge of men, the holie Scripture
ſhalbe of no more force, than as if it were dead, and vtterlie
brought to ruine. Loe howe they behaue them ſelues herein, and
when queſtion is of the ſeruice of GOD, they wander (as we haue
alreadie ſaid) after their owne inuentions, and loe, My meaning is
good, will they ſay, and they thinke God will ſuffer him ſelfe to bee
ruled as a litle childe, and that he will neuer come to examine all
the doctrine of Poperie. Againe, if men ſpeake of faith, is there anie
talke of the free promiſes of GOD? No, but they attribute all
to them ſelues. When they will ſpeake of the office of Ieſus Chriſt,
they ouerthrowe the vertue of his death and paſſion, as much as in
them lieth. When anie queſtion is to be handled of their ſaluation,
then will they come in with their free will, their merites, and
ſatiſfactions. But we ought contrariwiſe to returne to the meere and
onelie grace of the holie Ghoſt, confeſſing that we are in bondage
and ſeruitude of ſinne, but that we are thence deliuered by the mercie
and goodneſſe of God. And here hence cōmeth it, that the holy ſcripture
calleth the remiſſion and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes our righteouſneſſe.
We muſt therefore come vnto this point, and alſo knowe, that
if we haue failed in our duetie, we can not bring anie other payment
or ſatiſfaction, than that which we borrowe of the death and paſſion
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Of all this there is nothing to be found in
Poperie: If queſtion be of calling vpon GOD, they will make
their vagaries vnto their he Saintes and ſhee Saintes: and Ieſus
Chriſt in the meane time ſhall not be knowen ſuch a one as he is, nor
clothed with the office which hath bene giuen him of God his Father.
But the Papiſtes degrade him as ſacrilegious and falſe traiterous
villaines, which ſeeke nothing els but to burie altogether, and toſet
forth to open prey all the glorie and dignitie which God his Father
hath giuen him. As much may be ſaid of all their ſeruice and religion.
We ſee howe the Sacramentes are polluted and defiled among
them. In place of the holie ſupper of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
there is ſubſtituted this infernall and diueliſh abhomination, of the
Maſſe,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   24. wherin they ſay, That Ieſus Chriſt is ſacrificed, as if he him

ſelfe had done nothing, as if he were not eſtabliſhed the onlie & perpetuall
prieſt by God his father. So then we ſee howe the Papiſtes
make a mockerie of the word of God, wherein hee hath reuealed him
ſelf, that it ſeemeth, that of ſet & deliberate purpoſe they would deface
& put out the knowledge of him which is in the Goſpell. And therfore
we muſt more hee) fullie note this word, That the Lord is God: yea,
one God onlie. And ſo alwayes & as often as this worde of God ſhall
come in place, let vs knowe that it is to cut off all that ſhall come
into our braine, all that which men ſhall haue forged & deuiſed, and
which we are not taught by the holy ſcripture: for God wil be in ſuch
ſort conſidered of vs, that we be not wrapped & entangled in the fantaſies
& errours of idolaters. And in verie deed, wee can not haue the
true God, except we haue him alone, that is, that we ioyne with him
no companion: for aſſoone as we come in wt our litle halfe gods, we
renounce the liuing God. And why? For he will be alone, as he pronounceth
by the Prophet Eſaie in another place, I am the euerliuing,
ſaith the Lord,Eſaie. 42. 8. I will not giue my glorie vnto another. And again,
we haue ſeene before that he nameth him ſelfe, A gealous God.
And for what other cauſe, than for this, to withdrawe vs from all corruptions?
As S. Paul ſpeaketh in the 2. to the Corinth. For aſſoone
as we are turned from the ſimplicitie of the word of God, it is as if a
woman ſhould hearken vnto a Bawd which ſhall come to whiſper in
her eare. Lowe are forthwith corrupted, & ſo we play the wicked fornicators
againſt God, when we falſifie the faith which we haue promiſed
him in baptiſme: we reiect & caſt aſide his law, we violate and
profane all religion, when we decline the leaſt that may be from his
pure & ſincere doctrine. Let vs therfore beare in mind alwayes & as
oftē as mention is made of this word (God,) that we know that God
muſt be alone: & therfore when we ſhall haue accompanied him with
creatures, he caſteth vs off as Apoſtataes, & as people which are not
worthie to haue to doe with him, becauſe wee would not yeelde vnto
him the honour which hee deſerueth: namelie, that he ſhould be the
Lorde, but ſhall haue profaned his name by making it common vnto
creatures, or communicating of it with our dreames. But withall,
let vs note, that it is not inough that we reſerue vnto the liuing
GOD the title of one woorde, but we muſt take heede that whatſoeuer
apperteineth vnto him, remaine and abide vnto him in his
entire and perfecte eſtate. As howe? He meaneth not only to be called

God, but to be acknowledged Almightie, to be acknowledged our
Father and Sauiour, to be knowen for him which hath authoritie to
gouerne vs, for him in whom we ought to repoſe our whole truſt and
confidence, for him whom we ought to inuocate and call vpon. Loe,
the chiefe and principall things we ought to thinke and meditate
vpon, when queſtion is of honouring one onelie God. I graunt the
Papiſtes will ſtill ſay, That S. Michael, and S. William, and ſuch
others are not their goddes: but yet for all this they worſhip them:
yea, their images and pictures: although they thinke to eſcape by
this ſhifte, that the images are not the Saintes they pray vnto, but
onelie their remembrances to repreſent them, and yet is this againſt
the expreſſe commandement of God. And againe, they knowe not
howe GOD will be worſhipped, when they ſo mingle him among
their idols of wood and of ſtone, by the which they thinke to repreſent
their Saintes. It is true, they vſe words them ſelues vnderſtand
not, of Dulia, and Latria, when they ſay they ſerue their moppets,
that they beare reuerence vnto God. For loe, what they vnderſtand
by theſe wordes. But truelie God is much beholding vnto them,
when they declare they honour him onelie, and that withall they
ſerue their idols. Againe, to call vppon God, is it not an holie and
ſacred thing? For this is the true ſeruice which he requireth, as it
is ſaid in the fiftie Pſalme. So we ſee, that the worlde ouer impudentlie
mocketh God,Pſal. 50. 14. 15. 23. when men ſo wickedlie corrupt and depraue
his whole ſeruice and worſhip. And knowe we that this is a thing
moſt deteſtable, when men ſo wander and leade them ſelues aſtray,
after they haue had ſo cleare and ſo plaine a reuelation of God, and
his will, as is conteined in the Goſpell. And with ſo much the greater
heedfulneſſe muſt we reſt and ſtaie our ſelues on this doctrine,
knowing that our Lorde will, that we hang and depend wholie on
him, and that there he an inuiolable vnion betweene him and vs. And
this ſhall then be, when we ſhalbe withhelde ſimplie within the borders
and limites of his word, when we ſhall yeelde no acceſſe vnto
the inuentions of men, when we ſhall not leaue our minde to wander:
but that after we ſhall haue heard what is conteined in the holie
Scripture, we ſhalbe preſt and readie to ſay Amen thereto, not onelie
with our mouth, but that our faith ſhalbe ſlayed and faſtened on
that which proceedeth from the mouth of God.
            
               
               
                  〈1 line〉
               
with acknowledgement of our faults, praying him to make vs feele
them better than wee haue done, and that more and more wee may
knowe how farre and wherein wee are bound vnto him, and that wee
thinke not raſhlie to acquite our ſelues towardes him, but that wee
tend altogether to him, and to his ſeruice, that wee haue no other
ſtudie nor deſire, but to obſerue his holie lawe. And ſeeing we are yet
ſo farre from it, as any thing may bee, ſeeing we falter ſo much and
linger in the midde way, hauing the onely refuge to the remiſſion of
our ſinnes, pray wee that it will pleaſe him to receiue vs vnto mercie,
and to beare with vs ſo farre, as to continue to conduct and to gouerne
vs by his hole ſpirite, albeit we deſerue to be wholie reiected
of him. And withall alſo pray wee, that it will pleaſe him ſo to open
our eyes, that beholding the brightneſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, we
may be altogether rauiſhed thereby, and conſtrained to renounce the
thinges of this worlde, with the iuſtes, and affections of the fleſhe.
which carrie vs headlong to all wickedneſſe: in ſuch ſort, that wee
haue none other deſire, but to humble our ſelues vnder him, to the
end that beeing beaten downe in our ſelues, he may raiſe vs vp againe
to himſelfe, by his woord, attending vntill it pleaſe him to
change and tranſfigure vs into his owne image and likeneſſe,
in the latter day. That it will pleaſe him to
graunt this grace, not onely to vs, but
vnto all people and nations
of the earth, &c.
            
               
the Lawe.
            
               Matth. 22.
               
                  35 One of them, a Doctor of the Lawe, aſked him a queſtion,
tempting him, and ſaying:
                  36 Maiſter, which is the great commaundement of the Lawe?
                  37 Ieſus ſaid to him, Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God, with all
thine heart, and with all thy ſoule, and with all thy minde.
                  38 This is the firſt and the great commaundement:
                  39 And the ſecond is like vnto this, Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour
as thy ſelfe.
                  40 On theſe two commaundementes hangeth the whole Lawe
and the Prophetes.
               
            
            God bee praiſed.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London,
at the three Cranes of the Ʋinetree,
by Thomas Dawſon, for Iohn
Hariſon. Anno. 1579.
         
      
   